



















































Hansard: February 24, 1965


599 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

15th Day 
 

Wednesday, February 24, 1965 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE PURPLE GAS IN THREE TON TRUCKS 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I have several 

announcements that I would like to make. In the first place there has been some confusion as to the size of trucks 

which can use purple gas. In my budget remarks, I indicated that trucks up to three tons could use purple gas. I 

wish to state that the intention is to include three ton trucks. 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey): — On that point could I ask the hon. 

Premier a question? Does that include a truck that is rated by the manufacturer as three ton, regardless of what it 

may be licensed for. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would hope the hon. member could wait until the regulations are introduced — they are going 

to spell them out in pounds, so that there will be no doubt. What we mean to say right now is that any three ton 

truck, as designated by the manufacturer, will be able to use purple gas. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE PROMOTION OF HARRY BURNS TO CHAIRMAN OF THE LIQUOR 

LICENSING COMMISSION 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — I am pleased to announce that the government has promoted Mr. Harry 

Burns to Chairman of the Liquor Licensing Commission. He has been Vice-chairman and Secretary of the 

Commission. Mr. Burns lives in Regina and succeeds Percy Shore, who died last month. The government is very 

pleased to promote a man who has served the province for over thirty years and I wish to pay tribute to the work 

done by Mr. Shore. I am confident that the new chairman will serve the people well. I am pleased that a man of 

Mr. Burns' capabilities was available and that we did not have to go outside the commission to fill this post. 
 

Mr. Burns joined the Liquor Licensing Board in 1928, and served in Biggar and Saskatoon at various times in his 

career, before being appointed assistant warehouse manager in Regina. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE SAVINGS BONDS — FIFTH SERIES 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, one further announcement I would like to make today. In 

connection with the fifth series of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds, the maximum amount that any one person will 

be permitted to purchase will be increased to $15,000. The previous maximum, which I earlier announced, was 

$10,000. The action will afford all residents of Saskatchewan, including corporations and societies with head 

offices in Saskatchewan, to invest more of their savings and idle funds in high grade investments at an attractive 

rate of return. 
 

This move has been taken in view of certain major developments in Washington, B.C. recently, which will curtail 

Canadian borrowing in the United States. I would like to remind the house and the people of Saskatchewan that 

the savings bonds will go on sale on March 1st. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, Sir, I would like to 

draw your attention, and the attention of the members of the house to the presence in the Speaker's gallery this 

afternoon, of the grade seven and eight students from Pense School in my constituency. I am pleased 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

600 

to extend a welcome to these students. They have had a fairly full day thus far. They came to the Legislative 

Buildings this morning and had lunch here. They have had a tour of the buildings and now they are having their 

piece-de-resistance, they are going to observe the proceedings of this assembly this afternoon. 

 

I want to welcome them on your behalf to the house and while I am on my feet I would also like to pay a tribute 

to the people who bring these students in from day to day from various schools throughout the province, to the 

public spirited citizens in various districts, towns and villages. In this particular case, six of the residents of the 

Pense district have taken the time and effort to bring these students in to observe these proceedings. These 

individuals are Mr. Boyle, Mr. Grant Ogilvie, Mr. Fraser Ogilvie, Mr. Bjarsgard, Mr. Lloyd Morrison and Mrs. 

Wood. 

 

VETERANS BONSPIEL ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet I would also like to draw the attention of the assembly to the fact that last 

week at the Regina Veterans' Bonspiel, the championship was won by a rink from Pense, skipped by Mr. J.R. 

Wood, and members of the rink were Mr. J.D. McEwen, Mr. Ralph Taylor, and Mr. Fred Taylor. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. Lionel Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would like to draw the attention of the house to a fine group of students in the West gallery, in the two front rows. 

They are from Mazenod High School and are under the guidance of Mr. George Mayotte, their teacher, 

accompanied by Mr. Gauthier, and Mr. Krause. I am sure that their attendance here this afternoon will be most 

enlightening and educational. I would like to welcome them here on behalf of the legislature this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.A. Broten (Watrous): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring the house's 

attention to a group of grade 12 students in the Speaker's gallery, from Watrous, the new potash capital of the 

world. The new potash capital could be a little bit further south than my home area, Viscount-Colonsay too, ladies 

and gentlemen, do not forget that. The students from this area are here for the first time and I am sure that they 

will come every year. I hope their stay is both informative and educational. These students are accompanied by 

Steve McCann and G. Stinshon. Mr. McCann is the Principal, Mr. Stinshon is the teacher and Mr. B. Hutchinson 

is the bus driver. Welcome students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that we have a group of school 

children from Victoria School in the city of Saskatoon, and I would also like to say that these young people 

represent one of the earliest schools in the city of Saskatoon. It was the first school built on the Nutana side. There 

are 60 students here today from grade seven, with their teachers, Mr. Ron Usick, and Mr. Brian Ferry, and I 

would like to welcome them to the house, and hope that they enjoy the proceedings and their visit to Regina today 

very much. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, as a former student of Mazenod High School, I would like to join 

with the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) in welcoming the students from that school, here. It was on a 

visit similar to this that I first saw the legislative session in action, and I just want to caution the visitors from 

Mazenod that they guard against the same kind of fate happening to them as happened to me. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will second that. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Quite seriously, I welcome them to the assembly and would like to say that we all hope that they 

will enjoy their visit here, and that they will go back to Mazenod High School and see to it that a bright young 

class 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

601 

like them comes next year. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the assembly that 

when I was introducing the students from the Pense School, I omitted to state that their teacher, Mrs. Clamp is 

accompanying them today. 

 

WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION BOARD REPORT 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey): — I note that today is the 15th day of the 

sitting of the legislature. I didn't hear for sure if the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) tabled the report of the 

Workmen's Compensation Board. It is tabled today, is it? It is required to be tabled within the fifteen days. 

Thanks. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to 

welcome a group of grade 10 students who are in the Speaker's gallery. They are not from my constituency 

unfortunately, but in the absence of their own member, the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) I would like to 

welcome them on behalf of this assembly. They are from the Kelliher School and are under the guidance of Mr. 

Millum, one of the teachers at that particular school in Mr. Trapp's constituency. 

 

I am quite certain that they are going to gain a great deal of knowledge this afternoon in listening to one of the 

major debates of the assembly and I hope that the rest of their day will be is interesting and informative. I wish to 

extend a welcome to them today on behalf of their member, Mr. Trapp. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Thatcher, that Mr. Speaker, do now 

leave the chair, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Blakeney. 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, just before I adjourned the debate last evening, I was on the 

verge of giving some advice to the government and I want to proceed from there this afternoon. 
 

For twenty years, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party was in the opposition. During that time their approach to public 

affairs was characterized by a high degree of irresponsibility and destructiveness. 
 

A party in opposition, Mr. Speaker, can adopt such a stand without much harm to the public. The only ones they 

really hurt are themselves. However, Mr. Speaker, in April of 1964, the people of Saskatchewan entrusted the 

Liberal party with the reins of office and in my humble opinion when the Liberal party and the Liberal leader 

accepted this responsibility, they accepted responsibility on behalf of all the people of the province, not just on 

behalf of the Liberal party and its supporters. 
 

This, of necessity, entails change of attitude and requires people in positions of responsibility, be they ministers of 

the crown or members of the legislative assembly to conduct themselves in a responsible fashion and to guide 

their approach to public affairs in the direction that will be in the long term interests of the Saskatchewan people. 
 

I would like to take this opportunity to convey to the people of my constituency sincere thanks for the confidence 

and trust conferred upon me at the last provincial election. I will, as in the past, fulfil my obligations with humility 

and dedication, in their best interests and in the best interests of the people of the province. 
 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Premier on his success, but at the same time may I remind 

him, Sir, that he adheres to his somewhat outmoded beliefs which he so convincingly expressed when he sat 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

602 

on this side of the house. Time and time again, Mr. Speaker, he rose and chided the government for not having an 

overall majority, or 50 per cent, of the total vote. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I do recall during the introduction of The 

Medical Insurance Act, this argument to the now Premier was valid. My sincere hope at this time is that he 

applies his conviction even more forcefully in his position as Premier. I want to remind him, Mr. Speaker, and all 

the members of the government that the people of this province are aware that the pioneering CCF Social 

Democrat government is out of office. They are also aware of the massive impact their innovations have had on 

all of Canada. May I, Mr. Speaker, in passing, list several of the major accomplishments which the CCF 

government undertook before anyone else, and which have since become part of the fabric of this country. 

 

It was the first provincial government to give provincial employees the right to organize and bargain collectively, 

and to take part in political activities. The Trades Union Act of 1944, Mr. Speaker, gave people who were in 

public service . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Like Mr. Dojack? 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Yes, like Mr. Paul Dojack and Mr. John Ignjtoff and several others, the privilege to run for 

public office without fear of reprisals or fear of losing their jobs. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I know of one 

individual in the public service who was a nominee at a Liberal nominating convention in the federal constituency 

of The Battlefords. He was unsuccessful and later he was appointed by the then government to The Adult Branch 

of the Department of Education, without a political blood test. 

 

It was the first province to establish a government insurance plan for automobile insurance in 1945. This 

insurance system has been envied by motorists in all of Canada. It was the first province to implement province 

wide hospital insurance for all residents in 1945. Since its inception, it has been adopted in whole, or in part, in all 

the provinces and also by a Conservative federal government. It is worth noting, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal 

party had this plank in its program since 1919. They were thrown out of office in 1957 without implementing this 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the implementation of the Medical Care Plan in 1962, another bold step was taken to advance 

human welfare. Another great freedom was achieved — freedom from financial suffering from ill health. Against 

great odds truth did prevail! It prevailed because it was so undeniably obvious to fair-minded people. It prevailed 

against the door-kicking of the then Leader of the Opposition and now Premier (Mr. Thatcher). It prevailed 

against the action of the politically motivated K.O.D., assisted and abetted by the members of the then opposition. 

 

I well remember what the then Minister of Public Health (Mr. Erb) had to say when he moved second reading. He 

said: 

 

What we are in the course of doing here and what we have done, is that we shall have written a new Magna 

Carta for the health and well being of the people of this province. 

 

Moreover, I am sure that we shall set a pattern for other jurisdictions to follow in the years to come. 

 

It is in this air then, Mr. Speaker, that I hope this bill will be debated, the future generations will acclaim the 

men and women of this legislature for their vision, their courage to pioneer and their sensitivity to human needs. 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, during the last session of 1964, this same gentleman, Mr. Walter Erb, called this medical care 

plan unvarnished and unadulterated state medicine. 

 

However, no greater tribute could have been paid to the people and the government of Saskatchewan than that 

expressed recently at a public meeting by Dr. James Mutchmore, the Moderator of the United Church of Canada. 

 

Here is the report of the Star Phoenix of October 5th, 1963. I quote: 

 

The Moderator of the United Church of Canada said Thursday night, 'The rest of Canada owes 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

603 

a debt to the province of Saskatchewan for blazing the trail for hospital and medical care insurance. The welfare 

society today is the western world's answer to communism'. Rt. Rev. Dr. James Mutchmore told a public 

meeting. 

 

How different, Mr. Speaker, to a stand taken by another priest and reported in the Prince Albert Herald and I 

quote: 

 

The people of Saskatchewan must not allow the government to control the doctors and to take away our 

freedom, but if necessary must carry guns and resort to violence. 

 

and further in the article reference is made to a comparative medical plan elsewhere. I quote: 

 

A medical care plan as many people have it in the European countries is all right, but ours is a form of 

Communism, he stated. 

 

I am delighted that the present government and the Minister of Public Health have accepted this form of 

Communism as propounded by this man of the cloth during the trying days of the medical care episode. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Propounded by whom . . .? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to request the hon. member to give the name of the second 

individual that he mentioned. He named the first individual and I think in all fairness to this house he should be 

prepared to give the name of the second. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, I think this name is pretty well evident to all members sitting in this house. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I still state that he should name the individual, he did in the first case so I think he should 

in . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — May I return for a few minutes . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, he is quoting from the press and I think he should give us the name of the 

person he is quoting from. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, may I proceed? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member is quoting from an article in the press and has to give the name of the periodical 

and the date . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — It is with reluctance that I would give this name, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The name of the periodical and the date . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — It is the Prince Albert Herald, July 6th, 1962. May I turn for a few moments to the 

uncertainties in some of the constituencies after the final tabulations of the votes cast, and to the Hanley 

by-election recently held. It has been well established that the Horatio of the Liberal cabinet (Mr. Pinder) now 

defunct, received his just reward. What stand did the Premier take in respect to the requests of the then elected 

member of Hanley (Mr. Walker) to hold a by-election? A by-election was the last thing that the Premier wanted. 

He had broken faith with the people by not calling a special session of the legislature. 

 

What assurance did he give? On May 22nd, speaking to the annual convention of the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Association, on Friday, May 22nd, what stand did the hon. Premier take on this Friday in May? 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

604 

May I with your permission, and with the indulgence of the house, read into the records of the house, portions of 

the Premier's address as it appeared in the official organ of the Saskatchewan Government Employees 

Association, "The Dome"? I quote in part, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I have always believed that public service, whether you are an elected member or a member of your association, 

is one of the noblest vocations, because after all, you are serving your fellow citizens. 

 

 Now, years past in some provinces, yes, and at Ottawa perhaps, civil service jobs have been looked upon as 

 political plums. With government changes many political opponents were dismissed, only to be replaced by 

 political friends of the new government, and four years later if there was another change, the same thing would 

 happen. But I think in modern days all political parties have become more enlightened. 

 

In respect to the budget itself, and I want to be more specific. The allocations made by the Provincial Treasurer to 

some of the Departments of Government, which I consider vital, are most disappointing to say the least. 

 

The Agricultural Representative Branch staff was reduced from 94 to 87, for a total of seven, and the allocation 

for this branch was reduced by some $39,170. The South Saskatchewan River Delta Survey was reduced by 

$100,000. More disappointing were the cuts from Municipal Road Assistance Authority, $22,370 less for the 

engineering service. I would have hoped, Mr. Speaker, that the larger increases would have been made in the 

assistance for market road grid. Rural people were looking forward to a rapid completion and further extension of 

market road grid. The treasurer has seen fit to reduce this estimate by $100,000. 

 

As a school teacher I was certainly disappointed in the allocations to the Department of Education. I would have 

hoped that in a buoyant revenue year a larger contribution would have been made for operational and capital 

grants for education, thus relieving direct taxes which will inevitably go up due to the short-sighted policies of the 

Provincial treasurer and the Minister of Education. 

 

Appropriations for the technical education are a mere pittance to say the least. In the 1964-65 estimates a CCF 

government allocated $2,000,000 for the construction of several technical schools. One was to be built in 

north-western Saskatchewan in the city of North Battleford. I want to remind the present Minister of Education 

that the allocation had been made for this purpose a year ago. This has been a disappointment to countless 

numbers of boys and girls in that part of the province who have been deprived of the opportunity of preparing 

themselves for future employment. 

 

Saskatchewan now is in the process of adopting programmed education at all levels. This, Mr. Speaker, will entail 

additional costs for providing additional plants, language labs, more libraries and more and better qualified 

personnel to meet the challenge of a bold new program. Instead of cutting taxes, I am certain that more assistance 

to local governments, would have been more welcome. It is evident, Mr. Speaker, to you now, and to members of 

this legislature, that I will not support the motion, but I have an amendment, a sub-amendment to the amendment, 

which I wish to move at this time. 

 

I would now move, seconded by the hon. member for Wadena, (Mr. Fred Dewhurst), the following 

sub-amendment: 

 

That the amendment be ascended by adding thereto the following words: 

 

and further this assembly is of the opinion that much greater emphasis should be placed on the construction of 

facilities for technical education. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The motion before the house is: 

 

 That Mr. Speaker do now leave the chair.  

 

to which an amendment has been moved by Mr. Blakeney, (Regina West), 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

605 

seconded by the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank): 

 

This assembly views with alarm and dismay the inadequacy of the amounts proposed to be voted for school 

grants and other assistance to local governments and regrets that those local governments will be compelled 

either to reduce services or to increase property taxes. 

 

to which a sub-amendment has been moved by the member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) seconded by the 

member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst): 

 

and further this assembly is of the opinion that much greater emphasis should be placed on the construction of 

facilities for technical education. 

 

I believe that the sub-amendment is in order, the debate continues on the motion, the amendment, and the 

sub-amendment. 

 

Mr. W.S. Howes (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, I do so with 

trepidation, because this is my first speech in this house. I think perhaps all new members have had this feeling 

when they first rise to speak. 
 

I would like, Sir, at this time to offer my congratulations to you on the high post to which you have been elected. I 

feel, and I think that all members feel that you will handle the position of Speaker of this house with dignity and 

impartiality. I would also at this time like to express my appreciation to the house for their confidence in electing 

me as Deputy Speaker. I shall do everything in my power to fulfil the trust that has been placed in me, and like 

you. Sir, when I leave this desk I shall leave behind all partisan feelings. 
 

I have always understood that in the budget speech it is permissible to cover a wide range of subjects and it is 

customary to make some remarks about a constituency a member represents. Insofar as my constituency is 

concerned, I would like to express to the people of Kerrobert-Kindersley, my deep appreciation for the honor they 

have conferred upon me by electing me to this assembly. I want to assure them that I shall do everything within 

my power and ability to fulfil the trust they have placed in me. 
 

The Kerrobert-Kindersley constituency, as many of you realize, is an up and coming area, and the people within it 

are, in my opinion, the finest people in the province and the Dominion of Canada. I also think that many people in 

this province should be grateful to my constituency for what it provides for them. I have some figures which 

indicate that of non-associated gas production in this province, Kerrobert-Kindersley produces 76 per cent of the 

total. So I think that in the winter, when you face the weather outside, you can thank my constituency for the 

comfort that you enjoy and possibly for the heat we face here around 5:00 at night. 
 

My constituency also produces a great deal of grain, in fact it has within it, some of the finest grain producing 

land in this province. Its cattle production is also extremely high and I have no doubt that the production of both 

of these commodities will rise as the years go on, because the people of my constituency are progressive and 

forward looking and I am certain, they will take full advantage of technological progress as it comes about. 

Something else of interest about my constituency is the fact that the people, in addition to being forward looking, 

are self-reliant and independent people who believe very strongly in local self-government and they believe that 

local self-government is the cornerstone of democracy and that if local self-government is not strong then 

democracy will falter and fail. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Howes: — During the county difficulties of 1961, a considerable amount of opposition was encountered in 

our area, and I think that the primary reason for this opposition was not that the people of my seat were opposed 

to change, but rather they felt that when something of value was being taken away, it must be replaced with 

something of value or you have nothing. The feeling in my area was that something was being taken away and 

that it was proposed to replace it with something of unknown value. The people of my constituency are, in the 

field of local self-government, prepared to give consideration to the enlargement of municipalities and this has 

already taken 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

606 

place in the case of R.M. 290 and R.M. 291. At the present time, consideration is being given to the amalgamation 

of R.M. 290 and R.M. 289 and to the amalgamation of R.M. 261 and R.M. 262. I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that you can say that the people of my constituency are not willing to move forward. They feel that if they do 

move forward and the pressure comes from the local people, that the results will be a far stronger local 

self-government than any changes imposed from the top, although, of course, I think, we must all agree that 

changes must take place within a. broad over-all plan so that the interaction of one area with another will not have 

detrimental effects on local self-government. 

 

Now, I would like, Mr. Speaker, to turn for a moment to the subject of crown lands. I think all of us in this house 

realize from recent announcements made by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald) that a new policy is 

being followed insofar as crown land is concerned. It seems to me, Sir, that over the years abuses have been 

evident. Some will dispute this, but to me as a municipal secretary it seems quite obvious. I feel very strongly on 

this subject since, in my opinion, land owned by the crown is owned by all people of the province. I am very 

pleased that a policy has been established whereby all will have an equal opportunity to secure this land and 

decisions will be based absolutely on need. I am also pleased to see a sales policy that will enable the people of 

this province to secure the cultivated crown acreage they may be farming at a very reasonable price and on very 

reasonable terms. I feel, Mr. Speaker, as I said previously, that crown land must be allocated without reference to 

the political affiliation of any applicants. I can assure this house that I will never make representation on behalf of 

any constituent based on his political affiliation. This debate, Mr. Speaker, is keyed to the budget presented by the 

hon. Premier and Provincial Treasurer on Friday last. I think, Mr. Speaker, that when he referred to this budget as 

a development budget, he used the right description. 

 

This budget will without doubt encourage industry and, as a result of that encouragement, the population of the 

province will grow. There has been a great deal of discussion with regard to the subject of farm income and I feel 

that as a representative of a rural constituency, that we must always keep in mind the income of the farmer, 

especially his net disposable income since farming and grain production along with cattle production is basic to 

this province. 

 

There is absolutely no question that when you consider the reduction of the sales tax, the elimination of the 

mineral rights tax on farmers and the elimination of tax on truck fuels, for trucks up to and including what is 

commonly known as a three ton, net disposable farm income will be increased. Of course, if farmers do not wish 

to use this purple gas as suggested by the hon. member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) they don't have to. We will be 

quite pleased to have them use bronze. 

 

Some have said that this budget is keyed to the farmer. I think it has been keyed to all people of this province. If 

the farmer has more income, and knowing farmers as I do, he will spend it, and the merchants in our towns and 

cities will benefit. Also will be benefited the employees of merchants, since more employees will be required. I 

think that the increase in farm income, that it has been made possible by this budget will assist all people of the 

province. 

 

I was pleased also to note that young people have not been forgotten. I remembered when I was married, that 

there seemed to be quite a shortage of funds. That is a fairly common situation when you get married. The amount 

of tax exemption to newly married couples will assist them in the material way and, of course, the reduction in the 

sales tax will assist them even more should they be purchasing a home. 

 

In this debate, remarks have been made about the new policies of the Department of Public Health. Mr. Speaker, I 

have been a secretary of a small hospital for about seven years and I do not think the previous government was 

fully aware of the problems facing small hospitals. It seemed to me that the answer of the previous government 

was "we will give you a flat increase per year, and then you can sink or swim by yourself". Well, Sir, costs have 

risen far faster than payments from SUSP, and today small hospitals are in a serious position. The previous 

government did not, in my opinion, offer assistance by the way of administrative counselling. If they had, I know 

costs could have been drastically reduced. I feel we must provide for the care of the sick and that we should 

realize that this is the main job of a hospital. Sir, it is not the job of the hospital to carry costs that are not 

necessary for the care of the sick. I know now that efforts are being made to assist hospitals in their management 

policies. 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

607 

This help is long overdue, but it is not too late and I am sure that the results of this work will be of help to all 

small hospitals in the province and eliminate many of their problems. 

 

Now, the hon. member from Cumberland, (Mr. Berezowsky) said the other day, that we on this side of the house 

had never gone hungry. Well, I have. I will bet with anyone on the other side, they don't know what it is to go 

without food for a few days. But, Mr. Speaker, I did not, as a result, catch the political measles, sometimes called 

Socialism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Howes: — I would say, Sir, that this budget and the policies that will unfold as this legislature progresses 

will show that this party and the members that sit to your right, are endeavoring to develop policies that will assist 

labor, the farmer, business and all the people of the province. 

 

We, on this side of the house, Mr. Speaker, have no axe to grind with anyone. We are only interested in the 

welfare of all citizens of the province and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this budget will do a great deal toward 

promoting that welfare. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Howes: — I am also certain, Mr. Speaker, that as the years go by and more budgets are presented by the 

present government, say eight or ten years from now, greater advances can take place in the welfare that I have 

mentioned. Advances will take place every year a budget is presented. I think, Mr. Speaker, that it can be said that 

this province needed the tools to put the province right side up, and the people of the province have given this 

government the tools, have given them the mandate to govern. The government is quite properly, in my opinion, 

acting on the mandate as it was received on the basis of a platform that it ran on. Can any government do less than 

honor the pledges it has made? 
 

An Hon. Member: — No. 
 

Mr. Howes: — We are doing it. In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, there is little more I would like to say, except that I 

feel that the results that we have seen and will see, and the winning of last year's election by the members to your 

right, are in large part, due to the effort of one man. The present Premier of this province. 
 

I think it can be said, that the time had come for a change. A change was badly needed, and I often think of the 

words of Clement Atlee, when he referred to Winston Churchill. He said: 
 

The hour found its man, and the man found his hour. 
 

I will, naturally, Mr. Speaker, support the motion, but I cannot support the amendment or the sub-amendment. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Harry D. Link (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to participate in this debate I would first of all like to 

take this opportunity to express my sincere sympathy to a former member from Saskatoon, on the loss of his wife. 

I am sure every member in this house who knows Arthur Stone, will sympathize with him in his great loss. Arthur 

Stone represented Saskatoon in this legislature as a Socialist for some twenty years. As a Socialist, I hope to 

continue to represent my constituents with the same devotion. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to thank all those people in Saskatoon who made my 

election possible. Let me assure you, Mr. Speaker, that although the people of my constituency are concerned 

about health matters, I really do not believe that they are in any danger of becoming hypochondriacs, as has been 

suggested by Liberal members opposite. May I say again that I shall do my utmost to serve all of my constituents 

to the very best of my ability, I intend to represent not only the Socialists in Saskatoon, but all the people of my 

constituency. For me, Mr. Speaker, my election in April marked another milestone in the history of our fair city. It 

appears from checking the records that I am the first man of a minority group ever to be elected to this legislature 

from Saskatoon. 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

608 

Mr. Speaker, not only is Saskatoon one of Canada's fastest growing cities, it is also one of the most beautiful. The 

people of our fair city take great pride in their surroundings, and there is no doubt that it is a city with a bright 

future. Those of us who are fortunate enough to make Saskatoon our home owe a great deal to the early pioneers 

who had the foresight to plan our city, and at the present time, Mr. Speaker, we now who live and work and raise 

our families in Saskatoon have a golden opportunity to plan once again for those who will follow us. 

 

I am referring, of course, to the fact that the Canadian National Railway is removing its tracks and buildings from 

the centre of the city. Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the people of Saskatoon are in favor of this move. By 

removing the tracks and buildings a good deal of valuable land will be made available for replanning. I 

understand some 36 or more acres are involved in this project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon is perhaps one of the first, if not the first city that has a wonderful opportunity to plan and 

rebuild itself. It is to be hoped that those people responsible for this new plan will build and plan as well as did 

their predecessors. Already various new buildings are being contemplated, including a large, new hotel and 

various retail outlets. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Public Works and his government would 

avail themselves of this opportunity to acquire sufficient land in this area in order that provincial government 

building might be erected in this desirable location. 

 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, not only because it is a city almost the same size as our provincial capital, but because of 

the huge area of central and northern Saskatchewan that it serves, deserves to have a government building that 

would not only be an asset to the city, but that would provide a service to all the people that use Saskatoon as a 

trading area. 

 

At the present time, Mr. Speaker, the government is occupying a great number of buildings. Some are owned by 

the government and some are rented. I believe it is fair to say that at the rate Saskatoon is growing that such a 

building as I propose is urgently required. It would save the people of this province a good deal of money. Many 

of the offices presently occupied by government departments are already cramped and within a few years will be 

entirely unsatisfactory. 

 

I sincerely hope that the minister will give favorable consideration to this suggestion. As I mentioned earlier, an 

opportunity such as this comes only once in a life time, and in many cases a city never gets an opportunity such as 

this at all. New buildings would also make jobs available to the people in the building industry. Indeed, it might 

be a good place for the government to make available some of the 80,000 new jobs that they promised when they 

were campaigning for election. They might even find a few jobs for some of the cleaning ladies that they 

dismissed a short time ago. 

 

Speaking of jobs, Mr. Speaker, it appeared for a while as though there might be an opening for one druggist in 

Saskatoon. However, since December 16th, this vacancy no longer exists. The people of Hanley decided that this 

druggist should stay at home and look after his pills and other items that are generally sold in drug stores. 

Members on the government side, Mr. Speaker, have a peculiar idea of what a successful business man should be. 

The present Minister of Public Health, speaking in the house on February 24th, 1964, said, and I quote: 

 

I don't think there is a successful businessman on that side of the house. I don't even know if there is a 

successful man, I can't see one if there is. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) was referring to a successful businessman 

from a financial point of view, and I am sure this is the only language a profit capitalist understands, I suppose he 

would consider Mr. Pinder a success. If he was speaking of a businessman being politically successful then I 

would suggest that Mr. Pinder and Mr. Buckwold in my constituency are anything but successful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Link: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the ordinary small businessmen know very well that the only friends 

that they have sit on this side of the house. They know very well that the giant corporations and the profit 

capitalists are going to squeeze them out of business slowly and surely. 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

609 

The small businessman like the small farmer is fighting for his life. Mr. Speaker, I intend to do everything in my 

power to help the small businessman survive, and to see that they can at least continue in business in order that 

they can raise and educate their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more and more people in this province, those on social aid, those in the civil service, and others, are 

becoming alarmed at the attitude of the present Liberal regime to the general public. They are living in constant 

fear of the Liberals and their capitalists friends. They can see every day that the present Liberal regime judges all 

things on a financial basis. I believe more and more people every day are beginning to realize how important 

freedom is to them and what they have lost since last April. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand that a liquor store in my constituency will be allowed to remain open until 10 o'clock at 

night. I would have thought that a moderate consumer of alcoholic beverages might well find the opportunity 

during the regular hours of business to buy liquor. Once again, in order to derive a few more dollars in revenue 

from the sale of liquor, the Liberals are prepared to take advantage of those unfortunate souls who have a 

compulsion to acquire alcohol at all hours of the day or night. It would seem to me that instead of making more 

liquor available to these people that the government might well consider reducing proposed expenditures in some 

other area by one or two million dollars to erect a research centre to try and assist these people, rather than to 

tempt them more. 

 

Drinking is no longer considered a moral weakness, but an illness. As far as I am concerned, the welfare of the 

people should be of vital interest to any responsible government. This government, as I have indicated, is not 

responsible. One wonders if this is just the first step in keeping all liquor stores open every night in order to 

increase the profit from this source to cover up obvious deficits, such as for education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan has been quoted as saying that he is going to change Saskatchewan 

from the cultural wasteland that it has been. This is indeed very commendable, if such was the case. Perhaps there 

are times when his years in the Socialist Party, before he was lead astray, come to the fore. However, that may be, 

I question his interest in cultural matters for various reasons. One reason why I am sceptical about his suddenly 

acquired interest in matters of this kind is the fact that one of the first things he did after assuming office was to 

cut the grant to the proposed auditorium in Saskatoon. Although the previous administration had agreed to support 

this project in Saskatoon to the extent of $2,000,000, what did the Premier do — the man who now proposes to 

convert this cultural wasteland? He is now proposing that only $750,000, or just about one-third originally 

approved by the CCF, be allocated for this purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government is not going to come through with the grant to the auditorium that the previous 

administration had promised, perhaps some of the government's industrial friends might supply us with a few 

crumbs to help build what would ordinarily be assumed to be the responsibility of a culture loving government. 

Speaking about culture, it is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of Saskatchewan was absent on 

January 30th, the time that Her Majesty's representative, the Governor General of Canada, was in our province to 

speak at the Saskatchewan Diamond Jubilee dinner. He was in Montana visiting his friends. It is also interesting 

to note that the governor of Montana was the guest speaker at the Liberal convention in Saskatoon on November 

23rd, 1964. 

 

I presume these exchange visits were arranged to establish better understanding between our province and our 

neighbors to the south, a sort of a cultural chit-chat. Mr. Speaker, I believe that the people of Saskatchewan would 

hang their heads in shame if they knew the kind of Goldwater type friends our Premier associates with in the 

United States of America. Mr. Speaker, these are the kind of friends we can well do without. 

 

Mr. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Better than the Russians. 

 

Mr. Link: — It is to be hoped that if the cultural standards of Saskatchewan are to be raised that they will not be 

imported from a Fascist type of state like Montana. I repeat what I said earlier in this debate. Let the government 

make available the grants to cultural institutions as had been promised by the previous administration and 

Saskatchewan people will co-operate in raising the cultural level of this province. Let me also say, Mr. Speaker, 

that I cannot see how testing farm machinery at the university is going to help 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

610 

culture very much. Mr. Speaker, it is quite obvious after having listened to the presentation of the budget by the 

Premier that it leaves much to be desired. 

 

Perhaps one of the reasons why the budget was such a feeble effort was due to the fact that so many capable civil 

servants, who ordinarily would have been doing some of the preparatory work on this document, have been fired 

by the Liberal regime, or have left the civil service as they found they preferred to seek other employment rather 

than work under the Liberal capitalists in Saskatchewan. This loss of civil servants, Mr. Speaker, is only one of 

the losses suffered by the people of this province since the Liberals came into office. The capitalists, as the civil 

servants found out, are not interested in people or in the welfare of Saskatchewan, or of good government, but 

rather they are interested in paying back some of their election debts to their capitalist friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier was perfectly frank in this regard. He said in his budget speech and I quote: 

 

We are convinced that industrialists will establish in Saskatchewan for only one reason, because it is profitable 

for them to do so. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, the people cannot say they were not warned. It is quite obvious from this remark that the 

Liberal regime does not care what happens to our natural resources. All that matters is that their capitalist friends 

can make money. Mr. Speaker, I don't suppose one would blame the industrialists for grasping such an 

opportunity. It is the present regime in this province that is giving away our resources. I was also disappointed in 

the budget as far as help for technical schools was concerned. Although I was pleased to see that a little help 

would be available to the Saskatchewan Technical School located in Saskatoon, by and large, the overall picture 

with regard to aid for technical schools is pretty pathetic. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, from a political party that went up and down this province during the last election, telling the 

people that they were interested in our youth. What utter nonsense, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal regime of today is no 

more interested in the youth of this province than their predecessors were twenty years ago. At a future date I 

propose to talk on how the Liberals looked after the youth of this province prior to 1944. No, Mr. Speaker, I am 

afraid that there is very little in this budget that will be of help to the young people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see my time is up and I will have to cut off part of what I had hoped to say, but I do want to 

say this, that after listening to this budget that the hon. Premier of Saskatchewan brought down a few days ago, 

more people will be paying more taxes after this budget than before this budget. 

 

Now, as you have gathered from these brief remarks I cannot support the motion, but I shall support the 

sub-amendment and the amendment. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, while I have briefly spoken on previous occasions in 

this house, this is really the first opportunity I have had to extend to you, Sir, my sincere congratulations on your 

election to the position which you occupy. Your past experience in this house, your sense of fair play, your 

respect for proper decorum amply qualify you for this important post. I wish you well. I assure you of my full 

co-operation. 
 

I was flattered when the Premier of this province asked me to accept the portfolios of Highways and Telephones 

and subsequently that of Industry and Commerce, First of all, to be included in the cabinet of any province is an 

honor bestowed on relatively few citizens, and an honor appreciated by any citizen. I will, to the best of my 

ability, endeavor to perform my duties with dignity, diligence and integrity. Secondly, I consider my appointment 

to be a compliment to the good people of Regina South in electing me to this legislature. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Grant: — I consider I represent the finest constituency in Saskatchewan. I thank my constituents for the 

wonderful support they gave .me and the rapidity with which my victory was announced. Contrary to some other 

cases, I had no concern about recounts. 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

611 

My constituency is a fine residential area composed of people from every walk of life including many 

agriculturalists — people who carry an above-average share of community responsibilities in educational, church, 

business and social activities. It is a constituency I am very proud to represent. 

 

Some members of this house have expressed appreciation for the consideration given them by the Department of 

Highways. I would like to express my appreciation, Sir, and that of my constituents, to the Minister of Public 

Health, for his recent announcement of substantial financial assistance to the Regina General Hospital. There has 

been a crying need for many years for additional hospital beds in Regina. It is most gratifying to see this 

demonstration of action. The hon. member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek) in his remarks yesterday, accused me 

of being glued to my chair. I suggest that the business of this house could be expedited if some of the opposition 

members were glued to their chairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — Better to be glued to your seat until you have something worthwhile to say than to do otherwise. 

In all due respect to the hon. member referred to, he at least did not bring in a 14 course blue plate special as did 

his running mate in Regina East (Mr. Baker). 

 

I was on the Regina General Hospital Board for twelve years, retiring in 1957. During the latter part of my term 

and on numerous occasions since, representation was made to the previous government regarding the urgency for 

additional hospital beds in Regina but no action whatsoever was taken. In nine months, we have broken this 

ridiculous situation, and today the Chairman of the Regina General Hospital Board announced plans to proceed 

immediately with the construction of a 80 to 100 bed addition to the Regina General Hospital to be ready next 

spring. 

 

At this point, I would like to say I was honored when the Premier asked me to assume the portfolio of Industry 

and Commerce in an acting capacity, following the loss of Herb Pinder to this house. The hon. member from 

Saskatoon referred to Mr. Pinder as a druggist. This is a demonstration of how little he knows about business, 

because Mr. Pinder is not a druggist. He is a leading businessman — a businessman who has forgotten more about 

business than the members on the other side of the house will ever know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — I will admit that December 16th was a sad day — a sad day for the future of Saskatchewan, when 

we lost a man of the calibre of Mr. Pinder. He had all the qualifications so necessary for the dynamic, aggressive 

and promotional leadership of a department so vital to the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

In the new Industry and Commerce Act, there will be provision for legislative powers to enable the department to 

act as the focal point for industrial and commercial promotion and development in Saskatchewan. It will 

co-ordinate and promote tourism, a most important industry. The opposition, on occasion, has cast disparaging 

remarks about American investments in Canada and Americans in general. I will welcome and encourage the 

American tourist dollar as well as the American investment dollar. 

 

Let me assure this house, that while my department is keenly interested in the development of industry and 

commerce in Saskatchewan, we are equally interested in encouraging and promoting trade with other provinces 

and other countries. The department recognizes that trade is a two-way street and is appreciative of the 

tremendous impact made on our economy by our exports of wheat, potash, oil, minerals, etc. We stand ever ready 

to offer whatever assistance we can to foreign governments, or to their representatives. Five countries, namely, 

Great Britain, France, The Netherlands, Denmark and Belgium, are officially represented in this province and at 

the current time, Japan is actively looking for a representative in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am optimistic of the role that the Department of Industry and Commerce can play in the life of this 

province, now that the department is divested of extraneous, unrelated services, such as the so-called Information 

Branch, Photographic Services, etc. I can find little evidence of energetic industrial promotion by the previous 

government. Let me assure you, that under the forceful, imaginative leadership of our 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

612 

Premier, there will be unlimited scope for this department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — While representing a top constituency, I also consider that I head up a most important and 

challenging department, that of Highways. Permit me to express a sincere word of thanks to the dedicated, 

conscientious officials and staff of the department. The men and women engaged in the work of the Department 

of Highways, demonstrate a real esprit de corps, and genuine interest in the implementation of the department's 

program. Their enthusiasm and co-operation aided me greatly in taking over a busy department at the height of 

the construction season. Their help is deeply appreciated. 

 

I would like to say a special word of thanks to the maintenance branch, and in particular to those hardy souls who 

have worked long hours under adverse conditions on snow removal. This has been the severest winter we have 

had for years, and particularly so in the southwest portion of our province. Roads closed in almost as quickly as 

we opened them. In spite of this, complaints were not too numerous. My heartiest thanks to the maintenance men, 

and to the public, whose patience was appreciated. 

 

Highways is a big department, involving many employees, and the department, and the department affects the 

lives of most of us. When you are dealing with a part of our lives, as important as highways, I can assure this 

house, that the role of minister, is not always an easy one. I have concluded that every highway, existing or 

proposed, has an organized group, either promoting it or protesting it, and I also believe that in the first six 

months in office, I had every group in to see me. This was an eye-opener to me, as the previous government had 

led us to believe they had provided for every one of our highway needs. Such, however, was not the case. Many 

areas had been completely neglected, year in and year out. Many constituencies had fewer than 25 miles of 

dust-free surfaces, one had eight miles. 

 

I was amazed to find that some of the former cabinet ministers' constituencies were considerably lacking. The 

hon. member from Kelsey, (Mr. Brockelbank) last fall, had occasion to mention in the press, that I was too slow 

in promoting the work of the department. Might I point out that the road in question, namely no. 23, was built 

almost 20 years ago. He had 20 years to do something about it. When I moved in to the Department of Highways, 

one of the items of correspondence that first greeted me, was a letter dealing with highway no. 23. My 

predecessor had advised the opponents of the route that a new minister would be coming in shortly and they could 

bother him from here on in. This was one of the reasons why this road was delayed, another was the weatherman. 

 

Our opposition knows perfectly well, that we extended the highway program after May 22nd, by additional miles 

of oiling and grading, where population priorities dictated attention. The only deferment was the by-pass for no. 2 

north of Prince Albert. I can assure this house, that this by-pass is not forgotten. It will be given its proper priority. 

 

In discussing the work of the Department of Highways and the program for the coming year, a useful background 

would be a review of the progress in road improvement across Canada, in the post-war period. Canada's surfaced 

road mileage in 1945 was 131,000 miles and this had increased to 291,000 by 1962. Canada's paved highway 

mileage in 1945 was 17,000, in 1962 this had increased to 53,000. Western Canadian roads and highways 

required more attention because of the general curtailment in governmental expenditures during the depressed 

thirties, which created a considerable backlog. This was worsened by the relative lack of new construction during 

the war years. On top of this, the growth in motor travel traffic has been phenomenal since 1945. This was 

brought about by an up-growth in the average family income and great improvements in the motor vehicle. 

 

The high per capita income and high employment following 1945, made it possible for more people to travel, 

which in turn increased the demand for better roads, tourist facilities, etc. This was not a situation peculiar to 

Saskatchewan but was common to the North American continent, and Saskatchewan was faced with the same task 

as most provinces, and many states to the south. 

 

The hon. member from Melfort (Mr. Willis) once again referred back to 1944. They seem to enjoy harping back 

to the depression and war 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

613 

years for their comparisons. That is their privilege. It makes their 20 years look better. They feel they must gild 

the lily. He mentioned that, in 1944, the budget, determined by a Liberal government, was $2,700,000 whereas in 

1945, under CCF administrations it grew to $4,100,000 or a 50 per cent increase. They had to go back a long way. 

We have never said that our budget this year represented the greatest percentage increase. We say it is the biggest 

dollar budget and that it is. It represents a 50 per cent increase over the last year's capital budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — He also mentioned that in 1944 there was a road sign some place, the road was so bad that the sign 

said: 

 

Choose your rut here because you can't get out of it for the next 20 miles. 

 

Well, I can tell him that in 1964, I travelled on a road in Saskatchewan on which I had the same trouble. I did not 

have much choice. There was just one bottomless rut, and I travelled for 25 miles in it. 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Where was that? 

 

Mr. Grant: — That road has been considerably improved since and I know work will be done on it this year. 

He knows where it is, I am sure. No one can disclaim that road conditions in Saskatchewan are much superior in 

1965 to 1964. I will certainly give credit where credit is due. This is true of every Canadian province. I will not 

take the time of this house for needless harping on the deficiencies of the highway program for the province since 

1945. I think it can be summed up in a very few words, not enough of the provincial budget has been allocated to 

this very essential and necessary part of today's living. 

 

Mr. J.T. Douglas, Minister of Highways for 16 years, was well respected by all those associated with highway 

work. I am very pleased to see him in the house today. I welcome him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — In spite of limited funds placed at his disposal, he and the department did a very good job. In 

retirement, as in harness, he is held in high respect. His successor, and my predecessor, the hon. member from 

Melfort (Mr. Willis) took over a department suffering from growing pains. On the advice of outside consultants, 

the department was completely reorganized during 1963 and 1964 to better enable it to handle the demands of the 

sixties for highway construction and maintenance. This reorganization established five districts with considerable 

authority and responsibility delegated to these districts in order to lessen the load at head office and also enable 

the departmental personnel to deal more readily and efficiently with problems in their own areas. 

 

It is felt that this delegation of authority will do much toward developing personnel with capabilities to handle 

major responsibilities. While this reorganization seems to be working out very well, there are, nevertheless, 

certain problems, normal to such a reorganization, but these, I am pleased to say, are being adequately handled by 

the personnel of the department. 

 

The restricted funds made available for highway construction over the last 20 years means that the program of 

roads has not kept up with the demand. It is estimated that there exists a backlog of highway construction and 

improvement in the neighborhood of $172,000,000. It is also estimated that only slightly in excess of 30 per cent 

of the highway system can be considered as adequate. This means that the Saskatchewan Department of 

Highways is faced with tremendous demands to bring the system up to the reasonable standards, which is required 

by today's motorist. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer, in presenting his budget, has indicated a program of approximately $35,000,000 of 

provincial funds for highways, which provides roughly a 50 per cent increase for capital construction over last 

year's budget. This is the largest highway budget in the history of the province. It is the first stage of a four year 

program, which will involve a minimum of $175,000,000. This is most welcome and encouraging and the 

announcement; I know, will make the Department of Highways move into 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

614 

this program with enthusiasm and satisfaction. The Provincial Treasurer is to be congratulated on his budget for 

1965-66 which indicates to the people of this province that our government is living up to its election promises. It 

is concrete evidence that tax reductions can be given in certain areas, where required, at the same time as 

expansion of highway programs, etc., which are so essential to the welfare of the people of Saskatchewan. It 

demonstrates that this government is doing something to give highway construction its proper priority. 

 

There is not a segment of our economy that is not dependent on highways, whether it be the farmer, the 

businessman, the industrialist, or the tourist. We realize full well that all segments must be cared for in the 

program. The schedule of work, which I will announce today, does this very thing. The greatest single demand 

seems to be for increased dust-free surfaces and your government will zealously work toward the objective of 

7,000 miles of dust-free roads in Saskatchewan by 1967-68. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — This year's program calls for 700 miles of oil and 200 miles of pavement. In addition to this, there 

are many miles of road requiring to be brought up to better standards, and our 1965-66 program will make a very 

worthwhile start toward this objective, mainly grading involving some 550 miles. In all, some 26,000,000 yards of 

earth will be moved in providing new and wider and better highways. This work will cover the rural and urban 

areas throughout the length and breadth of this province. The largest yardage in any previous year, for which 

records are available was 1960-61 when approximately 19,000,000 yards of earth were moved. 

 

The hon. member from Melfort (Mr. Willis) mentioned that, in all likelihood, government crews would be 

discontinued this year and this would mean an influx of out of province contractors in order to meet the increased 

demands. Let me say that government crews will not be reduced in 1963. Let me also say that already two 

Saskatchewan contractors, who had moved out of the province, are back in the province and it is my sincere hope 

that with the help of government crews, the private contractors will be able to handle the contracts that are 

available this year. We will certainly give them every chance. 

 

It was mentioned that government crews were in existence prior to 1944 in the Liberal years. Certainly they were. 

The road building industry was in its infancy and the government was forced to do this in order to carry out the 

necessary work. I am a little puzzled because the government crews' work in the department has decreased over 

the past few years, in spite of the opposition members. Departmental officials, as far back as 1958, recommended 

drastic reductions in government crews. The reason was, that at the rate they were going, they were going to chase 

all of the contractors out of the province, so they had really no choice. They either had to reduce them or else take 

over the industry entirely. 

 

The hon. member from Melfort (Mr. Willis) knows perfectly well that precise evaluation of the cost of 

government crew work is most difficult, especially when you compare it with contract prices — and I am sure 

you will agree. This type of work is exempt from taxation, sales tax, business and property tax, vehicle licence, 

etc. Certain staff limitations, that means lack of supervision, and while this might be a saving, it is a disadvantage. 

Also, in the government crews, there is no provision made for that bad thing called profit, bad in the eyes of the 

opposition, but very essential to the private contractor. There is also no charge for capital funds and there is no 

charge for the maintenance or cost of the buildings occupied by the government equipment. 

 

The hon. member also mentioned that the next logical move was to oil the northern roads. Well, it would certainly 

be most desirable, Mr. Speaker, to do so, but I do not think I have to give him any reasons why this is a little bit in 

the daydream class at the present time. 

 

He also expressed criticism of the change in the routing of highway no. 5, north of Saskatoon. Might I say that 

this is a demonstration on the part of the present government of people before dollars, and that I am gratified to 

have received many, many communications from the people in Saskatoon, commending us on the expression of 

opinion on these routes. We favor the one north out of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

615 

Mr. Grant: — He talks about the small businessman. Let us advise him that many small businessmen on this 

route north of Saskatoon will be sadly effected if we follow the route suggested by the previous government. 

Today's heavy volume of vehicles, particularly adjacent to our larger cities, require us to extend our four-lane 

divided highway mileage. In addition to some small sections in the area of Prince Albert and Saskatoon, the major 

start will be made in the Moose Jaw-Regina road from the Moose Jaw end, working east. Within a few years, this 

road will be a fine four-lane highway structure designed to carry high volumes with a minimum of interference. 

 

In connection with urban improvements, we are embarking on a considerably stepped-up program of aiding and 

assisting urban areas to provide the road surfaces required to meet today's traffic demands. Some 120 urban 

centres have applied for assistance, and weather permitting, expenditures in the neighborhood of $5,700,000 of 

provincial funds will be involved. This is based on 75 per cent assistance to those centres with 15,000 population 

and less, and 50 per cent to the others. 

 

Another very major area receiving our attention is that of roads in the northern part of the province to aid and 

assist in the opening up of this fabulously rich section of Saskatchewan. The roads to resources program, a 

sharing arrangement with the federal government, will be pushed with all speed. This program involves extension 

of various highways in the north, including 102 from Otter Rapids north to Reindeer Lake, the Island Falls road, 

the Cumberland House road, etc. Another major undertaking for the summer is the connecting road, known as no. 

165 between no. 2 and the Hanson Lake Road to facilitate the movement of mineral concentrates from our 

Precambrian shield area to the smaller outlets. In northern areas, a vigorous program of construction and 

maintenance will be carried out to improve road conditions in our recreational areas. A heavy regravelling 

program is underway on no. 2 north of Waskesiu. Major reconstruction will take place on this same road. 

Generally speaking, access roads to provincial parks will be improved involving a total expenditure of $154,000. 

 

A major step will be taken early in 1965 when all-weather roads, now under the Department of Natural 

Resources, will be transferred to the Department of Highways. In all, some 577 miles of road are involved. As 

from April 1st, construction and maintenance of all-weather roads will be under highways. The Department of 

Natural Resources will continue with forest roads, fire roads, and some roads to recreational areas. 

 

A policy decision of some considerable importance to the municipalities and to our industries was announced 

early in January. I make reference to the industrial access road assistance program. This involves government 

assistance to municipalities required to construct access roads to heavy industry and calls for the provincial 

government to share on a 50-50 basis with those municipalities in which the industries are located, and on a 80-20 

basis with those municipalities through which the roads go but in which the municipalities do not share the 

benefits of the industry. This program will be of particular benefit to those municipalities in which are located 

industries employing large numbers of people, for example, the potash industry. 

 

One of the most urgent problems that seems to be facing the municipalities of this province, is the increasing 

burden of construction and maintenance of roads. In a number of cases, the overall traffic volume is creating a 

burden on the municipality in maintaining certain roads to the standard required. A complete review and study has 

been made by the Department of Highways of grid roads carrying abnormal volumes of traffic and presenting 

maintenance and construction problems. As a result of this study, I am pleased to announce, that the department 

will take steps immediately to incorporate approximately 450 miles of grid roads into the highway system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — These roads are those that serve a great number of people, not strictly the local inhabitants, and 

which, in some cases, might be classified as gaps in the highway system. Initially, in some cases, this program 

will merely involve the relieving of the municipalities of the maintenance of grid roads, but in other cases, it will 

involve the reconstruction of the roads as well. The extent of this reconstruction will depend on the highway 

budget for succeeding years. The timing of the incorporation will be dependent on the roads in question being 

brought up to grid road standards. I know that this announcement will be welcomed by dozens of communities 

and municipalities throughout the province. This program will 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

616 

help provide rural residents and those responsible for the transportation of school children, with adequate roads, 

particularly during winters such as we have experienced this past winter. A different type of marker and 

numbering will designate the roads considered as secondary. 

 

I consider that a progressive step has been taken by the two departments under my direction, namely highways 

and the tourist branch. Up to the present, there have been two maps published by these two separate departments, 

and this necessitated unnecessary expense and confusion to the user. In 1965, I am pleased to say, there will be 

one suitable map incorporating all the necessary information for the tourist and the ordinary traveller, whether 

they are seeking accommodation or road information. 

 

I can assure this house that the department is keeping a watchful eye on all rail lines which might be up for 

abandonment, and on the effect that any such action might have on the highway needs of the particular area. 

 

To sum up, the program I am about to announce represents, in my opinion, a genuine start on a program that will, 

within a few years, give Saskatchewan a pretty complete highway system. It covers most sections of the province 

and is related to need insofar as priorities are concerned. I have indicated earlier that it covers rural roads as well 

as urban roads, southern roads as well as northern roads. The farmer, the businessman, the tourist, and the 

industrialist have been kept in mind, and the comfort and convenience of the travelling public, is foremost at all 

times. The program, I feel, is a direct challenge to the road building industry of this province, and will give them a 

greater yardage of earth to move than in any year in the history of the province. The program calls for 

considerable bridge construction throughout the province and a start on a major bridge at North Battleford. Other 

bridge structures will be required on both the North and South Saskatchewan rivers, as a result of increased 

volumes of traffic, and the effect of the South Saskatchewan Dam on water flow. We have provided for a total 

bridge expenditure of $1,355,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have very much pleasure in presenting to this house, the 1965-66 program for the Department of 

Highways, and I believe each member has been supplied with a copy of it. 

 

Highway no. 1 — From the Jct. with no. 16 there will be resurfacing of the north lanes, east of Regina. 

 

— Moose Jaw to Regina there will be commencement of construction of a four-lane highway 

 

Highway no. 2 — Has a considerable program of work. U.S. Boundary to Rockglen, oil treatment. 

 

— Jct. no. 36 highway to Moose Jaw, widening and resurfacing. 

 

— Prince Albert south, construction and paving of a four-lane divided highway, 2.6 miles. 

 

— Prince Albert north, subgrade construction and paving. 

 

— Prince Albert National Park boundary to Montreal Lake, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway no. 3 — My predecessor will be interested in this one. Melfort to Kinistino, completion of grading and 

paving. 

— Kinistino to Birch Hills, grading, 

 

— Prince Albert-Shell River bridge, hot-mix bituminous surface. 

 

— Mont Nebo to Shell Lake, oil treatment. 

 

— Glaslyn to Turtleford, grading and gravelling 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — That is last years program. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Highway no. 4 — U.S. Boundary to Val Marie, completion of grading and gravelling. 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

617 

Highway no. 4 — From Jct. no. 43 to Swift Current, commencement of paving. 

— Glaslyn to Midnight Lake, oil treatment. 

— Meadow Lake to Dorintosh, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway no. 5 — Kamsack to Canora, grading and gravelling. 

— Wadena to Watson, grading and gravelling. 

— Sutherland By-pass, completion of grading and paving. 

— Saskatoon to Borden Bridge, grading. 

— Borden Bridge to Radisson, subgrade widening and surfacing. 

— Lashburn to Lloydminster, subgrade widening and resurfacing 

 

That is the member from Cutknife's constituency (Mr. Nollet) 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — Should have done that last year, Gordon. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Took you fellows 20 years. We are putting it into high gear now. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A little late. 

 

Mr. Grant: — I am amazed at how long the hon. member from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) got away with so little road 

improvement in his constituency. I inquired one day, why this was, and the answer was, that he was so busy being 

Minister of Agriculture that he had little time for the other problems of the constituency. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Pretty good, Toby. 

 

Mr. Grant: — I'll say he did a good job. I ran into you often on agriculture but not on highways. 

 

Highway no. 6 — No. 13 to Corinne, completion of grading and paving, 

— Raymore to Dafoe, completion of grading and paving. 

— Melfort to Gronlid, oil treatment. 

 

This shows the fairness of our program. We don't discriminate between the political coloring of the district 

constituency. 

 

Highway no. 7 — Delisle to Tessier, grading. 

— Rosetown to D'Arcy, paving. 

 

Highway no. 8 — Carievale to Redvers, completion of grading and gravelling. 

— Moosomin to Rocanville, oil treatment. 

— Rocanville to two miles north of Jct. no. 22 highway, grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway no. 9 — U.S. Boundary to Jct. no. 18, grading and gravelling. 

— Jct. no. 18 to Jct. no. 13, completion of oil treatment. 

— Stockholm to Yorkton, oil treatment. 

— Yorkton to Canora, commencement of sub-grade widening and resurfacing. 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

618 

Highway no. 10 — Commencement of grading between Yorkton and Melville. 

 

Highway no. 13 — Weyburn to Jct. no. 28 — oil treatment (1964 contract — Mr. Willis) 

— Jct. 16 highway to Jct. no. 34 — oil treatment 

— Robsart to Consul — grading and gravelling 

 

Highway no. 14 — Langenburg to Churchbridge — grading and gravel 

— From no. 11 highway to Ruth Street in Saskatoon to connect to the Idylwyld Freeway — 

grading 

— Asquith to Perdue — completion of grading and commencement of paving 

— From no. 14 also from Jct. no. 15 highway to Wilkie — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 15 — From Jct. no. 9 to Melville — oil treatment 

— Melville to Fenwood — grading and gravelling 

 

Highway no. 17 — Lloydminster south to Lone Rock Corner — completion of grading and gravelling 

— Lloydminster to Jct. no. 3 highway — grading and gravelling 

 

Highway no. 18 — Estevan to Torquay — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 19 — Chaplin to Central Butte — grading and gravelling 

— Elbow to Jct. no. 15 highway — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 20 — Lanigan to Humboldt — grading and gravelling 

 

Highway no. 21 — Maple Creek to Jct. no. 1 highway— grading and paving 

 

The next one is of extreme interest in that area, 

 

— Jct. no. 1 highway to Leader, minor grading and oil treatment 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — 

 

Highway no. 22 — Jct. no. 8 to south of Yarbo — oil treatment 

— Lipton west — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 23 — Carragana to Chelan — grading and gravelling 

 

I'll admit it's a 1964 program, the hon. member from Kelsey, (Mr. J.H. Brockelbank) and I'm sorry that you were 

not able to get this program under way before we took over. We had to come in and get it started. 

 

Highway no. 26 — Turtleford to Spruce Lake — grading and gravel 

— North of St. Walburg to Loon Lake — grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway no. 29 — Wilkie to Battleford — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 32 — Shackleton to Leader — minor grading and oil treatment. 

 

Highway no. 34 — Bengough to no. 13 highway — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 35 — Elfros to Wadena — oil treatment 

— Jct. 49 to Archerwill — oil treatment 

— Tisdale to south of Nipawin — completion of paving 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

619 

Way up in the Flin Flon area, 

 

— South of Creighton to Denare Beach — completion of grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway no. 36 — Hart to Willowbunch — completion of grading and gravelling 

 

Highway no. 40 — Krydor to Hafford — completion of oil treatment 

— North Battleford to Wilbert — grading and gravel 

 

Highway no. 42 — Jct. no. 15 to Jct. no. 7 — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 43 — Jct. no. 2 to highway to 7 miles west of Gravelbourg — oil treatment 

 

This is one of the areas that had been passed up for so many years. 

 

Highway no. 44 — Elrose to west of Eston — grading and gravelling 

— West of Eston to west of Laporte — oil treatment Highway no. 47 — Benson to Stoughton 

— grading and gravelling 

— Jct. no. 1 highway to Qu'Appelle River — grading and gravelling. 

 

Highway no. 49 — Pelly to Stenen — oil treatment 

 

Highway no. 58 — Lafleche to Gravelbourg — oil treatment 

 

Badly needed for the use of that park area down there 
 

Highway no. 80 — Esterhazy to Church bridge — grading and gravel 
 

— North of McLennan Lake — grading and gravelling 
 

Highway no. 102 — Otter Rapids to McLennan Lake — completion of this year's program and an extension 
 

Highway no. 123 — Squaw Rapids to Cumberland House — completion of grading and gravelling. 
 

Highway no. 165 — From no. 106 to no. 2 mentioned earlier 
 

The Red Earth Road which is currently a Department of Natural Resources' responsibility, is one that we are 

taking over. There will be extensive improvements in this area, 
 

— From the Hanson Lake Road to Island Falls — a continuation of grading 
 

The first of our industrial access roads, 
 

— Allan to Elstow — completion of grading and gravelling, mostly completed last fall. 
 

The major structures will include: 
 

— completion of Saskatchewan Landing Bridge 

— commencement of Battleford — North Battleford Bridge. 

— Beaver River Bridge on no. 4 

— Assiniboine River Bridge on no. 8 near Kamsack 

— Frenchman River Bridge no. 13 near Eastend 

— plus other smaller structures 
 

As mentioned earlier, it is proposed to transfer the following municipal roads to the provincial highway system 

over the next few years when they have been completed to grid standards by the municipality concerned. 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

620 

 

— Pasqua Street North — that's a two mile section 

— Lampman to no. 47 highway 

— Mankota-Ferland-Wood Mountain 

— No. 1 highway to Buffalo Pound — recreational area 

— Meadow Lake-Loon Lake 

— Rosthern-Wakaw 

— Rockglen-Hart 

— Francis-Qu'Appelle 

 

Some Hon. Members: — After twenty years. 

 

Mr. Grant: — This was certainly a gap in the highway, I don't see how anyone could deny this. It's very, very 

apparent. 

 

— Balcarres-Ituna 

— Torquay South-old no. 50 

— Stoughton-Grenfell 

 

An Hon. Member: — Another gap 

 

Mr. Grant: — 

— Springside-Buchanan-Preeceville 

— No. 1 highway to Pilot Butte 

— No. 13 highway — Kayville-Avonlea — long overdue 

— Balgonie-Edenwold 

— Prince Albert-East 

— No. 11 highway to Warman — very heavily travelled this section 

— Kerrobert-Unity 

— Courval to no. 19 highway 

 

Mr. Speaker, needless to say with the funds made available to the Department of Highways in the Budget Speech, 

I will not be supporting the amendment or the sub-amendment, but will certainly be supporting the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Before the hon. minister resumes his seat, I wonder if he would mind answering a 

question with reference to the remarks which he just made. He spoke of the construction of the highway from 14 

to Allan, as being an inclusion or an addition to the provincial highway system. I wonder if he is prepared to give 

us assurance now, that the department is willing to forego the ten per cent that it was attempting to collect from 

the municipality to help to defray the cost of this road? 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I did not say it was to be included in the highway system, and I can't see 

any reason why I should give an answer on the latter one. We made an arrangement with the municipality and we 

made it in good faith and we'll stick with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon, the grade seven pupils from Albert 

School in Saskatoon were in the gallery. They listened to the hon. member for Yorkton, (Mr. Gallagher). One of 

the pupils apparently asked their teacher, "do those people down there hate each other?" Had I been 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

621 

answering the question, I would have said that the member for Yorkton, (Mr. Gallagher) wasn't quite as biased a 

person as you might have surmised by listening to him. I think that we, who consider it a great privilege to be 

assigned the duties of being law-makers for the province, should realize that what we say and do in this chamber 

is heard and seen by young and old. I am willing to accept my share of the blame for the image of the legislature 

not being as favorable as it might be desired. However, it should be understood that under our parliamentary 

system of government, one group of elected members is responsible for the government of the day. While they 

naturally propose legislation which they hope will result in winning friends and influencing people, those of us 

who sit opposite have a duty to the elector to examine critically the past pledges, the performance and the 

proposed expenditures of the government. After we give full marks to the government for the proposals which we 

consider to be in the best interests of all the people, it is not surprising that we speak with a good deal of feeling, 

when changes of policy are proposed which we believe will make Saskatchewan a much less desirable place for 

the young, the old, and for those who will be spending their working years in the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Premier who spoke in his capacity as Provincial Treasurer in 

presenting a budget in which he expressed his philosophy and for delivering it so well. I would be the last to 

suggest that there is nothing good in the budget. But its favorable features have been mentioned time and time 

again by members opposite. The financial critic of the opposition, Mr. Blakeney, and those who followed him on 

this side have pointed out many weaknesses. I shall try to avoid repeating any of the comments made on either 

side of the house. I must express my appreciation for the fact that the Student Aid Fund will be extended to permit 

financial assistance for students who wish to enter the vocational and technical training schools. I must also thank 

the Provincial Treasurer for finally admitting that the earned interest on the financial assets of the consolidated 

fund for the year 63-64 amounted to $2,800,000 compared to the interest paid out on the dead weight, a charge on 

the consolidated fund amounting to $1,800,000. I regret that the hon. member for Kelsey, (Mr. J. H. Brockelbank) 

had to move to this side of the chamber before the Premier would concede this elementary bookkeeping detail. 

This information he has set out in the November 24th Saskatchewan Financial and Economic position. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer in his opening remarks said that he had quite a number of factors in mind in formulating 

his budget, one being the belief of the government that taxes in Saskatchewan are dangerously high, as compared 

with the rest of Canada. He should remember that he is no longer the Leader of the Opposition. He is the head of 

the government in what has been and what will continue to be an important province in Canada. He has no 

business misrepresenting the province of Saskatchewan either here or elsewhere, as pointed out by our financial 

critic, member for Regina East (Mr. Blakeney). Saskatchewan does not have the highest nor the lowest per capita 

taxes in Canada. I have the following table which has been prepared from the D.B.S. per capita taxation by 

provincial governments for 1964-65 and they might be arranged in this order: 

 

Ontario has the highest $155.97; Quebec, second — $184.20; B.C., third — $146.37; Saskatchewan comes fourth 

with $129.44; Manitoba, $94.40; Nova Scotia, $81.65; Prince Edward Island, $80.86; Newfoundland, $77.15; 

Alberta $72.89; New Brunswick, $72.07. The Canadian average is $134.18, the average for Saskatchewan is well 

below this, $129.44. It should be mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that the provinces of Ontario, Quebec, and British 

Columbia account for 72.4 per cent of Canada's population on June 1st, 1964. So, Mr. Speaker, it is correct to say, 

that 72.4 per cent of the Canadian people live in areas where the per capita tax is higher than in Saskatchewan. It 

should also be mentioned that Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada which includes medicare in its per 

capita payment of $129.44. If this factor was taken into consideration, Saskatchewan would be able to boast of 

one of the lowest per capita taxes. I think any Provincial Treasurer would do well to consider the services which 

are provided for the citizens in any given province in the country and I hope, before the Premier is Provincial 

Treasurer much longer, he will discard the gramophone record which he has played for so long as a member of 

the opposition. 

 

I recently checked the gasoline tax rates in various provinces. Newfoundland with a Liberal government has the 

distinction of having the highest rate, 19 cents a gallon, New Brunswick also with a Liberal government is a close 

second with 18 cents, and as you might expect with another Liberal government, Quebec is third with 15 cents, 

Saskatchewan with 14 cents has only two provinces with lower rates, Alberta 12 cents and B.C. 13 cents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the Provincial Treasurer would recognize some of these elementary matters. 

As you would expect, the change 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

622 

in the political climate in Saskatchewan has resulted in the Provincial Treasurer ignoring, almost completely, 

mentioning the Department of Social Welfare which is going to spend more than $29,800,000 during the next 

financial year. I would like to compare the budget address this year delivered by the Provincial Treasurer with the 

address delivered by the former Provincial Treasurer (Mr. J.H. Brockelbank), the hon. member for Kelsey as 

recorded on page 318 of the Debates and Proceedings last year. The member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) said 

then: 

 

All programs for Social Welfare are well known to hon. members. They include social aid based on needs, 

allowances for the blind, disabled, and other handicapped persons, assistance for the aged, including the 

Geriatric Centres and grants for housing, and nursing homes, Child Welfare programs which provide homes and 

care for neglected children, correctional institutes for those who break the laws, and a variety of other programs 

designed to look after the needs of the unfortunate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to hear the Provincial Treasurer give high priority to the essential welfare programs 

when representatives of banks and financial corporations in Canada were on hand in the galleries and on the floor. 

The budget for all these programs in 1964-65 amounts to $19,000,000. I am reading the remarks from the member 

of Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank): 

 

increase of $1,300,000 over the current year's operation. This will ensure that we maintain this basic protection 

for our citizens. 

 

The figures used by the hon. member were the net amounts disbursed by the province. They did not include the 

reimbursement from the federal and municipal governments. Last year, the financial critic, (Mr. McDonald) the 

present Minister of Agriculture and Deputy Leader, who I am sorry isn't in his place, had some very strong words 

to criticize the inadequacies of the budget. For years we have heard the Minister of Agriculture stand in his place 

and criticize budgets on the ground that inadequate provision had been made for disabled persons. It was 

explained to him over and over again, that the program for disabled persons was operated according to federal 

government rules and regulations. The federal regulations provided for the present restrictive definition of a 

disabled person. 

 

Time and time again, members opposite said that this was not good enough and that two things should be done. 

First, the federal government should be persuaded to change their definition and secondly, if the federal 

government would not change its definition, the provincial government should go ahead with a wider program 

with provincial funds. The financial critic of the Liberal party said this in a most emphatic way. Last year he 

considered this subject to be sufficiently important that he discussed it twice during the budget debate. On Friday, 

February 21st with all these distinguished financial gentlemen on the floor of the chamber and then on Monday 

the 24th, when he resumed his speech on the debate — listen to what he said, as reported on page 341. 

 

The interpretation of a disabled person is a disgrace to Canada. If the federal government is not prepared to take 

care of these people, then the members of this legislature ought to be prepared to do something about it. I will 

never support a budget in this house that doesn't make adequate provision for our senior citizens, our blind and 

disabled persons. 

 

Well, the Deputy Leader cannot support the budget before us because this important group in the Canadian scene 

has not even been mentioned in the budget by anyone on the government side. Knowing his background and 

knowing that the previous financial critic is now the Deputy Premier, and knowing there is now a Liberal 

government in both Ottawa and Regina, I particularly looked forward to this budget to see what was being done 

about this problem on which they were so vocal and so critical. But my anticipation was quite in vain. In spite of 

all they said in the opposition, the Liberal party in Saskatchewan has done nothing. They have done nothing to 

persuade their friends in Ottawa. I'm hoping that the Minister of Social Welfare will join the debate before the 

vote is taken to indicate what progress has been made in persuading the federal government to act on the 

recommendations made by his colleagues so effectively a year ago. 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

623 

Well I shouldn't say they have done nothing. They have done something for this group. They have raised the 

hospital tax by $20 per family. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Progress in reverse. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — They have done an equally ineffective job in dealing with the real problems of providing jobs 

for able-bodied persons in Saskatchewan. It is a reflection on our society, Mr. Speaker, when the Departments of 

Health, and Social Welfare establish schedules which they consider should be available if children in this affluent 

society are to have proper food, shelter and clothing. And, if at the same time, there are citizens in the market 

place who are unable to sell their services for sufficient to purchase the necessary food, shelter and clothing, the 

government of the day should do something about this problem. The Minister of Welfare has made headlines in 

all the daily papers across Canada with his solution which would require able-bodied people to work or starve. 

What has been done during the nine months by the new Liberal government to provide the 15,000 jobs which 

were promised at the rate of 50 jobs per day has not been disclosed in this legislature, and while I have no doubt 

that the Minister of Social Welfare does receive from people throughout the province, letters congratulating him 

on his stand, I am waiting for him to reply to the question from the member from Saskatoon, who spoke this 

afternoon, when he asked "How many in the province, on social aid, are getting over $500 a month or over $400, 

or over $300? 

 

I was interested in an article in the Battleford News Optimist, January 26th of this year, written by Don Lobb, 

Town Cryer. I should mention this paper is not owned and operated by the CCF. As a matter of fact the publisher 

for many years was Cameron McIntosh who was a Liberal member in the House of Commons. I should say, in 

passing, that Mr. McIntosh is in his 90's, is still as active and bright as ever. When the previous cabinet was 

entertained in North Battleford when they celebrated their Jubilee, Mr. McIntosh was able to appear at the 

banquet wearing the dress suit which he had purchased when he first went to the House of Commons over forty 

years ago. I do not think very many of us would be able to wear the same clothes that we wore forty years ago. 

Mr. McIntosh and his son are publishing a very bright paper. Here is what I read in the Battleford News Optimist, 

regarding the question that the Minister of Social Welfare feels so very strong about and: 

 

This refers to a drunk who cannot support himself, except perhaps in periods of painful sobriety because he is 

obviously disabled by his habit, curse, sin, illness, or whatever other label may be tied to him. Through sublime 

faith, humanitarianism or squeamishness, nobody wants to consider him expendable, and let him starve to 

death, so we established these eligibilities for public citizens. Having made an admission that the wretch has a 

right to live, it would seem logical to provide him with a little encouragement to look upward a little. Through 

some inherited perversity, we take the opposite point of view and maintain an atmosphere of contempt in which 

the difficulties sometime approaches the impossible. Contempt and related forms of abuse are not the stumbling 

blocks themselves. It would be a sad day indeed when a society could not or should not express its disapproval 

of behavior but there we have the same kind of rejection as the leper expressed in his warning crys. 

 

Further on: 

 

We may do many things in giving them, but the point is that no human being will be cast by unconcerned into 

the limbo where the ladders have no rungs. We shall recognize that a woman with three children of various 

colors and configuration needs something more than contempt and marginal subsistence in order to understand 

that she need not throw herself into any arms simply to belong to someone for a little while. All this welfare 

makes things too easy for people. A little big of root-hog-or-die philosophy would put some needed iron in the 

national bud. 

 

Take away the crutches from a cripple and you may produce a lean greedy fellow on all fours, just loaded 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

624 

with admirable determination. The object of the program is to help people stand upright as best they can. Bad 

welfare practices can and do create dependency just as it is bad to leave crutches with a person who no longer 

needs them. 

 

Good public welfare is not more debilitating to people than good health. It is hardly sensible to view a man as 

something of no account and to treat him accordingly, and then expect him to assume the mentality of noble 

independence. 

 

I suggest that the government opposite carefully look at the views expressed by a paper which has supported the 

Liberal party for years and years to see what they think of the attitude of the present government regarding 

welfare. 

 

I was interested in reading the Star Phoenix on January 18th, that municipalities are to get more help with social 

aid. This is a Prince Albert Canadian Press despatch: 

 

Mayor Allan Barsky of Prince Albert, Vice-President of the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

said Saturday in an interview, that the provincial government intends to establish a fund from which 

municipalities facing heavy social aid costs can obtain administrative costs. Mr. Barsky said that the plan was 

unfolded to S.U.M.A. Friday at a meeting of the group's executive. Detailed information on when and how the 

fund will be established and operated was not revealed. 

 

This was very good news, Mr. Speaker, but I am sorry that the Provincial Treasurer did not think it was 

worthwhile discussing while he spoke. I hope that the Minister of Welfare will comment on this change of policy. 

I am sure that municipalities, urban, rural, towns and villages, will welcome the fact that since there does not 

seem to be any increase in the job opportunities available, municipalities should be encouraged to take a keener 

interest in up-grading, in helping the people who have been on social aid for some time to get the sort of 

encouragement that the writer in the North Battleford News suggests they should have. 

 

I must thank the minister for replying so promptly to a letter which I wrote to him on December 20th as a result of 

an interview with one of his constituents. This constituent came to me on the 10th of December, after consulting a 

lawyer in the city of Saskatoon. The lawyer does not happen to be a supporter of my political party. He later 

spoke to me about the decision to limit to $200 a month a family of father, mother, and eight children. He took the 

case, knowing he wouldn't receive a fee, and he completed the file without submitting a bill or expecting a fee. 

This constituent of the minister came to see me. He has had a good earning record in years gone by, and he is now 

engaged in taking one of these high priced courses that a Chicago Vocational School provides. Apparently at this 

point it is hoped that he will have a chance to be accepted for a training course at Moose Jaw and if this happens 

he will not be limited to $200. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, here is a couple. I am sorry the minister has not found it possible to act on my suggestion to 

visit the home. I think that since the Premier was good enough to take time to see how some of our northern 

people are living, members on the government side should take time to visit some of the people in their own 

constituencies, who have the misfortune to be on social aid, and see just how they are living. 

 

In this family there is a girl at University, another girl staying with relatives, another girl in grade 12, and they are 

living in a house which they bought for $1,400. They would like to have better accommodation. I think that the 

municipality that has to deal with this type of case should be given assistance and encouragement to get the 

person to take advantage of the services which are made available in the provincially owned and operated 

technical institutes without paying a high fee for courses in Chicago, which are not as useful. 

 

As a result of the tremendous interest in Technical Training, the new Technical Institute in Saskatoon was much 

too small after it was in operation a few months. Last year the budget provided for an additional $1,000,000 to 

add to this facility. This amount was not spent by the new government, and the $1,000,000 has been included as 

one of the millions that has been saved during the present fiscal year. 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

625 

Mr. Speaker, time will prove that this was a very costly type of saving, when we have so many unemployed in 

Saskatchewan who with training would qualify for work. What is the Premier proposing to do? He is suggesting 

that he should go outside Saskatchewan to other parts of Canada, and other parts of the world, where the 

taxpayers have gone to the trouble of building, and operating, facilities such as we have in Saskatoon. The 

Provincial Treasurer has a total of $445,000 in the Department of Education estimates for the Saskatoon Institute, 

and another small amount for miscellaneous construction in the province. But when you take into account the 

amount which will be recovered from the federal government, a mere pittance of $119,000 of provincial funds are 

being made available for an expenditure which should have much higher priority. 

 

The member for Regina West mentioned that previous governments felt that we should not pass our Diamond 

Jubilee and Canada's Centenary without having a suitable auditorium in the province's two larger cities, Regina 

and Saskatoon. I appreciate the opinions expressed by members opposite about places other than these two cities, 

but I think they should remember that Saskatchewan is a province and it so happens that the Legislative Buildings 

were placed in Regina and the University in Saskatoon, and so in a very real sense these two cities belong to all 

the people in the province. 

 

The government of Alberta, to mark their fiftieth anniversary, built auditoria in Calgary and Edmonton. I 

understand the total cost was over $6,000,000 for each one. I must give credit to a former Mayor of the City of 

Saskatoon, one who is well known opposite, one Sid Buckwold, who years ago conceived the idea that by 1965 

we should be ready to start an auditorium and that it should be completed by 1967. The member for Regina West 

and I had the pleasure of negotiating with a group from Saskatoon, and later with groups from Regina and Moose 

Jaw, because the previous government did make a firm commitment that up to $2,000,000 would be made 

available from provincial funds to erect an auditorium in each city, I think that this was a sound business 

approach. 

 

We will have a large enrolment on Regina campus very shortly. At the present time we have no place in 

Saskatoon large enough for Convocation Exercises so that the relatives of those who are graduating from the 

University are able to be on hand for this occasion. Nowadays when we have so many national and international 

conventions where very large numbers of people attend, it does seem a great pity that without greater 

accommodation Saskatchewan will not be able, in the years to come, to host these important conventions. 

 

I notice in the estimates they have provided $750,000 for centennial grants and that there is a note that probably 

additional funds will be made available, but I understand that the maximum is $1,000,000 that the Premier has 

been willing to commit for each city. 

 

Our financial critic also discussed assistance provided for the University of Saskatchewan in the current budget. It 

seems the Premier was most generous with the surplus left in the till by the previous government. He provided in 

the supplementary estimates for $3,000,000 to be transferred to the University account. But, Mr. Speaker, I cannot 

understand why, in the most affluent period in the history of our province, the present Liberal government is 

ashamed of the needs for university education and is reverting so quickly to the policy of deficit financing which 

proved to be so costly while the Liberals were in office for so many years prior to 1944. 

 

In the Budget Speech of a year ago, I noted that the public expenditures on the grounds and buildings at the 

university, up to March 31st, 1944, totalled, $4,327,762. Of this capital cost only $150,321.27 had been paid on 

principal. The CCF government, in 1944, introduced the pay-as-you-go policy and what happened? By March 

31st, 1964, a total amount of $34,983,718 had been spent on land and buildings, and, as I mentioned before, just 

over $4,000,000 had been spent prior to that date so that during the 30 years in office, over $30,000,000 had been 

spent on new buildings. What about the interest charges? As a result of the program that existed previously, and 

that has been re-introduced now, I find that the debt charges on a total cost of $4,300,000 amounted to 

$9,029,628. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no time in Saskatchewan history when it was easier to pay taxes and when it was more 

popular. I admit very frankly that the paying of taxes is never popular, but in organized society, if we want 

university education, if we want a lot of services that we are all committed to, at some point we must raise the 

necessary taxes. This year, of all years, when a new government inherited the largest surplus ever known 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

626 

in the province and on a per capita basis, the largest surplus ever inherited by any government in Canada, it is 

hard to understand why we have to embark on deficit financing so quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of my last duties as Minister of Social Welfare was to participate in the official opening of 

Saskatoon's first low rental housing project. My clansman, Hon. J.R. Nicholson, federal member in charge of 

C.M.H.C. was out from Ottawa for the occasion. City council spoke to him and to me about acquiring the RCAF 

land and houses for Saskatoon's second low rental housing project. I took my namesake and his senior officials 

from Ottawa, Winnipeg, Regina and Saskatoon, to see the buildings. It was understood by everyone that my term 

was running out within the next week and I could not commit the incoming government, but it was agreed by 

everyone that the quality of the buildings and the extent of the land suggested that here would be an ideal area and 

project, where you could move immediately to meet some of the demand for low rental housing. 

 

While the city of Saskatoon and CMHC were anxious to proceed, the new Liberal government in Saskatchewan, 

in one of its very early decisions rejected the idea of providing additional low rental housing for the large number 

of families in Saskatoon who are paying high rentals for substandard accommodations. The city of Saskatoon was 

prepared to acquire the property, regardless of federal or provincial assistance, but since the land is in the R.M. of 

Cory, and the federal Liberal government and the provincial Liberal government seemed more concerned about 

making this valuable property available to friends of the government, nothing was done. 

 

It has taken a long time for both the provincial government and the federal government to make available all the 

details in connection with the correspondence. I have had a question on the order paper since the session began 

and I hope that it can be made available. Mr. Douglas, the NDP leader, has had a question on the order paper in 

Ottawa. My information is that the Liberal government in Ottawa had agreed to sell this property without calling 

for tenders for half the price they finally received after advertising. 

 

I expect that when this information is available both the government of Saskatchewan and the government of 

Canada will have some questions to answer which will cause some embarrassment to some people and I hope that 

the lady member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) will have something to say about this unnecessary delay in the 

providing of additional low rental housing for people in Saskatoon, that is now regarded as the potash capital of 

the world. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. member would just let me clarify the one matter. I take it he 

realizes that the R.M. of Cory, where this housing is located, specifically requested us not to move in the direction 

he is suggesting. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the R.M. of Cory is now asking that this area be incorporated with the city 

of Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Did you see the correspondence? 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — The correspondence has not been available but if the Premier will make it available, we will 

be glad to have a discussion later on, but the city of Saskatoon did want it . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . but it was just a query . . . 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — I agree, I am familiar with the problem, but the facts are that the government of Saskatchewan 

didn't provide any leadership with a view to having this very valuable property made available so that the federal, 

provincial and the city governments might be able to have available a very valuable property, and have housing 

that would be available for the potash development in the Delisle area and in the Allan area where people are 

going to be looking for this type of accommodation. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, if the member wants to be fair, this property did lie within Cory and they said 

they wanted it to use it for housing . . . 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Let me see the letter. 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

627 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . therefore, we should turn it over to them. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier has all this information at his fingertips, he has refused to make it 

available to me, and I hope that he will check . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . now, I am sorry, let me interject just once more. Now, let us be fair about these questions. 

Since the house started you have been putting in questions, dozens a day, now, half our staff is trying to get 

answers to these questions as fast as we can but it does take . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, yeh! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! We can't allow a disorderly debate. When the member has finished speaking, it is in 

order for anybody else, who wishes to make a statement or make a correction to do so then, or to ask questions. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Returning to the budget, I find that the construction grants for 

housing for the aged and infirm have been slashed by 28 per cent, from $700,000 to $500,000. Without doubt, one 

of the most important firsts introduced by the CCF government during our twenty years was housing and geriatric 

centres for our elderly people. 

 

I have here a submission to the Senate Special Committee on Ageing by Central Mortgage and Housing. I referred 

previously to a very fine tribute which they paid to the province of Saskatchewan, and they do not limit their 

tribute to the previous government. They do not exclude the present government, but I find on page 17 of this 

report that in all of Canada a total of $42,000,000 has been provided for limited dividend loans approved for 

senior citizens housing, and Saskatchewan qualified for $8,900,000. We qualified for nearly as much as was spent 

in Manitoba, Alberta and British Columbia. We spent more in Saskatchewan than the provinces of Quebec, New 

Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland spent. 

 

We embarked on this program during our Golden Jubilee. It was thought appropriate that those of us who had the 

good fortune to live in an affluent period like the fifties or the sixties should have some concern for those who 

came here prior to the turn of the century and that we should provide better housing. The hon. member for Kelsey 

(Mr. Brockelbank) has the distinction of having in his constituency the first rural community in all Canada, which 

took advantage of the funds made available by the federal government — I refer to Zenon Park. It is a very small 

community. Moose Jaw was the second, Saskatoon was the third, Neilburg was fourth, Regina, Assiniboia, 

Ponteix, Shaunavon, Watrous, Unity, Kamsack, Macklin, Middle Lake, Meadow Lake, Balcarres, Swift Current, 

Wadena, Tisdale, Carnduff, Yorkton, and so on, all over the province. 

 

Citizens accepted this challenge of having three levels of government, municipal government, provincial 

government and federal, all working together to provide better housing for our pioneers. The member for 

Kindersley (Mr. Howes) has reason to be proud of the facilities available in his constituency made possible under 

this program. 

 

Mr. Howes (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — We enlarged it. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Yes, and congratulations. In Manitoba, until they got rid of the Liberal government, they had 

only one project, only one. They have moved rapidly since, but again, I want to say that people in our 

communities, as I have mentioned, deserve a great deal of credit for doing the hard work that has made it possible 

for people to live in Ponteix, in Meadow Lake, in Middle Lake, where their children and grandchildren are living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is a great pity that as we celebrate our Diamond Jubilee in the province, as we look forward 

to our centenary, that we use the meat-axe to slash expenditures for housing for our senior citizens. The formula 

provides an outright grant from the provincial government. To add insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, in addition to 

cutting out this grant the government of the day has withdrawn the funds that had been recommended and had 

been expected by the committee that was responsible for The Aged and Long Term Illness Survey. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, let me mention just two of the people that served on this committee and many of them are supporters 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

628 

of the government of the day. Here is Mr. Goos of Prince Albert, who could not be described as a Socialist. He 

represented the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. Mrs. Ruth Hall from Saskatoon represented the Provincial 

Council of Women, Dr. Heal from Moose Jaw represented the Physicians and Surgeons, Father P.S. Kinley 

represented the Roman Catholic church, and Rev. Vipond represented the Regina Ministerial Association, Everet 

Murphy, the SARM, Mr. Mead, the Pensioners and Senior Citizens Organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, none of these persons were selected for political reasons. They were selected because they were 

sensitive to the increasing importance of this particular problem and they have made some recommendations, 

quite a number, as a matter of fact. They suggested that studies be made in selected communities of the health 

care needs and the health status, both physical and mental of people over 60. It was suggested that the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons at the university acquaint doctors practising in Saskatchewan with preventive techniques 

and practices which can eliminate many of these elements which cause disabilities and long-term disease. They 

suggested that the medical students going out should be given special training regarding the very exciting 

challenges in this particular field. 

 

The committee recommended that grants to cover 50 per cent of reasonable and approved cost of construction be 

provided by the provincial government for construction of non-commercial nursing homes. 

 

Now, the member for Saskatoon asked the other day what the previous government had done but this report was 

brought down in the summer of 1963. It is a report which involved a great many communities. It was expected 

that we would pass on these recommendations to the communities to find out what should be done. It was pointed 

out quite correctly that since federal and provincial governments provide very substantial grants for hospitals and 

for our patients in hospitals for as long as three years at a cost of $25 per day, when these people could be 

accommodated in nursing homes where they would be much happier, where appropriate programs would be 

available to look after these people, these nursing homes should be built. I must pay tribute to many of the 

churches in Saskatchewan which have taken advantage of the challenge to enter this field. 

 

I am sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, that the new government has decided to withdraw from this field and we are not 

going to have any money available to do the educational work out in the community to find out whether Meals on 

Wheels would be feasible in different places in the community or whether the local organizations cannot be made 

aware of the challenges in this particular field. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that I have said sufficient to indicate that one of the major weaknesses in the budget we 

are considering is the large group of our people who have been forgotten, the old, the disabled persons that the 

Deputy Premier was so concerned about a year ago, and the very large number of people on social aid. I was 

interested, Mr. Speaker, to note that in spite of the publicity given regarding cutting off people who are on social 

aid, the Minister of Social Aid (Mr. Boldt) is counting on spending $13,200,000 in the next year compared with 

$12,900,000 the present year. There is one other piece of legislation not mentioned in the estimates but the 

Premier discussed it last night, the providing of assistance for six members of the legislature. I know this does not 

come in the social aid category, but as far as I know, Mr. Speaker, this is the first time in Canadian history when 

any Premier has ever asked the taxpayers of the province to place some MLA's on a salary basis so they can go 

politicking across the province. 

 

I have not heard any cabinet minister stand up in his place and say "this job is too much for me, I'm completely 

exhausted, I need some help". I don't know any minister who finds it too strenuous to stand up in his place when 

we come to the question period and say "Mr. Speaker, the question is tabled herewith". If this is too exhausting I 

am sure that if anyone who is in this predicament would resign, there are a number sitting behind him who would 

be able to take on this particular assignment. Since the Provincial Treasurer did not discuss this in detail when his 

friends were on the floor on Friday, I hope he will reconsider and excuse the hard pressed people from 

Saskatchewan for appropriating additional dollars to perform this type of service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will gather by now, that I will be supporting the sub-amendment, the amendment and voting 

against the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

629 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, I 

would like, first of all, to join the financial critic of the opposition, and several who have spoken in the house 

since, in congratulating the Premier in his capacity as Provincial Treasurer on his Budget Address which he 

delivered on Friday last. Of course, as a member on this side of the house, I want to go further than merely 

congratulating him on his address. I want to express, to him, my sincere commendations for having handed down 

the budget which he has properly termed a development budget. By starting on tax reduction, the budget gives 

some immediate incentive to economic growth. It will bring needed relief to agriculture, and perhaps, just 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it may have given some little encouragement to those in and out of the house who are still 

unmarried . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Will that do the trick? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — . . . at the same time, Mr. Speaker, the budget provides for the maintenance and in many 

instances, extension of essential services and capital works projects. All in all, it is a bold, dynamic, and as was 

said before, an imaginative and courageous budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before proceeding with matters involving my department, may I digress for just a moment to 

join the many who have congratulated you, Mr. Speaker, on your appointment to the high office of Speaker, and 

for the manner in which you are discharging the functions of that important position. 

 

I would also like to digress for a further moment, to express my thanks and sincere appreciation to the good 

people of Shellbrook constituency for the honor conferred on me by electing me as their representative in this 

assembly. The constituency of Shellbrook, situated as it is on the fringes of the forest area of the province, may be 

described as a softly undulated area possessing some of the finest scenery. It is the most direct route through 

Marcelin, Leask and Shellbrook to the Prince Albert National Park from Saskatoon and points west. It is the 

gateway through Big River to many fine northern lakes and hunting grounds with good accommodation. Number 

three highway which crosses the constituency from east to west should ultimately become the second 

TransCanada highway. 

 

Economically and geographically it is a diversified area having within its boundaries some of the finest 

agricultural land in the province, as well as land more adaptable to mixed farming and grazing and the northern 

areas of the constituency still remains largely forest area. It has many good sized and progressive towns and 

villages. Big River, with a population of 1,000 people is unique. It is probably the only community on rail, 

dependent almost entirely upon the resources of timber, fish and fur. 

 

I might just mention in passing that I settled in this very fine constituency back in 1912 at the ripe age of one, 

about the time when the railway was under construction. It is a source of pride that I belong to one of the pioneer 

families of the constituency. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that too often we are told of the accomplishments of 

Saskatchewan in more recent years. It does seem to me that, at least in this Diamond Jubilee Year, none ought to 

claim all the credit for the standard of living and the benefits most of us now enjoy. 

 

I suggest to you that much, if not most, of the credit is due to those who broke and opened the country and the 

people and the governments who laid a sound foundation for the institutions which we now enjoy. I believe that it 

can be truly said of these fine pioneers and each succeeding generation, that they built well on the material which 

they had, and I think we can only express the hope that when the time comes, the same can be said of us. 

 

At this time, I would also like to express my pride and satisfaction at having been assigned the portfolio of 

Natural Resources. I feel that few departments of government offer the scope, the opportunity and the challenge 

offered by this department. It is a department which in many respects is still in its first stage of development, and 

many engaged in trapping, fishing and lumbering, particularly in the northern areas, are still pioneers in the true 

tradition of the past. Many of its employees are scattered in the sparsely populated areas of the province doing 

manifold duties not 



 

February 24, 1965 
 

 

630 

only for the department but also for the community. 

 

I wanted at this time, Mr. Speaker, to express my appreciation to the employees of the department for their 

assistance and their loyalties since 1 took office. I am convinced that with few exceptions, they are dedicated 

public servants whose main allegiance is to the department and to the people they serve, and I can assure you that 

my aspirations are to make the department an even more interesting and challenging one for them to work in. 

 

I can only say at this time, Mr. Speaker, that I somewhat regret that the member for Regina West, the financial 

critic (Mr. Blakeney) who spoke on Monday, saw fit to bring the civil servants into this debate, by attempting to 

smear a few appointments which have been made by the government. From his remarks and from other remarks 

that have been made, Mr. Speaker, you would think that they on the other side were completely innocent, 

completely blameless of patronage and nepotism and political consideration in making their appointments. Mr. 

Speaker, I did not have to go very far in my department to find several instances of it and here are just a few 

instances and I am not going to belabor the point, but here is a man, Mr. Speaker, whose name is Mann. His 

previous experience before he joined the department, was working on his father's farm for a while (which is very 

commendable) and he did a little farming for himself, and then in 1941 and 1942, he was a salesman for Co-op 

Implements. Then his occupation, according to his application form, from 1942 to 1945, was constituency 

organizer part-time. In 1945 until 1952 he was a constituency organizer full time; he had been promoted! Then in 

1953 by an Order-in-Council, he was appointed as assistant office manager in the Provincial Secretary's 

department. In 1956, he was appointed as assistant director of Public Relations. His previous experience would 

qualify him for public relations and then he was transferred again, because of his experience to the Department of 

Travel and Information and then finally in 1960 he was transferred to the Department of Natural Resources. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He really travelled around. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Now I don't know, there is a note on his file — it may be just a coincidence, Mr. Speaker, 

that he was granted leave of absence between April 18th and June 15th, 1960, and again, he was granted leave of 

absence without pay between March 2nd and April 30th, 1964. I suppose this happened to be a coincidence that 

these were both election years and the two months taken off were just at the time of the election. All I can say at 

this time is that this man despite the fact that he is an Order-in-Council appointment, is still employed by the 

Department of Natural Resources . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — He is, and all I can say is that probably today he should thank his lucky stars that he is 

employed in 1964 instead of 1944. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — I might mention another person who is probably very well known to the opposition. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Never. 
 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Arnold Joseph Fusey. His qualifications are that in 1952 to 1956 he was an MLA. In 1956 he 

apparently was defeated and was appointed on November 1st, 1957 to the Department of Travel and Information 

on a probationary basis and a year later this was confirmed. He was given leave of absence to contest the ’52 

election and resigned, but immediately following the 1956 election, he was brought back. 
 

Then we have Mr. Harold Duncan Quigley who secured employment on March 14th, 1964. I am told that Mr. 

Quigley was the candidate at the CCF convention at Wilkie for the 1964 election and because he lost the 

nomination, he was rewarded with the rather important appointment as Commercial Manager at Kenosee. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, mention the sons and relatives of members of the legislature, members of 

parliament, appointees of the CCF government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the point is that I wonder whether it is necessary to continuously take on that "holier than thou" 

paragon of virtue "attitude" 



 

February 24, 1965 

 

631 

that is so often taken by the members opposite. I think when the records are looked into that they were certainly 

no exception when it came to making appointments from ex-members who had sat here and from members of 

their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before I don't want to belabor the point, I believe that I would prefer to get down to 

something that is positive and constructive. 

 

The budget handed down, insofar as it affects the Department of Natural Resources, does make provisions for an 

increase in revenue and also an increase in expenditure, both ordinary and capital, for the department. It would be 

impossible in the time allowed to me to deal with all phases of my department. Mr. Speaker, during the course of 

this debate, in the short time that remains to me this afternoon and tomorrow, I propose to discuss four main 

topics which fall within the jurisdiction of my department. I want to discuss briefly the parks and recreation 

programs for which the budget has been fairly substantially increased. I intend to discuss the Indian and Metis 

branch which is being established in my department and for which an allotment has been made in the budget. If 

time permits, I intend to deal briefly with the Northern Administration where re-organization is taking place and 

the possibilities of having the ARDA program being broadened out to include a greater portion, or at least some 

portion of the Northern Administration District under the new agreement presently under negotiation with the 

federal government. 

 

Dealing very briefly this afternoon with parks and recreation development, I should point out that a good start has 

been made in the establishment and the improvement of provincial parks. All the vision and the creation of 

provincial parks does not belong to any one party. The first eight of the 14 existing provincial parks were 

established back in the thirties, since 1939, six more were added in very recent years. The first of these latter 

additions was in 1959 and 1960, four more were added and the latest one was added in 1963, Buffalo Pound. 

 

Now with the prospects of increasing leisure and tremendous growth of tourism, this government is dedicated to 

the further expansion and improvement of our provincial parks, camp sites and historic sites for the benefit of 

both our people and for the promotion of the tourist industry. To that end, the budget makes substantial provisions 

for increases both in maintenance and capital expenditures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these is only about five minutes left, and I think that possibly there are some other matters which the 

house would like to deal with at this time, and I would deal with the other matters tomorrow and at this time I 

wish to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 


