



















































Hansard: March 17, 1965


1193 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

29th Day 
 

Wednesday, March 17, 1965 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock 

On the Orders of the Day 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE ROYAL ASSENT 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day, I wish to inform the house that His Honor the Lieutenant Governor will 
arrive to give royal assent to certain bills later this day. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Also before Orders of the Day, on March 11th last during debate on the motion respecting Roads-to-Resources, an 

exchange took place between the hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. 

Berezowsky) during which the hon. member for Cumberland, at my request, withdrew an unparliamentary remark. I have 

now had an opportunity to examine the record and I find that the hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) speaking of the 

hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) said, and I quote: 
 

He mentioned the desirability of developing a large sand deposit along the Hanson Lake Road but I wasn‟t surprised in 

this regard because I understand that he is a large share holder in a company which is interested in developing these 

sands. 
 

Inasmuch as there appears to be an imputation of improper motives at which the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. 

Berezowsky) has taken offence and I would ask the hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) to withdraw any such 

imputation. 
 

Mr. A.R. Guy: (Athabasca) — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly withdraw those remarks. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. R.A. Walker: (Hanley) — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like, on your behalf, and on behalf of all 

the members of the house, to welcome here to the Speaker‟s Gallery this afternoon, youngsters from the Gideon, 

Smithville, and Edsel schools, all just west of Saskatoon, three girls‟ schools in the Hanley constituency. I am glad to see 

them here and we hope that they will come back to see us again sometime, and trust that they will enjoy the proceedings 

here in the legislature. I would enjoin all hon. members to do their best to maintain the high standard of dignity and 

decorum that we are used to up in the Hanley constituency, and I hope that they will have a safe journey home. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 

REPORT RE SALES OF PROVINCIAL SAVINGS BONDS 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I should like to say a word about the sale 

of provincial savings bonds. The people of Saskatchewan have purchased $6,300,000 in Saskatchewan savings bonds in 

the first eleven days. This is approximately $2,900,000 less than in the same period a year ago. However, the government 

believes that the disparity has occurred mainly because final wheat payment cheques were made two weeks earlier in 

1964. The government intends to continue the sale of these bonds throughout the month of March. We hope to attain not 

less than $12,000,000, and perhaps, if we are fortunate, $15,000,000. We commend these bonds again to the people of 

Saskatchewan as a sound investment, yielding approximately 5.15 per cent and redeemable any time after September 

15th. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE BIRTH OF GRANDSON 
 

Mr. E I. Kramer: The Battlefords) — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to announce with pleasure, a 

son was born to James Patrick and Maureen, son and 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

1194 

 

daughter-in-law of the hon. member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) better known as Battling Bill Berezowsky, and I am 

sure that while they are not Irish, they say there are some people that wish they were and others that just are Irish, I‟m sure they 

have a lot in common and I want to tender the congratulations of this house to another heir in the family and the clan of 

Berezowsky. 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 

Mr. Ed. Whelan: (Regina North) — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to remind all members that this is 

one day of the year when Irishmen the world over exhibit their modesty. Everyone knows that the Irish people are noted for 

their enthusiasm and love of politics, music, poetry and argument. Irishmen never enumerate these excellent and desirable 

qualities themselves. Using their persuasive powers during the other 364 days of the year, they convince others that today they 

should recognize these fine characteristics of the modest Irishmen. 
 

Often we are led to believe that the Irish are always anxious to do battle, perhaps this may be right to a slight degree, but the fact 

is that modest Irishmen maintain their ability to compromise is more noteworthy and less advertised, Mr. Speaker. A good 

friend of mine, the Irish Poet of the Prairies, Dennis Joseph Kelly has written a poem that makes my point, and with his 

permission and your permission, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read Mr. Kelly‟s poem, it is called, “St. Patrick‟s Birthday”: 
 

On the 8th day of March, some people say, 

That St. Patrick at midnight first saw light of day, \ 

While others declare „twas the 9th he was born, 

And „twas all a mistake between midnight and morn. 

For mistakes will occur in a hurry and shock, 

And some blamed the baby, and some blamed the clock, 

Till with all the cross questions, sure no one could know 

If the child was too fast or the clock was too slow. 

Now the first faction fight in Old Ireland, they say, 

Was all on account of St. Patrick‟s birthday. 

Some fought for the 9th, for the 8th more would die, 

And who wouldn‟t see right, sure they blackened his eye. 

At last, both the factions so positive grew 

That each kept a birthday, so Pat then had two. 

Till Father Mulcahy, who showed them their sins, 

Said, “No one could have two birthdays but twins”. 

Says he, “Boys don‟t be fighting for eight or for nine. 

Don‟t be always dividing, but sometimes combine. 

Combine eight and nine, seventeen is the mark, 

So let that be his birthday. “Amen” says the clerk. 

If he wasn‟t twins, sure, our history will show 

That at least he is worth any two Saints that we know. 
 

Mr. Speaker, March 17th is a compromise date, and a grand one it is. On this day everyone is Irish. To those who have inherited 

the title and to those who have claimed the title by association, to Irishmen everywhere, on this March 17th, may I say: The Top 

o‟ the Morning, and May the Luck of the Irish always be with you! 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear! Hear! 
 

QUESTION RE CO-OPERATION WITH OTHER PROVINCES IN SOME PHASE OF ECONOMIC UNION 
 

Mr. Martin Pederson: (Arm River) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a question to the 

Premier, regarding statements that were purported to be made by himself in Alberta yesterday, regarding a question of 

co-operation with the other prairie provinces on, at least, some phase of economic union. In view of the statement that he made 

not too long ago, in which he was purported to have stated that Saskatchewan would have to go it alone, and he couldn‟t seem 
to indicate much interest in it, I was wondering if he would like to make a clarifying statement today, to clear up once and for 

all if he was about to start taking over some of the Conservative policy on this economic union that we have been talking about 

for six or eight years. 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn‟t want to handicap the government by taking over any Conservative policies 

advocated by my hon. friend. If this session is any indication, those programs would be Socialist policies, 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

 
1195 

because the MLA for Arm River has voted consistently with the CCF. He has. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . voted consistently with the Socialists. There are many on this side who feel that he is the Deputy 

Leader of the Socialists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Premier Manning has indicated that when this session is over, he will ask the government to co-operate with 

Manitoba and Alberta, in having a meeting of some kind to discuss over-all co-operation. This government believes there 

are many fields where such co-operation would be valuable. All I have indicated, is that we would not want to go to such 

a meeting with our hands tied, as far as promoting incentives for industry. Alberta and Manitoba have gone away ahead of 

Saskatchewan in the last twenty years and we have a lot of catching up to do, We intend to adopt policies which will get 

industries for Saskatchewan. We feel that Mr. Manning and Alberta have had so many industries that they can afford to 

take a dispassionate attitude. But we still have to be pretty competitive. Other than in this regard we will certainly 

co-operate at such a meeting. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Still maintain tariffs, eh! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It is a well known fact, Mr. Speaker, that it is the Conservative party which has always advocated high 

tariffs in this country. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis: (Melfort-Tisdale) — May I ask a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker? May I ask the Premier if at 

this projected conference rail line abandonment will be discussed? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — This will depend I suppose on the agenda which Mr. Manning submits to us. This government is 

certainly going to see that there is no wholesale rail abandonment in this province. I am sure the farmers and the 

communities are thankful that there is a government which will do something about this matter, and not just talk about it, 

as my hon. friends have been doing for many years. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere, (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill no. 37, An Act to amend The Forest 

Act, 1959. 

 

He said: This bill provides for the repeal of section 5 of The Forest Act, 1959, which appoints the Saskatchewan Forest 

Products as agent of the Minister of Natural Resources for the purpose of harvesting, marketing, utilizing, the forest 

products of the province. 

 

The amendment, by the deletion of this section, Mr. Speaker, will have the effect of placing the Timber Board on the same 

footing as private enterprise. It will not prevent the Timber Board from continuing its operation. The Timber Board will 

be able to apply for cutting permits from the Department of Natural Resources, and will continue to market forest 

products delivered to it. 

 

As I have said before, there is no intention to eliminate the Timber Board. I realize that the Timber Board can serve a 

useful purpose to the mill operators who require financial assistance and who desire to have their products marketed 

through a central agency. But, Mr. Speaker, any producer who can show that he can market his products, or utilize it 

himself, will be free to do so. We believe that the elimination of the near monopoly of the Timber Board will serve to 

attract new industry interested in the development of our forest resources. 

 

A section such as section 5, is not present in any other provincial act. This type of legislation and the policy of the Timber 

Board has, Mr. Speaker, in our view, kept private industry from participating in the development of our forest resources. 

 

I think that while I am speaking on the subject of forest, I should point out, as I have said before, that as matters now stand 

there is altogether too much matured timber remaining unharvested in our province. 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

1196 

 

I had a communication from our forest branch dated October 27th, 1964, dealing with a section of the province. It states 

and I quote directly from the report: 

 

We have not cruised the Buffalo Hills nor the Clearwater river timber, but ocular estimates for the former run between 

40,000,000 and 50,000,000 board feet of large mature spruce, and for the latter over 100,000,000 board feet including 

pine. 

 

and the report goes on to state: 

 

following are estimates for the Upper Cummins and Vermette Lake area, 

 

and it gives a figure for the Cummins Lake area, showing a total there, again, of over 40,000,000 board feet. In the 

Vermette Lake area, the quantity is given at approximately 65,000,000 board feet. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the same could be said of several other areas in the province. 

 

It has been suggested that there are no large quantities of unmatured timber remaining, rotting in the forest, as I said 

before. At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from a letter, which came to me unsolicited, dated February 27th, 

1965, and I have the letter, it is signed, and it reads as follows: 

 

Dear Sir: 

 

I have just read an article in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, which quotes you as having made the statement that there were 

millions of board feet of white spruce timber, rotting every year in the Saskatchewan forest. 

 

I have been employed in the woods as a faller for the past several years and I would like to have Mr. Kramer, yourself, 

and anyone, come and spend the day at any mill in the Nipawin and Cumberland area, to see with their own eyes the 

truth of your statement. 

 

I have personally felled over 1,000,000 feet of board timber this winter, and two, out of every three trees, have been 

rotten at the butt end . . . 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: (Hanley) — On a point of order, is the hon. member going to table the letters. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes, I am prepared to table it. 
 

. . . and for several feet up the tree. I have been told by people in the employ of the Saskatchewan Timber Board, that 

white spruce timber should not be left standing after it had reaches 125 years of age, and yet the average age of the 

timber in the area where I am employed is 175 years, or 50 years over-ripe. 

 

I contract selling timber for so much a board foot, and I have seven men in my employ. Recently myself, and my crew, 

had to take a two weeks layoff while the contractors who employ me haggled with the D.N.R. for an extension of their 

licence. 

 

If conservation is the reason for the reluctance of the D.N.R. to harvest this timber, then it would appear to me, and 

many other people, that they are wasting their money and their people‟s money conserving something which is already 

beyond saving by conservation. 

 

If you can use this letter in any way, which you think may help our lumber industry, you have my 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

 
1197 

permission to do so. Thank you for the time to read this letter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased at this time to table the letter. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank: (Acting Leader of the Opposition, Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the hon. minister a 

question? Who was that that was haggling with C.N.R. in 1965, about something, it said in the letter? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — The question here, pardon me? Do you want to know the name of the person? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Who was haggling? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Oh yes, he says “recently myself and my crew were laid off while the contractor, who 

employed me, haggled with the D.N.R. for an extension of their licence”. 

 

This is the statement that was made in the letter and I am just quoting the letter verbatim. Well, we are going to 

change that, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — This happened just now, Mr. Minister, I was asking what you have done about it, 

this haggling? This hold-up — it is your responsibility now. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes, and we are going to change the act and we are going to change some of the policies . . .  

 

Mr. Brockelbank: (Kelsey) — Still going to, still going to . . . 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes, and . . . 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet: (Cut Knife) — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. minister a question? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Could the members ask the questions after I am through? 

 

Mr. Speaker, just to continue on the subject, I would like to go on to point out that the quantity of timber, particularly 

pulp wood, available in Saskatchewan is set out in a brochure entitled “Saskatchewan Pulp and Paper Potential”, and 

I want to show this to the house. It was put out by the Department of Industry and Information in 1961; the front is a 

photograph that I recognize very well; it is at the east end of Prince Albert. This is the Riverside collegiate, the 

Saskatchewan River, and the River Road, and, right across the river road is the photo of a very large pulp mill. 

 

I assume, Mr. Speaker, that this was the photograph that was taken, probably in 1956, or 1960, but it is one of the 

mirages that was put out at the time. I have never been able to discover just where this pulp mill is. 

 

To continue . . . 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina West) — The Dumont . . . 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes, the Dumont Mill. You just wait. The Dumont Mill will be built. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Trick photography to fool the people. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, we will go on to read part of the brochure which, I think substantiates what I am 

trying to point out as to the large quantity of Saskatchewan forest resources available. On this page, the pages are not 

numbered, the brochure states: 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

1198 

 

One of the most attractive features of Saskatchewan‟s pulp potential is the available volume of pulp wood. In 

terms of quantity, qualities and accessibility of pulp wood resources, this forest area ranks high in Canada. The 

general topography of the forest also presents physical conditions conducive to low cost wood operations. The four 

areas selected for pulp and paper development shown on the map, totalling approximately 17,600 square miles, is 

provincially owned and administered by the Department of Natural Resources. The estimated allowable annual cut 

for all species in the above area is approximately 2,900,000 cords of which 1,395,000 cords is made up of soft 

wood. This is accordingly an adequate wood supply to support in perpetuity a pulp mill with a capacity of 1,800 

tons per day. The annual allowable cut for the Hudson Bay area, is shown in terms of cubic feet, it is shown to be 

close to some 300,000 cords. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of removing this section from the act, as I said before, is in the hopes that we can, 

and I believe we can, attract private industry to go into our forest areas and take some of these allowable cut. A start 

has already been made. Some reference was made to the Dumont-Simpson agreement and in the area of Hudson 

Bay, this report says the annual allowable cut is some 300,000 cords per year. This company is going to take out 

100,000 cords of that product, namely pulp wood. 

 

I think it is important for another reason that we encourage the cutting of this available forest product. I think the 

house should know that in the last six years, including the current year, the total forest revenue, the total amount 

received by the Department of Natural Resources from the forest, was slightly less than $3,000,000. To be exact it 

was $2,978,000. The total expenditure on the forest for forest management; for fire suppression and for fire 

prevention, amounted to over $6,000,000. The exact amount being $6,391,000. 

 

Now as late as 1959-60, the province was receiving as revenue from the forest, $660,000 and its expenditure was 

$880,000 — a couple of hundred thousand dollars more. In 1963-64, which is the last complete year, the revenue 

from the forest had dropped to $444,000 and the total expenditures had risen to $905,000, and that was a year where 

fire prevention expenditure was what could be considered a normal year. It was that year, only $320,000. In the 

current year . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must interrupt the debate while we await the arrival of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and having taken his seat upon the Throne, gave Royal 

Assent to certain bills, and withdrew from the Chamber. Thereupon Mr. Speaker again took the chair. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, in the current year there has been no change in policy. In the 1964-65 season, the 

same method and policy that has been followed for some years has been followed mainly because of the time of the 

year we assumed office, the revenue to the department to date, and may go up slightly, is $431,000 and because of 

the very high fire incident of this year, the expenditure for the forest, amounted to the staggering sum of $1,784,000. 

I believe this to be probably the second highest year on record. In 1961-62 it exceeded that figure by some $300,000 

for a total of $2,080,000. 

 

Now, it is true, Mr. Speaker, that the forestry department makes some expenditure in tree planting for parks and that 

type of work out of its expenditure, but I suggest it is more than offset by the fact that figures which I have given to 

you do not include any share of salaries or expenses incurred in the conservation service, the conservation officer or 

any share of the administration cost. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe the time has arrived in this province to reverse the trend. The trend seems to have been 

in the last few years for a reduction in revenue and an increase in expenditures. I believe that 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

 
1199 

with a more aggressive forest utilization policy that we can increase the revenues and narrow the gap that now exists 

between the forest revenues and the expenditures on the forest. I submit that this amendment and the steps to be taken to 

encourage private industry are steps in that direction. 

 

The only other matter that I would like to add at this time, is in connection with the schedules. These are just routine 

changes, changing the boundaries and I am prepared to answer any questions with respect to that in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet: (Cut Knife) — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the hon. member a question? I did not get up to speak on the 

motion. Could I ask you . . . 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes. 
 

Mr. Nollet: — I was quite surprised at the minister‟s statement that he read from a letter just awhile ago, saying that in a 

particular area of the province there was quite a quantity of over-aged white spruce. Would the minister mind telling the 

house where this area is and the approximate quantity of over-aged white spruce that is involved? That is white spruce. 

According to your letter, it was 175 years old. I have seen very little of this in Saskatchewan and I would be interested to 

know where this is, because previously I have been told always, and have been under the impression that there was very 

little good merchantable lumber in Saskatchewan and that we had to curtail exploitation in line with sound forest renewal 

and conservation. So I would like to know where this area is, and how much timber is involved. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — The letter refers to an area in the Nipawin-Cumberland House area. Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
question, I have a news clipping which says “Challenge Cuelenaere to Prove His Statement”, and it is a statement that was 

made by the former Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer) challenging the fact that there is a large quantity of 

matured timber in the province. Mr. Speaker, I think that the report which I have read from the Director of Forestry and 

other material that I have referred to, indicates that it is a fact, that there is a large quantity of mature timber in the 

province. Some of it located, so far, where there hasn‟t been any roads built to it, but I think that our policy should be to 

make these matured stands accessible to industries so that they can be developed. The reports that we have, both prepared 

now and in the past, do in fact indicate that there is a large quantity of mature timber. 

 

I have other verbal statements, some producers in Carrot River have verified the statement that there is a large quantity of 

mature timber. Some of it over-rips. In addition to that, there is other information that has come to us, people who were 

cutting for Hard ply, in the birch stands, told us that much of the birch in the province is rotten at the core, because there 

has been delay in harvesting the forest. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — What is a large quantity? He constantly says a large quantity, could we have some idea what a large 

quantity is? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, I have not got the figures here. 
 

Mr. Nollet: — Well, what is a large quantity? Million board feet? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes . . . 
 

Mr. Nollet: — A hundred million board feet? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes, millions, yes . . . 
 

Mr. Nollet: — Two hundred million board feet? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes, millions in the Kazan, Cummins, Vermette area and Clearwater area. There are also the Amisk 
Lake area and other areas of the province — large stands of over-matured timber that so far have not been 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

1200 

 

made accessible and have not been harvested. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer: (The Battlefords) — Mr. Speaker, could I at this time ask leave to adjourn the debate? 
 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill no. 48 — An Act to amend the Local 

Improvement Districts Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, there are a number of minor amendments to this act, none of which I feel can be called 

controversial and most of the amendments are for the purpose for bringing this act up to date and into line with other 

municipal acts. 

 

Some of the amendments are designed to correct every-day problems encountered in the administration by the Department 

of Municipal Affairs. I think members will agree that they can discuss most of this in Committee of the Whole, and I 

would therefore move second reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood: (Swift Current) — Mr. Speaker, I have gone over these amendments and I agree with the hon. minister 

that there is nothing here that is too controversial. There are some things that I would like to comment on, but I think it 

can be done quite well in the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. G.J. Trapp: (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill no. 53 — An act to amend The School Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the School Act, bill 53, are designed to accomplish the following: (a) To change 

the definition of ratepayer, to bring it more in line with the elector in the town and city acts. Residence in the district 

rather than on a specific type of property becomes the criterion, thus insuring the franchise of renters who live on property 

of owners who support other school systems, such as public or the separate schools. (b) To make possible the formation of 

an appointed school board for northern areas. A board with resident members from the north. 

 

We are suggesting three members be actual residents from the north for our schools for the northern areas. 

 

(c) To insure that the voters list is completed with the names of those in an urban district who may reside outside the town 

limit and to make it possible for any such ratepayer to be permitted to vote upon taking an oath, if his name has been 

omitted. (b) To further clarify procedures for increasing membership of boards, school boards from three to seven or from 

five to seven. 

 

It is not too clear just how this should be done in the act at the present time, and we have set out procedures here that 

might make it clear to all. I think that is all it does, where district boundaries change or population growth may make this 

change possible. 

 

Bill 53 contains new legislation permitting the creation of a board of education to replace the public school board and the 

high school board, where only the two conterminous districts exist in an urban centre. Or to place the public school and 

high school board or the separate school board and separate high school board where the four conterminous districts exist 

in an urban municipality. 

 

I think this is the main purpose of bill 53 really. You could have the separate schools going together and forming a board 

of education. You could have the public school, the elementary and the collegiate going together to form one board of 

education. 

 

In a city such as Regina, individual or joint petitions from the two public or the two separate school boards submitted to 

the minister before July 1st in any year would result in the minister‟s authorizing election of a seven man board of 

education at the next regular civic election in October and November. On the next January, this board of education would 

take office and the two boards so replaced are dissolved. 



 

March 17, 1965 

 

 
1201 

The board of education is a corporate body and assumes all rights powers, assets, liabilities and contracts of the two 

boards replaced. Its operations subsequently are governed by the provisions of the School Act, except in the matter of 

capital borrowings, for this provision the Secondary Education Act would be invoked. 

 

The legislation contains provision for the dissolution of the board of education in event that this should be desirable. 

 

I move second reading of this bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk: (Redberry) — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the hon. minister a question? In respect to northern 

administration, who administers the north administration area now and who administers education in the northern area and 

what members constitute the board if there is such a board to administer this northern area? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I think at the present time, practically all are members of the Department of Education staff. It has been 

felt that it would be advisable to have, in fact one from the west side of the northern area, one from the centre and one 

from the east side. I think it is important to have native people and have their thinking on the board and make 

recommendations. 

 

Mr. Walker: — No parliamentary assistant? 
 

Mr. Trapp: — No. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 p.m. 


