



















































Hansard: February 10, 1965


105 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

5th Day 
 

Wednesday, February 10, 1965. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I would like to draw your 

attention, and the attention of all members, to the distinguished group of young people with us from the 

University of Saskatchewan today. It has been traditional for many years that members of the Debating 

Directorate and members of the International Association should once a year have a chance to see where and how 

the laws of the province are made. I am sure members on both sides of the house would like to extend a very 

warm welcome to our visitors today, with the special hope that either in this province or somewhere they will find 

that they will have a place in making laws of the community, of the province or of the federal government, 

wherever they should live. 
 

I would like to say a special word of welcome to Mr. and Mrs. Harrington, who stayed over from yesterday. Mr. 

and Mrs. Harrington are now well known all over the world as a result of their hospitality extended to 

international students who come to Saskatoon. I was at their home on the first Monday of the month, not so very 

long ago, and more than fifty young people had a sumptuous meal. Mrs. Harrington has made this one of her 

major public services through many years and the people of Saskatoon, along with the visitors, appreciate very 

much their generosity. I hope that this visit to the capital city will be rewarding for all who are here today. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Gordon Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker; before the orders of the day are proceeded with, I 

would like to draw your attention also to a group of students from the William Grayson school in Moose Jaw. 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. May. While I do not personally recommend that they digest or 

subscribe to the thought content of the speech which they will undoubtedly be listening to this afternoon, I do 

hope that their stay has been enjoyable and that their visit to the legislature will enrich their day. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Better diet . . . 
 

TABLING OF LETTERS 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the hon. member for Kelsey, (Mr. Brockelbank) 

asked me to table certain letters from which I quoted, and I would like to now place these on the table. 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Guy, seconded by Mrs. Merchant; 

and the amendment thereto by Mr. Brockelbank, Acting Leader of the Opposition (Kelsey), seconded by Mrs. 

Cooper, (Regina West). 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks this afternoon must be to associate myself and this group with 

the remarks of the hon. member for Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) when he welcomed this group of University 

students to the legislature. We are very proud of our University. We are very proud of its standards, and we are 

very proud of the students we have there. I do trust that their visit may be enjoyable and I hope it will help to 

foster an interest in public affairs. As I said yesterday, we hope that many of these young ladies and young men, 

sooner or later, will take their places in this legislature or in the Parliament of Canada. 



February 10, 1965 
 

 106 

Mr. Speaker, this year in Saskatchewan we are celebrating our 60th birthday as a province. We were honored 

indeed a week or so ago when His Excellency the Governor General, George Vanier, took time out to visit us. He 

brought respects from Her Majesty the Queen, and wished us well on that particular birthday. During his visit, 

General Vanier, a very distinguished Canadian, won the hearts of many of our people. Extensive plans are under 

way in every part of the province to mark this birthday. Numerous projects are being designed to leave a lasting 

memorial to the occasion. Surely, in this Jubilee Year, it is appropriate to give thanks to providence for all the 

blessings of the past six decades. It is an opportunity to review our past; it is an opportunity to rejoice in the 

present; it is an opportunity to envisage the future. The Saskatchewan Jubilee Committee has planned and is 

putting into effect a wide range of activities to assist our people in celebrating and in commemorating this 

birthday. Local Jubilee Committees have been set up in about, eighty per cent of the towns, cities, and 

municipalities in this province. They are engaged in organizing various festivities, parades and celebrations in 

their own localities. Saskatchewan has come far in the last 60 years, and there are many indications that the next 

60 years will be even more rewarding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this afternoon, I want to talk about the Throne Speech. Nine months ago the people of Saskatchewan 

turned out a Socialist government which had held office for twenty years. They gave the Liberal party a mandate 

to form a new administration. In effect, they asked the Liberal party to carry out their program, which proposed 

new and aggressive far-reaching policies to meet the problems faced by our people. 

 

This overall program was designed not for implementation in one session, or two sessions, but it was designed for 

implementation over a four year period. During that campaign, we professed at no time to have any magic 

formulae, easy answers, or over-night solutions. But we did claim to have the will and determination to pursue 

every possible action that would help the people of Saskatchewan. It seems to me that Saskatchewan might be 

compared to a sleeping giant, potent with latent strength, capable of tremendous energy. Liberals believe the time 

has come to awaken this giant. Liberals believe the time has come to awaken Saskatchewan. Our activities in this 

session and in the sessions to come will be designed primarily to carry out the pledges that we made last spring. I 

propose to use this Throne Debate as a vehicle to outline some of the government's hopes and aspirations for the 

next several years. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, over the past few months, has contended from time to time that this government 

should have called a special session of the legislature last fall to begin implementing our program. We are 

flattered, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. gentleman thinks so highly of the government's policies that he was impatient 

to see them at work. The fact is, however, that there were a number of reasons which decided us against a fall 

session. One of them, it was pointed out yesterday, was the fact that the opposition took so long to turn over the 

reins of government to us after they were defeated. Another reason was that we have inherited administrative 

problems which were far worse that we had imagined. The final reason was the fact that all of our cabinet 

ministers were new, and we felt it wise to let each minister become acquainted with his department. Now our 

beliefs and our thoughts in this connection have been borne out by what happened in England where a Socialist 

government was elected a few months ago. Following his victory, the British Prime Minister called parliament 

into session, an immediate one, and promised one-hundred days of action. What happened? Newsweek of 

December 28th, 1964, summed up the result in this way: 

 

Harold Wilson became Prime Minister of Britain. He strolled into No. 10 Downing Street like a glittering St. 

George, pledged to put Britannia's many troubles to flight in 100 glorious days. Today with the self-imposed 

deadline rapidly approaching, Wilson and his government look less like St. George than like the nameless 

Dutch boy who staved off disaster by standing with his fingers plugged in the dike. 

 

Wilson's victories, though real, have been few, the lesson he has learned has been sobering. 



February 10, 1965 

 107 

Some magazines have likened Mr. Wilson's "hundred days of action" to Napoleon's "hundred days" before 

Waterloo. He also had some trouble, Mr. Speaker, with a man called Walker. By not calling a special session, we 

have tried to avert hasty and perhaps impetuous decisions, which might have otherwise been made. In addition, 

Mr. Speaker, this government has used those first few months to prepare the concrete legislation which is now 

being placed before the legislature. Today, our government stands ready to get on with the job of helping 

Saskatchewan catch up with the rest of Canada. I believe reasonable people will not take exception to that line of 

action. 

 

I want to say a word or so about the philosophy of this government. It is fashionable today, Mr. Speaker, for some 

people to talk of political parties as being to the "right" or to the "left". Liberals believe that neither extreme is 

needed in Saskatchewan today. We intend at all times to provide middle-of-the-road government. We are not a 

party of one class. Any party appealing solely to one class is doomed to failure, because our society is made up of 

different classes, each of which is entitled to the consideration of the government. The Liberal party, Mr. Speaker, 

always has been, and always will be a party of reform. This party has never been content merely to take the safe 

road. Down through the years, the Liberal party has been identified with enlightened social legislation. Let me 

remind the house today that it was a Liberal government which brought in such measures as — Old Age Pensions; 

The Unemployment Insurance Act; The P.P.A. Crop Insurance Act; The Family Allowance Act; National 

Housing Act, and so on. Nearly all the basic social welfare measures that are on the statute books of today, either 

in Canada or in Saskatchewan, were put there by Liberal governments. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that in season 

and out of season, the Liberal party has been concerned with the problems of the unemployed, the sick, the 

underprivileged, the veterans. We in this house expect to continue that kind of legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — But, Mr. Speaker, Liberals believe you can have social welfare without socialism, and we 

believe you can have social security without regimentation. This government believes in the principles of private 

enterprise. We do so because we know that system has given the people on this continent, including Canada, the 

highest living standards in the world. Liberals believe that you can run a government on a sound business basis — 

with a maximum of efficiency and a minimum of waste. Our people know that governments can't give them 

something for nothing. Governments secure their revenues from the pockets of the taxpayer, and anything 

promised by a government must be paid for out of the pockets of all. We do not believe, we Liberals do not 

believe, that oppressive taxation is inevitable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan today young men are taking over, men who are not bound by political traditions, 

men who are not blinded by old hates, fears, and rivalries, young men who can cast off old slogans, delusions, and 

suspicions. The times in Saskatchewan today demand expansion — innovation — invention — imagination and 

decision. This government wants our tomorrow to be better than our today. We want our children to enjoy a better 

life than we have enjoyed. The plans and platforms of this government then, Mr. Speaker, over the next four years 

will be designed with these principles and objectives in mind. 

 

The Socialists claim, and the hon. member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) yesterday claimed, that in our efforts to 

attract new industry, we are giving away Saskatchewan's resources. This government says — "that for too long 

those resources have remained underground — dormant — undeveloped." We intend to see that our mines, our 

forests, our resources generally are opened up and used for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with some of the specific measures which this government has 

already enacted, and also with some of the proposals which we hope will be enacted before this session is 

completed, and other subjects, Mr. Speaker, I shall deal with in a few days when we bring down the budget. 

 

First of all, I want to say a word or so about the matter of 



February 10, 1965 
 

 108 

taxation. For many years in the legislature and out of the legislature, Liberals have contended that taxes in 

Saskatchewan are dangerously high — much higher than in most provinces. We have also maintained that many 

of our provincial levies are working major hardship on the lower income groups. At no time have we suggested 

that tax reduction is any easy or simple matter because it is axiomatic and once a government puts a measure on 

the statute books it is unbelievably difficult to remove that measure from the statute books. Nevertheless we have 

argued that tax reductions in this province are possible and are necessary, and I ask the hon. members to note that 

in the Throne Speech, there is an indication that there will be major, far-reaching tax cuts introduced in the current 

session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We intend to take major steps when the Budget is brought down to honor the tax reduction 

commitments which we made during the election campaign. The Socialists said it couldn't be done. Mr. Speaker, 

we are going to show them that it can be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Throne Speech indicates the government is "giving major attention to industrial 

development. We believe that the policies pursued by the former Socialist government, as well as their expressed 

philosophies, was harmful to the atmosphere that was necessary for business development. Our friends opposite 

say that this government has sold out to "big business". Mr. Speaker, the CCF-NDP always smugly assumed that 

Socialism had a monopoly of all the virtues including integrity, compassion, and honesty. Well I respectfully 

suggest that Liberals are just as sincere in their motives as any Socialist. Liberals have worked, and will continue 

to work many hours a day to persuade new industries to locate in the province of Saskatchewan and not for any 

ulterior motives. We will do so because we know that major industrial development will mean jobs for our 

people, employment for many of our young men and women and a higher standard of living for our citizens. 
 

We will work because we know that every manufacturing plant, every mine, every retail business that comes into 

this province adds to the provincial tax base. As the base is widened we can provide better social services, 

improved educational standards, better highways and so on. 
 

In our pursuit of development in Saskatchewan, I say again, that we intend to use private enterprise methods, 

because we know this system has produced greater economic growth, technical progress and wealth, than any 

other system the world has ever seen. Also we know from harsh, bitter experience, from 1944 to 1964, how 

Socialism has impeded and retarded development in Saskatchewan as compared to the rest of Canada. I say this 

today very sincerely, Mr. Speaker, that for too long "private enterprise" has been a "dirty word" in this province. 

Liberals believe that the investment of capital is the one vital step towards the achievement of virtually every 

economic and social goal that we hold dear. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — It seems to me that instead of harassing, impeding, and discouraging business, we must nourish 

our investment climate; we must take care of our investment worthiness; we must improve our methods of 

attracting new capital. 
 

In this past nine months, we claim to have achieved no economic miracles. It may take years to repair the damage 

that has been done in this province by the previous administration. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — It may take years for Saskatchewan to catch up but I feel we have made a beginning. The past 

few months it has been my privilege to visit many of the industrial and commercial centres of Canada, including 

Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Winnipeg, and a few others . . . 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Montana . . . 



February 10, 1965 

 109 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, Montana, and we are getting some industries from Montana, my hon. friends may be 

interested to know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Every place that I have been privileged to speak I have had one message, that the war on 

business which the Socialists have been waging for twenty years in this province is over. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — And that "welcome mat" to private enterprise is out. Time and again our ministers have invited 

businessmen from Canada, from France, Germany, United States, to locate here in this province. We have told 

them that this government will take any reasonable or feasible steps to persuade them to come here. I can tell my 

hon. friends that everywhere we have found enthusiasm for the experiment which we are now carrying out. Mr. 

Speaker, the eyes, not only of other Canadians, the eyes of many parts of the world, are on Saskatchewan. Private 

enterprise is on trial here, and it will be the duty of our government to show that this system, the private enterprise 

system in the next twenty years can accomplish a lot more than Socialism did in the last twenty. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — We cannot assume, of course, that nice words and warm promises alone will result in new 

industry. Far more than lip service is required. We have taken numerous steps already to try and show that we 

mean what we say. I would like to give a few examples. 
 

The hon. member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) yesterday talked about oil. For some years, Mr. Speaker, our 

party has been concerned about the hesitancy of the oil industry to invest in petroleum development in 

Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — 5,000 oil wells . . . 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Show me an oil man, show me one that has a good word for Socialism. There isn't such an 

animal. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now there is little question that potential oil resources lie beneath our land. There has been, 

however, a major question about the willingness of the previous administration to permit private capital to 

develop that wealth. We hope we have changed all that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Tomorrow night there are oil men from many parts of this continent meeting together in Regina to discuss the 

change of atmosphere among other things. 
 

Shortly after we assumed office, we met with representatives of the oil companies to assess what problems existed 

and what solutions could be offered. As a result of those discussions, the Hon. Minister for Mineral Affairs (Mr. 

Cameron) and his department brought in new regulations to remove some of the petty harassments. Those actions 

have been met with enthusiasm by oil men all over this continent, and already results are beginning to show. 

Many new oil companies have come into Saskatchewan, are exploring in Saskatchewan and are drilling in 

Saskatchewan. What is more, Mr. Speaker, many of those who had left the province under the Socialists have 

returned. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Similar renewed activity is now being shown in gas exploration in Saskatchewan. Our 

province is fortunate to have many potentially rich gas fields, but these fields can only be developed by private 

investment. The previous administration, against the advice of the experts, gave to the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation a complete monopoly as far as 



February 10, 1965 
 

 110 

gas purchases were concerned in this province. This monopoly forced the gas industry to sell gas to Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation below the going price, as a result of this action. Exploration for gas in Saskatchewan last year 

almost ground to a halt. The new government opposed that monopoly and removed it. Today the gas companies 

are receiving competitive market prices for any gas that they may discover. There is reason to hope, Mr. Speaker, 

that before too long, we may find some new gas fields that are so sorely needed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You have . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — This government s opposed to any legislated monopoly in Saskatchewan. That is why we felt it 

necessary to break the monopoly held by the Saskatchewan Timber Board. One-third of our province is covered 

by timber. Yet under a government-held monopoly, in 20 years, production in our north fell from 63,000,000 

board feet to about 23,000,000 board feet. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not preserving our natural resources, that is 

retarding their development for the people. This is why we broke the timber monopoly and invited private 

companies to go into our north and open it up. Despite the hoots from the opposition, I want to tell them that 

lumbering and pulp companies are showing unprecedented interest in Saskatchewan's North, and that we expect 

over the next four years to see major developments in that area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — When this government took office last May, we were also very concerned about the almost 

complete lack of activity as far as minerals were concerned in our North. This assumes very great significance, 

Mr. Speaker, if you recall that half our province lies in the Precambrian Shield area, one of the world's richest ore 

yielding belts. We found that there were a number of reasons for the lack of activity in Saskatchewan. For one 

thing, royalty rates sometimes were out of line. For another, lack of good roads in the north seriously hampered 

and frequently prevented prospecting and development. And so again, Mr. Speaker, we called in representatives 

of the industry and asked them what we could do to persuade them to start looking for minerals in Northern 

Saskatchewan. And they told us. The Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron), then changed the 

regulations. First of all, the government is now in the initial stages of paying a portion of prospecting cost. In 

addition, we worked out a policy for assistance in paying for access roads to mine sites. Thirdly, we are providing 

additional government assistance for the building of major highways in our North in order to facilitate the 

development of our minerals. 

 

Mr, Speaker, this government attaches the highest and the greatest importance to the development of our North. 

We do so because we are vitally interested in the future in our northern residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We believe that this government must provide these people with opportunities for employment, 

social development and prosperity, at least commensurate with our people in the southern part of the province. 

Already those policies are beginning to pay off. Last December Anglo-Rouyn Mining Company began 

construction in the first bed base metal mine located entirely in Saskatchewan, the first. This copper mine will 

employ 150 people within the year and three or four hundred people within several years. Construction of a 

second mine is underway at Rotten Stone Lake. 

 

Potash is a field which offers unbelievable future development. We believe on this side of the house that potash 

can do for Saskatchewan what oil did for Alberta. At the present time, two mines are in operation, a third will 

commence to operate, I believe in the month of April, three more are being built. At the present time, the 

government has had negotiations with perhaps five other potash mines. When it is realized that each one of these 

may cost anywhere from $50,000,000 to $80,000,000 and when it is realized that each one of them will employ 

up to 500 or 600 workers, one can realize what potash will do for this the province. At the same time efforts are 

being made by the government to promote secondary industries. Sedco is being utilized and expanded and now 

that Sedco doesn't have to work in a socialist atmosphere we can expect it to accomplish something. 



February 10, 1965 

 111 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Incentives of every kind are being offered. Loans at reasonable rates are being offered to 

industries and I may tell this house that a huge expansion of these kinds of loans may be expected during 1965. I 

think it is fair to say that already business has begun to show a different kind of interest in Saskatchewan. Official 

figures show that for 1964 — 1193 new companies were registered. This compares to a year ago when there were 

915 new companies registered. In January 1965, this year, there were 173 new companies registered compared to 

138 the same period a year ago. As I pointed out in the house yesterday, the capitalization of some of these new 

companies amounts to millions of dollars. So I say that the Liberal party in the months ahead will spare no effort 

to attract industry and commerce to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now I turn for a moment to what the Throne Speech had to say about highway construction. 

The Throne Speech forecasts greatly increased spending in this department. Saskatchewan is a vast province, 

substantial areas of which remain completely undeveloped. It is inevitable then, before all else in a program of 

development, that we have means of transportation. There are many, many indications that our province has 

lagged far behind other provinces in this field also. During the last year for example, British Columbia spent 

$72,000,000 on highways. Alberta spent $64,000,000. Manitoba will spend $37,000,000 and Saskatchewan will 

spend $27,000,000 even though we put substantial amounts into the supplementary estimates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We maintain that the shape and the condition of our roads, has prevented us from getting our 

share of tourists. We maintain that the lack of roads in the North has prevented our people there from having the 

advantages of natural resource development. We think there's a lesson to be learned, Mr. Speaker, from other 

provinces in Canada. The pattern of mineral and forest and industrial Quebec has been determined by the vigor 

with which those governments have attacked the transportation problem. The development of the riches of such 

areas as Chibougamau in Quebec, Elliott Lake and Timmins in Northern Ontario was proceeded with only after 

major highway construction took place. Invariably those new developments have meant new citizens to those 

provinces. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, we have failed in Saskatchewan to provide this kind of access roads. We have 

timidly refused to build highways in our north. That is the reason that our North remains today virtually untapped. 

It will remain so, until we do something about highways. 

 

A good deal remains to be done about our grid road program to help service our rural areas. Last year, the 

previous government provided $7,000,000 for grid roads. We passed supplementary warrants during the last few 

months for another half a million dollars. It is our intention during the coming year to invest increasingly in 

municipal roads assistance. What then will be our highway program for the coming year? The Minister (Mr. 

Grant) of course, will announce the details when he speaks, but in a nutshell we propose: 

 

1. To increase overall capital spending on highways, by approximately 50 per cent. 

 

2. To begin bringing grid roads, carrying a high percentage of provincial traffic, into the provincial highway 

system. This will reduce the tax burden of local rate payers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — 

 

3. To accept the responsibility for paying 50 per cent of the cost of paving main streets in towns and villages. 

 

4. To begin double-laning the highway 



February 10, 1965 
 

 112 

between Moose Jaw and Regina. 

 

5. To spend far more money than at any time in the past on the construction of access roads in Northern 

Saskatchewan . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — In short, Mr. Speaker, the members of this legislature will be asked to approve new 

expenditure on highways. This government believes that such action is vital and necessary if we are to have a 

kind of development in Saskatchewan which is needed. 

 

I want to say a word about municipal water assistance. The Throne Speech indicates that the provisions of the 

Municipal Water Assistance Act will be greatly expanded. In the past decade, great strides have been made in 

bringing sewer and water to many of our towns and villages . . . 
 

An Hon. Member: — . . . inaudible . . . 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, there have been. Recently more and more people are moving into these villages and 

towns. This has created pressures on our municipalities with which those people often cannot cope. Our 

provincial government must carry the burden of capital construction that inevitably follows increased 

urbanization. It is the philosophy of this government, Mr. Speaker, to protect the strength of our local 

communities, and to shield them from crippling financial burdens. 
 

During the past year, our hon. friends opposite provided $600,000 for sewer and water programs for towns and 

villages throughout the province. We extended this in the supplementary estimates by adding another $400,000. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — During 1965, we hope that more towns and villages will participate in this worthwhile 

program. Mr. Speaker, our officials tell us that the present act has standards which are necessary in towns of any 

size. The water system must be adequate to provide sufficient pressure for fire fighting. However, these high 

standards, desirable though they may be for the larger towns, sometimes for financial reasons prevent the smaller 

communities from getting sewer and water. And so the government is proposing at the present session to amend 

the regulations as necessary to permit the department to provide less costly standards for very small communities. 

The new legislation will permit these villages and small towns to have water and sewer installations at a cost 

which is not prohibitive. 
 

I want to say a few words about the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission. Saskatchewan has always been 

short of water in many areas. Farmers have lacked water for irrigation. Industry has frequently been handicapped 

by lack of sufficient water for operation. Some of our industrial cities have had trouble finding sufficient water for 

domestic use. 
 

At the last session of the legislature, a new commission was set up, the Saskatchewan Water Resources 

Commission. The government proclaimed the new act on December 1st. This agency is charged with the 

responsibility to evaluate, to co-ordinate, and where necessary, to recommend laws that will insure the 

development of all our water resources in Saskatchewan for the good of everyone. Studies will be made in 

conjunction with the other three Western provinces of the Nelson River Basin. In the coming years, studies will 

be conducted in the Weyburn, Watrous and Moose Jaw Creek areas, and in dozens of other localities throughout 

the province. 
 

Now our greatest water resources development, of course, is still the South Saskatchewan River Development. 

When the budget is brought down, members of this house will be asked to approve the expenditures of large sums 

of money to complete this vast project. The investment which is required over the next six years, I am told, is 

staggering, likely around $60,000,000. However, I am sure that members on both sides of the house feel that 

unprecedented promise lies in the future in this 



February 10, 1965 

 113 

project. In the first place, when it is completed, there will be a lake 140 miles long in the heart of the dust bowl. In 

time, this will probably become one of our main tourist areas. The power plant at the dam will provide huge 

amounts of electricity. We think that irrigation benefits will go far to stabilize the agricultural industry in this 

province, and possibly to provide a base for further industry. I think the whole project is exciting. I think it is 

challenging and I think it is most worthwhile. This government would ask the co-operation of the legislature to 

make available the funds that are needed to complete it. 

 

There are some people in this legislature and out of it, who have accused this government of pushing irrigation 

down the throats of the residents, in some of the irrigated areas, whether or not they want it. One or two MLA's in 

this house have suggested that a vote should be held before any action is taken in the Broderick area. What are the 

facts? Some years ago, the original agreement was signed by the Diefenbaker government in Ottawa for the 

federal people and the Douglas government in Regina for the provincial people. Under that agreement, the 

government of Saskatchewan is obligated to have 50,000 acres of land ready for irrigation on completion of the 

project. We have no choice in that respect. Perhaps there should have been a vote, but if this is so, it was the 

responsibility of these two previous governments that I have mentioned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — When we took office, we found that the Socialists had talked a lot about this irrigation project, 

but we also found that they had not acquired one solitary acre of land that is needed to bring the project into 

being. What is the use of investing $150,000,000 in an irrigation project and then not use it? Now, in carrying out 

the agreement between Messrs. Diefenbaker and Douglas, we are only carrying out a legal responsibility, and I 

think it's a sensible responsibility. 

 

During the past few months in the Broderick area, the Department of Agriculture has been trying to acquire land 

on a voluntary basis. At this point, the Minister (Mr. McDonald) tells me about ten per cent of the land has been 

acquired. During the coming year, we will try to purchase as much additional land as we can by voluntary means. 

Certainly we will pay a fair price. This government believes that the South Saskatchewan Irrigation Dam will 

become one of the great farming industrial areas of Western Canada, and we're going to do everything we can to 

help it develop. 

 

I turn for a moment to agriculture, which will remain the basis of Saskatchewan's future economy. This 

government, in effect, Mr. Speaker, was elected largely by the rural areas of this province, and we believe we can 

do a lot for agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I have already announced that when the budget comes down, there will be major tax cuts. I can 

assure you, Mr. Speaker, that many of the reductions will be particularly helpful to the farmers of this province. 

Yesterday, the former Minister of Agriculture (I.C. Nollet) chided us about the master family farms awards. The 

Throne Speech indicates that in order to draw attention to the wholesomeness of the Family Farm and the dignity 

of rural life, Master Farm Family Awards will be instituted. What is involved? Back in 1949, the government of 

Alberta started giving these awards. Previous to this, I am told the same thing was done in Saskatchewan. We 

intend, in the future, to give one award in the south and one in the north annually. These awards will be given to 

individual farmers who have made an outstanding contribution to agriculture during the year. In making the 

selection, we are going to seek the advice of the various farm organizations. The winner, in each case, will either 

be given a cash award or an all expense trip to Great Britain. Details will be explained by the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. McDonald) a little later on in this session. 

 

The problem of lease land has caused a good deal of concern throughout Saskatchewan. We found, since we have 

been in office, that for every quarter section of lease land that comes up, there are maybe 35 or 40 applicants. We 

accused the former government repeatedly of giving lease land out for political reasons. We said that if we were 

elected to power, we would see that this lease land was given out on a fair and equitable basis. We do hope to take 

politics out of these decisions. The 



February 10, 1965 
 

 114 

land branch is now giving out leases on a point system . . . 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — The more yon have, the more you have to get. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — However, when the lease is allocated, if the applicant feels he has been unfairly treated, he now 

has a new appeal board to which he can appeal. This appeal board . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . was set up, as was promised in the last election, by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McDonald). He took recommendations from the Wheat Pool, from the Livestock Association, from the Farmers' 

Union and from the Stock Growers' Association, We suggest . . . 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — Did he follow them? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, he did follow them, and we suggest that those gentlemen who were named are impartial 

and that they will see that leases are given out in the future on a non-political basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald), at an early date, will announce a new policy, our 

new sales policy on lease land. Such leases will be sold in circumstances where the land is needed to make an 

economic farm unit. Safeguards, of course, will be taken to make certain that unsuitable land is not broken up. 

Here is one more instance, Mr. Speaker, where we are carrying out the pledges we made in the last election 

campaign. 

 

We think something should be done to encourage better feeder operations in the province of Saskatchewan. We 

have reason to believe that feeder operations in this province lag behind those in States and those in some of the 

other provinces. Often the difficulty of financing large scale cattle and hog feeding operations has handicapped 

our producers. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will ask for the co-operation of the house in enacting legislation that 

will permit Sedco to deal with agriculture industries in our province. In this way Sedco will be enabled to lend 

money to farmers who want to go into large scale feeder operations. This proposal will be dealt with more fully as 

the session proceeds. I ask members of the house to consider seriously the need for steps to aid our farmers, in 

bringing about the diversification they need to ensure a stable income. 

 

Another major problem facing Saskatchewan farmers today, particularly young farmers, is the lack of adequate 

farm credit. Recent amendments to The Farm Credit Act which were introduced at Ottawa should prove useful. 

However, in some cases, the lending requirements continue to be too stringent. It is still often difficult for young 

farmers who want to become established, and the farmer who is on light land and who lack adequate security to 

obtain the kind of credit that is needed. In the short time that we have been in office, we have not vet concluded 

what the proper role of the provincial government is, in providing additional credit facilities. However, I may tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, that a comprehensive study is being made of the whole matter. We hope that within the coming 

year, the government may be able to offer greatly expanded credit facilities for operation of the agricultural 

industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — In the interim, we are ex- 



February 10, 1965 

 115 

tending for another 12 months, the provisions of the agreement with the Co-operative Trust Company Limited. 

 

This government is co-operating in every way with A.R.D.A. organization of Ottawa. The hon. members know 

this is a. federal-provincial project designed to speed the effective use of marginal land in many parts of the 

province. At the present time, we have more than 100 A.R.D.A. projects approved or submitted to Ottawa for 

approval. Now those projects include 40 community pastures, 2 fodder projects, 14 co-operative pasture projects, 

18 drainage and flood control projects, a province wide shelter belt program, five recreational projects, 10 

research studies as well as extensive land use inventories. It would take a great deal of time to demonstrate 

adequately the effects of these programs. Suffice to say that in the forthcoming year we intend to see that any 

advantages available to the people of Saskatchewan through A.R.D.A. are fully and completely utilized. 

 

I turn for a moment to the Family Farm Improvement Act. In the past year, the government has worked for the 

improvement of people in the rural areas. The previous government commenced a program to bring sewer and 

water to many farms and I give them credit for having so done. The program has received wide acceptance. Since 

the inception of the act, I am told that approximately 16,500 families have had their homes modernized through 

this program. The current budget contains $324,000 in grants. We added another $100,000 in supplementary 

estimates to help the program along. During the coming year, the government will certainly expand this very 

worthwhile project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the debate proceeds, other members on this side of the house will discuss some of the measures 

that we are proposing designed to help agriculture. But I do want to assure the people of Saskatchewan that we 

intend to continue making whatever investment in agriculture that is necessary for the public good. We know that 

when the farmer prospers, the rest of our citizens also prosper. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We look ahead in the next few years to co-operation with such organizations as the Wheat 

Pool, Livestock Association, The Farm Union and so on. 

 

The Throne Speech mentions the desire of this province to step up the expansion and development of our 

provincial parks. In recent years our province has made strides in the development of its outdoors and recreational 

potential. But again I must say that relative to other provinces, we certainly have a great deal to do yet. 

Saskatchewan does not have to take a back seat to any province in the beauty and richness of its forests and its 

lakes. In fact in the field of wildlife, we have one of the great treasure chests. During the past year, we witnessed 

an increase of 20 per cent in the number of people using our parks. We have to consider seriously the attraction of 

our forests and parks and lakes on the basis of our tourist industry. For that reason the government proposes at this 

session to increase the pace of its outdoors development. Last year grants were made to 39 parks throughout the 

province. Ten of these were established in the last 12 months. We have now before us application for grants to 11 

more proposed regional parks during 1965. This is another project, Mr. Speaker, to which we hope to give 

priority. 

 

I would like to say a word about the tourist industry. This government is completely dissatisfied with the share of 

tourists which Saskatchewan has been getting. I would like to place before the house a few figures which I 

obtained from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. The first nine months of 1964, Canada as a whole had 

3,167,000 automobiles come from the United States. British Columbia has 300,000, Manitoba had 52,000, 

Alberta had 45,000 and Saskatchewan had 27,000. Our record for tourist entries is poor. We received last year 

less than one per cent of the American cars entering Canada. We think something must be done to improve that 

figure. We don't say that the difficulties will be solved overnight. However, the government again proposes 

increased spending for tourist promotion, and we hope that the Jubilee Celebrations may help us to obtain tourists 

in 1965. In addition, Mr. Speaker, we are beginning the celebration of Saskatchewan's Diamond Jubilee and here 

we must accelerate the development of our historic sites. Personally, I don't know if anyone in the house will 

agree with me or not, I think in this city of Regina we should have some appropriate memorial to the life of that 

unhappy and unfortunate Canadian, Louis Riel. 



February 10, 1965 
 

 116 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Last year we completed two new historical sites and we propose to complete as many as five 

more. In the following year, we expect that number will be again increased. 

 

I want to say a word now about the Youth Agency which was mentioned in the Throne Speech. Details, of course, 

will be explained when the legislation comes before the house. But one of the great concerns of this party and this 

government over the years, Mr. Speaker, has been the exodus of our young people from Saskatchewan. Year after 

year, a large proportion of our university students and a great proportion of our collegiate graduates had to leave 

Saskatchewan in order to find employment elsewhere. We believe something must be done to keep those young 

people at home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We also believe that Saskatchewan should pay more attention to the physical fitness of our 

young people. Many have been concerned, for example, that in recent years Russia and the eastern countries are 

regularly defeating us at our own game, hockey. We would like to see more financial assistance given to 

co-ordinate the activities of youth organizations throughout the province. For these reasons, at a later date, we will 

ask the support of the legislature in the establishment of a government agency to examine existing programs, both 

in government and in outside. Also the agency may recommend measures to encourage the development of our 

youth. We hope that such an effort will result in the establishment of programs to fill the voids which now exist. 

During the first year we will not propose a major expenditure of money, but from the second year forward, we 

would hope that a comprehensive youth program would fill a major place in the activities of the people and the 

government. 

 

The Throne Speech dwells at some length on education and I turn for a moment to that subject. As the Throne 

Speech indicated, we plan substantially increased spending in the field of education in the coming year. Statistics 

show that most of Canada's unemployed today have a grade eight education or less. Every year that a young man 

can stay in university or even in collegiate, adds to his earning power in later life. Liberals believe that there is no 

better investment any government can make, then in the education of its youth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There is not much use talking about the development of natural resources if we don't look first 

to the development of our human resources. The fact that we are proposing new and major industrial development 

only accentuates the problem, because new technical skills, new scientific knowledge will be needed more than 

ever in Saskatchewan in the next year. For those reasons we will ask the legislature to grant larger sums of money 

for education. 

 

First of all, there must be millions of dollars more allocated for ordinary educational costs. 

 

Secondly, additional funds must be found this year for the new separate collegiates. 

 

Thirdly, the house will be asked to provide for the construction of additional new technical facilities. 

 

Fourth, we shall ask for support in our proposal to extend educational grants to a number of private high schools. 

 

Finally, our government must find huge new sums for university expansion and operating costs. University 

enrolment . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . at both Saskatoon and Regina is increasing at an ever faster pace. Last year, I am told, that 

on our two campuses we had 7,600 students. At the end of the next three years, we are informed there 



February 10, 1965 

 117 

will be 14,500 new students. In order to meet this staggering increase in enrolment, we have no option but to 

assign a very heavy priority to the university expansion program, even though this may preclude expansion in 

certain other fields. 

 

We think on this side of the house, and I am sure that same is true on the other side of the house, that 

Saskatchewan is very fortunate indeed to have the kind of university president that we have in Doctor Spinks. He 

is building a reputation for our university throughout the world. We in the provincial government will do 

everything that we possibly can to make sure that our university has funds both for huge capital expansion and for 

operating costs. As I have . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher: — . . . mentioned previously, operating costs this year in the university will be up 

roughly 30 per cent. We are going to do these things but, Mr. Speaker, there is increasing evidence on every hand 

that, ultimately, federal assistance is going to he needed in this vital field. Under the British North America Act, 

of course, education is a provincial responsibility. Nevertheless, many members are convinced that if we are 

going to meet the competition of Russia in turning out engineers, economists, and scientists then we are going to 

need additional assistance. These matters also will be dealt with in more detail by the Minister of Education (Mr. 

Trapp) later in this debate. I am sure though that honorable members from both sides of the house will be 

sympathetic to needs in the field of education. 

 

I want to come for a moment to the question of Social Welfare. What is the Liberal attitude to Social Welfare? 

The Socialists would have people think that our Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) over here is some kind of 

a hard hearted individual who has no feeling for the unfortunate of this province. Mr. Speaker, I want to say 

again, that this Liberal party is certainly just as humane as any Socialist. I assure hon. members on both sides of 

the house, that this government will work diligently to see that any indigent, any one who is sick, anyone who is 

unemployed through no fault of his own, will receive generous treatment from the Department of Social Welfare. 

In a society as wealthy and as productive as ours, it is inconceivable that needless suffering and hardship should 

exist. We believe that any citizen in our province is entitled to certain basic standards of living. Government at the 

provincial and federal level must guarantee these basic minimums, always assuming that the able-bodied 

individual is willing to work, if there is work available. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — But, I make no apology, Mr. Speaker, for saying that this government has little sympathy for 

those able-bodied individuals who are unwilling to work or who are trying to make Social Welfare a way of life. 

As a matter of principle, this government is determined that Social Welfare programs shall be administered in a 

manner that brings benefit to the largest number of people. If those most deserving are to receive the assistance 

they need, then the duty falls on the government to make sure that there are no abuses. In this regard, Mr. 

Speaker, I should like to quote from a rather unique article in The Saskatchewan Commonwealth. I want to quote 

a couple of statements made in the June 3rd edition of the Commonwealth, under the by-line of Mr. Joe Phelps, 

former cabinet minister in Saskatchewan under one of the Socialist governments. Mr. Phelps said this: 

 

I still believe our own C.C.F. government failed in Saskatchewan to give more constructive leadership in 

providing some positive, yes, even a bold forward looking program to replace the present alarming and 

degenerating procedure of dispensing social aid to healthy able-bodied persons in our province, including 

among others, our native people. 

 

Later in the same article, Mr. Phelps wrote: 

 

Social aid to healthy, able-bodied persons unless corrected at once, will ruin the people but it will also ruin 

our country and the nation along with it. Social aid 



February 10, 1965 
 

 118 

today, with certain groups is becoming a new profession, even including in some cases, the second and third 

generation. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — I want to tell the hon. members for Saskatoon, that those are not the statements of our Minister 

of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt). These are the statements of one of their former colleagues. I must say that on this 

occasion, the government agrees with much of what Mr. Phelps had to say at that time. For every person who 

unjustly received social aid, it is likely that there are other people in Saskatchewan going without the assistance 

they need and deserve. For these reasons, the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) has been seeking to 

eliminate from the Social Welfare rolls any who are abusing the privilege. 
 

The government of Saskatchewan is not satisfied with the way that some of our cities are dispensing social aid. It 

is always dangerous when one government is collecting the funds for a program, and another government is 

spending those funds. I would like to point out to the house and to the people of Saskatchewan, that today the 

provincial and federal governments pay 93 per cent of the costs of social aid. The cities are only paying 7 per cent 

on the average. Of the 93 per cent, the provincial government puts up the larger share. Therefore, it is always easy 

for city governments to be very generous with the provincial funds. We intend to insist that all social welfare 

departments live up to the regulations. We propose to call a conference on this subject when the legislature has 

completed its session. We are going to call in the city people and ask them to meet with our Department of Social 

Welfare. If feasible, we intend to ask them to bear a greater per cent of the cost than 7 per cent. On the other hand, 

the government will be prepared to pay large sums towards the administration of city social aid. Our intention is 

that the cities will receive the same number of dollars in social aid, but it will be given to them in a different 

manner. 
 

I think I should add that it is the philosophy of this government that the only real answer to the social aid problem 

is to create new job opportunities, because 99 per cent of our people . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . would rather work than be on social aid. 
 

Mr. Speaker, while we are still on the subject of social benefits, I would like to refer briefly to what the Throne 

Speech says about our plans for a new home in Regina. Shortly after we assumed office, we became convinced 

that special attention must be paid to some of the institutions in this province. 
 

Dales House is a home for abandoned children. The Minister and I went out and inspected it one day. We found 

children packed four or five to a room, in a building which had been used 50 years ago as an old station. The 

general conditions there were appalling. 
 

People have heard a lot about Embury House. This was also an old building and an unsuitable one for the purpose 

for which it was being used. We found a staff of 18 looking after eight children. The cost to the tax payer, if I 

recall, was in the neighbourhood of $13,000 each. These costs did seem to be out of line with the results that were 

being achieved. 
 

In Prince Albert, we found that there was no such thing as a women's' jail. Instead we found the women inmates 

jammed into one wing of the men's' jail. After considering these circumstances, the government has decided to 

build two new institutions during 1965. We will replace Dales House with a new institution costing about 

$200,000 and in Prince Albert, we will build a new jail or directional institute for women at the cost of about 

$850,000. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — This institute will segregate the women prisoners 



February 10, 1965 

 119 

and provide new and modern facilities. So I say, Mr. Speaker, that a Liberal government will never take a back 

seat to any socialist in the enactment of needed social welfare measures. This government is going to be like other 

Liberal governments in this regard. 

 

What have we done about medicare? Throughout the last election, Mr. Speaker, the former Minister of Health 

(Mr. Blakeney) and the former premier (Mr. Lloyd) travelled up one end of this province and down the other 

saying, "don't elect those Liberals, or they will throw out medicare". But we have not done so. As a matter of fact, 

we think we have strengthened the plan, we think we made it work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — On a number of occasions the Minister of Health, (Mr. Steuart) has met with the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, to discuss and iron out the difficulties that existed in the medicare plan. I can say that 

we have received unparalleled co-operation from the medical profession in this regard, and we believe that a spirit 

of harmony prevails today for the first time since the introduction of the plan. Of course, we have been concerned 

with rapidly increasing costs. Surely nothing could jeopardize medicare as much as insolvency. For the sake of 

political expediency, just before the last election, the socialists reduced the medical tax. The day that it was 

reduced, the former premier (Mr. Lloyd) had this to say: 

 

If the federal government fails to proceed in accordance with its announced pledge, or if there are sharp 

increases in the cost of providing hospital and medical care, it may be necessary to vary the premiums in the 

future to provide adequate funds for these essential services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, costs are going up. Today the Socialists are pleading for the poor people of Saskatchewan. How did 

they act when they were the government? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It's a good question. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We had four elections as I said yesterday, 1948, 1952, 1956, 1960, and it is a matter of record 

that after every one of those elections, they raised the head tax for hospitalization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, in 1960, for a family, the cost was $45. Just before the 

election they reduced it to $35 but as soon as the election was over, they didn't put it back to 45, they put it up to 

$48. For that reason many people will not be too concerned by the crocodile tears which my hon. friends are 

shedding at this time. Of course, Mr. Speaker, we would have benefited politically perhaps, if we had left the 

medicare premiums where they were. But despite the temptation, we decided that it was our duty as a government 

to do otherwise. We did not follow the easy course. We restored the medicare premiums to the point where the 

Socialists had it before the last election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — In other words the medicare and hospitalization rate today is exactly where the Socialists had it 

about a year ago. If we had refused to put up this premium, I say again, we might have jeopardized the whole plan 

because, unless such a program is kept solvent, it is indeed in danger. Nothing could have been more unwise than 

refusing to recognize this type of danger to the plan. Mr. Speaker, I think our citizens for many years, learned that 

no government can give something for nothing. It will be the unswerving determination of the new government to 

run both the hospitalization plan and the medicare plan with all possible efficiency. I can tell you that the present 

Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) has saved hundreds of thousands of dollars in operating costs in this department 

already. We hope that if we do operate it with efficiency, that in future years we may be able to reduce the head 

tax. But I can tell you, Sir, that when reductions are made, it will be because they make economic 



February 10, 1965 
 

 120 

sense and not because they are politically expedient. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — While I am talking about matters of health, I would like to say a word about the North 

Battleford Mental Institution. We have been advised by some of the consultants of the Johnson Commission that 

compared to the buildings and facilities at the Weyburn Hospital, these buildings and facilities may be termed 

medieval. 
 

Now I am not sure why Weyburn should have obtained more than North Battleford in the past. Weyburn's 

facilities are good, but the time has come for North Battleford also to have better physical facilities. It would 

appear that a program of modernization is necessary before some of these shocking conditions can be corrected. 

The Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) is looking into the whole matter, and it is the hope of the government that 

possible action can be taken in North Battleford in the not too distant future to remedy some of these deplorable 

conditions. 
 

The Throne Speech indicated that this government plans to set up a new agency for the Indian and Metis people. I 

think this is a vital project because for generations people of Saskatchewan and the people in other provinces of 

Canada have lived with a shameful situation. I refer to the plight of about 38,000 people of Indian ancestry. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, many of these people are living in conditions that are unworthy of some of the most 

primitive countries in the whole world. Living standards of many of our Indians and Metis have to be seen to be 

believed. Housing is deplorable. Virtually none of these Indian homes have flush toilets. Very few have 

electricity. Many of them are heated with old tin heaters. Most of them have no running water. Very few of our 

reserves have roads that could be called roads, and all this at a time when the Indian population is virtually 

exploding in Northern Saskatchewan. Unfortunately job opportunities in the North haven't kept up with the 

population explosion. I read one study a while ago that said only about 200 people in these northern areas have 

full time employment. The rest of them have to eke out a living by trapping, or by fishing or by lumbering. Many 

of them simply live on social aid. The governments, both provincial and federal, in my opinion, have failed to set 

an example. Up in our north today, teachers, administrators, pilots, engineers, are usually white. Even positions 

such as caretakers and ward aids in our provincial hospitals and on our highway crews, appear to be beyond the 

reach of our Indian population. Surely, it doesn't make sense to give these young children a good education, and 

then refuse to employ them when they are through school. 
 

There are some who say that Indians are a federal responsibility. We maintain that it is not good enough for the 

provincial government to stand idly by while these problems become more critical. That is why, at the present 

session, as the Throne Speech indicates, we propose to set up a new Indian Affairs branch. The branch will come 

under the Department of Natural Resources. It is in no way intended to replace federal responsibility; rather we 

hope to supplement what the federal government is doing. One of the tasks of this new branch will be to do their 

best to find employment for our Indian and Metis people. The government, I think, must et the example by 

employing many Indians and many Metis in the civil service, in our crown corporations, in our highway crews 

and so on . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — We must also try to persuade these new industries, such as the potash, the oil industries, and 

our retail stores, to hire at least a small proportion of Indians and Metis. The new agency, as we envisage it, will 

concern itself with the co-ordination and extension of programs which are now available to non-Indian citizens 

for the benefit of every person of Indian and Metis ancestry in Saskatchewan. We hope that this new department 

will help to bring better roads to our reserves. We hope that it will help the Indian people obtain electricity on the 

reserves. It may take a number of years to accomplish but I think it can be accomplished. We believe that 

members of the legislature on both sides of the house will share our determination to change the conditions of 

poverty and ignorance and sickness in which our Indian population is living. So I say that we consider this 

program of vital importance. 
 

I turn for a moment to the arts. We feel, Mr, Speaker, that 



February 10, 1965 

 121 

for many years governments in this province have been tardy in providing for our people the kind of assistance 

needed to bring our cultural activities to a reasonable degree of maturity. Saskatchewan has lagged far behind 

other provinces in the arts and culture generally. We have watched the population drain from Saskatchewan as I 

indicated a few moments ago. We have deplored this, but we failed to realize that in trying to halt it, we might 

very well have given deeper consideration to those things that can enrich and fulfil the lives of both our old and 

our young. 

 

This government proposes, Mr. Speaker, at least to have a try at breaking the cultural barrier. We intend to 

encourage our young artists in the arts and crafts, and to make it possible for more of our citizens to enjoy the 

works of talented people. Thus we have decided this year to allocate substantially larger funds to the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board to make it possible for that body to extend its work. 

 

The Board has been enlarged and expanded. We intend to allocate funds for the development of orchestras and 

musical festivals, and where necessary, we will make grants. If assistance of other kinds is needed, we will also 

make that available. We hope, by next year or at least within two years, to have a special cultural branch or 

perhaps eventually do as they have done in the province of Quebec, have a department for culture. The 

government proposes to make available immediately, the first $12,500,000 which is needed to help finance 

auditoria in Regina and Saskatoon. Local committees are working diligently, I understand, in both of these 

centres. There are indications that when these auditoria are completed, the buildings will go far to promote 

cultural activities in Saskatchewan. In short, Mr. Speaker, I say again that this Liberal government wants to do 

something for arts and culture in Saskatchewan. It is quite true that the objective may prove costly over the years. 

The government will take the responsibility for finding the funds. 

 

The Throne Speech refers to proposed changes in the election act. It has been evident for some years, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are deficiencies in our election act. We protested this, time and again, in the house when we 

were in the opposition. But the election last year made a shambles of our electoral machinery. For one month 

nobody apparently knew who was the government. For weeks afterwards, perhaps there were eight members who 

were not sure if they had been elected or not. As a matter of fact, here today, nine months after the election, there 

are three members who are still not sure whether they will be here next year or not. The unbelievable experiences 

of the voters in this election surely emphasize the need to streamline voting procedures and bring them into line 

with practice elsewhere in Canada. So the government will ask the legislature to introduce changes in our 

Saskatchewan Elections Act this year. When the bill is brought forward, the Attorney General will explain details. 

 

However, I will mention two or three which we are proposing today: 

 

(1) The absentee ballot will be discontinued except that patients in sanatoria and hospitals shall vote by such a 

ballot; 

 

(2) The residence requirements insofar as students are concerned will be changed to permit a student to vote in a 

constituency where his home is located. If he is taking a course of studies away from home, he will be permitted 

to vote in the constituency where he is resident as a student. 

 

(3) The injustice of an election act which, in many cases, discriminates against members of the armed services 

will be changed, as the old act disenfranchises. This is very important to members of this side of the house, 

though obviously it is not, across the way. We propose to bring in changes which will permit members of the 

armed forces to vote with the same qualifications as civilians. 

 

I would like to say a word, Mr. Speaker, about labor. For weeks and for months, I have been reading speeches 

about all the anti-labor bills or legislation that this party is going to bring in. The hon. member for Moose Jaw 

(Mr. Davies) has made the most vehement speeches 



February 10, 1965 
 

 122 

about the wicked things we were going to do to labor. 

 

You know, Mr, Speaker, the only direct reference to labor in the Throne Speech, was an indication that we are 

going to increase the minimum wage. I do not know if my hon. friends object to that or not. I want to tell my hon. 

friends that this government takes a deep interest in the welfare of working people — those who are organised in 

efficient labor unions or those who are not organized. 

 

That is why this government was disturbed a few months ago to discover that the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour, at its annual convention, passed a resolution dedicating that body to the defeat of the present government. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — It is not true. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh yes, it is true. And I suppose it is true because this federation is pretty well dominated by 

my hon. friend from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), by my hon. friend from Regina, over there . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — My hon. friend, Mr, .Speaker, knows that this is not true. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . by my hon. friend from Saskatoon . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . and by a lot of other Socialists. 

 

Mr. Davies: — On a . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well now, Mr. Speaker, this is a free country and the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour is 

certainly free to take any political action it desires. But I can tell my hon. friends from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), 

and Regina, and Saskatoon, that there are many prominent union members in Saskatchewan who have wanted no 

alliance with a single political party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They have believed very strongly that when unions are politically independent, they can speak 

without fear or favor before the government of the day. But as part of a small minority party, particularly when it's 

a socialist party, their influence is dissipated with the other groups. And so, I would offer, on behalf of the 

government, the hand of friendship to labor. Co-operation is a two-way street. I would suggest to union leaders, 

that It might be in the best interests of the working people of Saskatchewan, if unions as such, maintained political 

neutrality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now, as one indication of our determination to deal fairly with labor, Mr, Speaker, I point to 

the wage negotiations that we had with the civil service union. In two days we settled the agreement with a good 

wage increase. It took four weeks or more often for the previous government to take the same kind of action. 

Since that time, the same wage increases have been given to other members of the public service retroactive to 

October 1st. We believe, and we are certain that our working people believe that the main need of labor in 

Saskatchewan today is for new industries which will create additional jobs. That is something that my hon. friends 

did not give labor for the last twenty years. 

 

Mr, Speaker, I am going to say a word about teachers and public service pensions. My hon. friends say that we do 

not believe in people. Two or three decades ago, partly as a result of the depression, hundreds 



February 10, 1965 

 123 

of teachers and public servants retired with pensions which were inadequate, deplorably inadequate. With the 

steadily increasing cost of living, the plight of some of these people has become serious. 

 

This assembly will be asked to pass legislation to increase all teachers' allowances granted prior to April 1, 1963, 

and which are less than $2,400 per annum. These increases are intended to replace the supplementary allowance 

now being paid by the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation to their own members. Under the proposed legislation, 

690 teachers will receive increased allowances, amounting to $300 per year. The estimated cost for the first year 

is $207,000 with a decreasing annual cost depending on the mortality rate of the recipients. 

 

Similar legislation will be introduced with respect to public service superannuation allowances granted before 

April 5, 1951, and which are less than $2,400 a year. I am informed that the annual increase for widows in this 

category will be about $105 and for other pensioners $217. This will amount to about $73,000 the first year. 

 

These changes will bring pensions for earlier retired teachers and civil servants more into line with pensions 

recently awarded. Mr. Speaker, I am sure it will not go unnoticed, that the teachers and the civil servants 

repeatedly asked for this reform from the previous government. They always said they did not have enough 

money. 

 

1 turn for a moment, to a final matter which was mentioned in the Throne Speech, a matter which affects not only 

the people of Saskatchewan, but the people of Canada as a whole. Many Canadians have become increasingly 

aware of the need for a more mature approach to constitutional matters. There has been a growing feeling in 

recent times that the hour has arrived when Canadians must surely be given the kind of self determination that the 

fathers of Confederation envisaged, when they brought in the B.N.A. Act almost a hundred years ago. 

 

Why, Mr, Speaker, should the people of Canada have to go to Westminster in London to amend the Constitution? 

This matter could have been solved a number of years ago, had not the Saskatchewan Socialists held it up. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now, throughout the years, various attempts have been made to amend our Constitution. Well, 

the most recent attempt took place when the provincial premiers and federal officials and the Attorney General 

met with the Prime Minister at Charlottetown, on October 14th. An agreement, in principle, was eventually 

reached. As a result, Mr. Speaker, a resolution will be placed before this house, the other provincial houses, and 

the federal government, calling for an amendment which will permit Canada to amend its own Constitution right 

at home in Ottawa. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Constitution may not be everything that we like but it is far better to take part of a loaf 

than none at all. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these are some of the aims and objectives of the new government. These are the goals for 

Saskatchewan that we have set as we move rapidly into an era of greater industrialization. These are the goals 

which we believe will help Saskatchewan to diversify. We admit very freely that the first eight months we have 

been in office have been difficult and contentious. Perhaps that is natural in view of the very fundamental 

difference between the philosophy of socialism and liberalism. 
 

Perhaps we have made some mistakes — but surely it is better to make a mistake once in awhile than not to try. 

We believe we have laid the groundwork for a program that will put Saskatchewan among the leading provinces 

in Canada. And we think that it will not be long, not very many months, before we show the people of this 

province that private enterprise can do far more for them than Socialism. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — So we don't tell the people of Saskatchewan today that 



February 10, 1965 
 

 124 

everything ahead will be smooth sailing. But we do think that the challenge ahead is well worth the effort and we 

think that the days ahead will bring us unlimited opportunities. 
 

This government came to power on the strength of a number of promises made during the last election campaign. 

I hold them in my hand. Mr. Speaker — eleven major ones — eleven or twelve minor ones. I want to tell the 

members of the opposition that when this session is completed, at least 50 per cent of those promises will have 

been carried out. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — We take our program promises seriously. And as the other sessions unfold before the next 

election, I can tell you, everyone of those promises will have been carried out. This is a party which does not 

make promises lightly and, having made them, we take action, as the hon. member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) 

and others will find, we carry them out. 
 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I guess it is hardly necessary for me to say that we do not support the amendment but 

we do support the motion for the Throne Speech. 
 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, just before the member takes his seat would he mind a short 

question? 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Not at all. 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Not all controversial either I think. I wonder, in his remarks if he suggested that the 

government was not satisfied with the way some of our cities are dispensing social aid? Would he mind advising 

the house whether or not the city of Regina is one of them with which the government is dissatisfied? 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would say that this problem must be investigated immediately in all cities. I would include 

Regina among those cities. 
 

Mr. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, in joining in the debate this afternoon I would, first of all, like to 

extend to you something by way of an apology for having risen on several occasions previous to this and not 

taken a moment on those occasions to extend to you my personal congratulations for your election to the high 

office of Speaker. I hasten to correct that error on my part, and offer to you, Sir, my respect and my belief that you 

will conduct yourself in a fashion that you have already demonstrated which will be of mutual benefit to all 

members in this house. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Pederson: — I should also like, of course, to join with those who have preceded me and like them voice a 

word of welcome to the students who are here with us this afternoon from Saskatoon University campus. I do so, 

Mr. Speaker, with some particular pride, in that I have my son numbered in this group, and I hope, Sir, that after 

watching the proceedings of this house that he will go straight home and forevermore forget about the political 

business. Amen. 
 

I, also, would like to express to my old friend, the minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald) a word of welcome 

back to the house, although he is not in his seat at the moment, and to join with those who have already done so, 

in expressing my hope that his health will continue to be good and that we will see him in his place for a long, 

long time and that his duties will not call him to other places from time to time. 
 

I also would hope that the acting leader of the opposition (Mr. Brockelbank, Kelsey) would express to his party 

leader, the official leader of the opposition, my sincere hope that he will recover shortly and take his place in this 

legislature. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Pederson: — And now, Mr. Speaker, if I 



February 10, 1965 

 125 

may also deal with one other matter which is of a personal nature and that would be to express to members on 

both sides of this house my personal thanks for their kindness, courtesy and co-operation in treating me as a new 

member, in dealing with me and in giving me the aid and comfort, I might say, that they have shown me on all 

occasions since I arrived here a week ago. I want to assure you all, through you, Mr. Speaker, that this is greatly 

appreciated. It is not a very simple task to be the lone member for a party and particularly the leader, to sit alone, 

as it were, as a rose between the two groups of thorns, but I will attempt, I will assure you, not to be either kicked 

too hard or pricked too hard through the session that lies ahead. I don't mind being alone really. I'm quite 

accustomed to it. Any man who seeks the leadership of the Conservative party in Saskatchewan must be used to 

being alone, because a good deal of his time is spent in that capacity. But I don't know, I've always seemed to 

have been in this position throughout my life and when I look around, Mr. Speaker, at the odds, exclusive of 

yourself, Sir, approximately 57 to one, that's just about right for a Conservative. I intend to make my presence 

felt, if at all possible, and hope that I will be able to live up to the old ideal that I have always held in my heart, 

"that when the going gets tough, the tough get going". 

 

Now, from the practice of the past in this house, Mr. Speaker, I understand that it has been traditional and is one 

that I also honor, to offer congratulations to the mover and seconder on the address-in-reply to the Speech from 

the Throne. In the case of the mover, the hon. member for Athabaska (Mr. Guy), I am afraid that I an unable to do 

that. I do that for a specific reason, Sir, in that I feel that in his duties as a mover, the member for that 

constituency in my opinion, at any rate, set a very bad tone and example for the future operation of this house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — I do, however, hasten to offer my congratulations to the constituency of Athabaska, in that the 

premier had honoured them by selecting their member to move that address. But, I believe that I should perhaps 

thank the hon. member for Athabaska for some of the remarks that he directed, not only against myself but against 

my party, because, as he probably recalls, he was on the air at the time and I'm certain that many Conservatives in 

this province would be listening to him. I want to bring to his attention the fact that in the last election in April, 

126,000 of them supported this party. Many of them, I'm sure, would be delighted to know precisely what his 

opinion of Conservatives in this province is. He referred to them, and I wrote the words down as he uttered them, 

as being "irresponsible, unprincipled, and incapable of deciding where they should vote". Now, I think that this 

may have been of some embarrassment to his leader because I have noticed that in the last little while he has 

omitted his regular monthly plea to Conservatives to support his party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Well, I presume the Premier was busy making other promises at this time and just had not got 

around to making that statement. But it may also be, of course, in reflection, that the hon. member for Athabaska 

(Mr. Guy) had an ulterior motive for making a strong speech such as he did make. I think I would like to bring 

this to the attention of some of those who sit behind the cabinet on the other side of the house, Mr. Speaker, to 

point out to them that perhaps there is a vacancy in some future portfolio and this member would like to get his 

bid in first to show his stuff and show how tough he can really be. I merely pass that on as a slight warning to be 

on your guard for future remarks from this particular member. 

 

I must now, of course, after having made these rather unkind remarks, completely reverse myself, Mr. Speaker, in 

dealing with the lady member from Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant). I offer her my most sincere congratulations, not 

only on the tone of the speech but in the temperate manner in which she delivered it. I feel though that in dealing 

with her at this moment that I should bring to the attention of the premier the fact that this lady is the lone member 

from Saskatoon sitting on the government side of the house. It has come to my attention that the constituency at 

Saskatoon has in its entire history always had a member in the cabinet, with one exception and that was from 

1917 to 1921, when Saskatoon was a single member constituency and its member sat in the opposition. Outside of 

that a member in the cabinet always represented the city of Saskatoon. I believe that overlooking this lady as a 

possibility in the 



February 10, 1965 
 

 126 

cabinet can only be interpreted as an insult not only to her but to the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that the premier will bear this in mind when he exercises his 

prerogative, in making future appointments in that direction. I might say to the lady member from Saskatoon 

(Mrs. Merchant) I wish you well in this regard. 

 

I sat back on this side of the house yesterday and listened to the hon. member from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) and 

I must say quite frankly that I was rather disappointed. His opening remarks regarding my own party, talking of 

the national party leadership, are almost as much in the background and history of this nation as some of the other 

remarks he made regarding pre 1944 days. I want to assure him, Sir, that he need have no concern about the 

question of leadership in the party that I happen to represent on the national level. I think that we will be capable 

of handling those problems ourselves — far sooner that we should have ours than some of the problems that other 

national political parties have at the present time. 

 

I would suggest first of all, Sir, that one of the chief criticisms that I would direct to the hon. member for Kelsey 

(Mr. Brockelbank) in his address was the fact that he failed, in my opinion, to present the view of an official 

opposition. By that I mean that he failed to offer what, in my opinion, were concrete alternatives to programs 

being advanced by the government. I felt that his entire speech dealt mainly with comparisons and criticisms, 

rather than anything in a concrete fashion for the betterment of this province. I don't think that I am too interested 

in merely listening to the pros and cons of which of these political parties or which of these two governments are 

the best. But I am vitally interested, Mr. Speaker, in hearing what the proposals of the government are and what 

the alternatives are. I would hope that in this regard, at any rate, there will be some improvement in the days 

ahead insofar as the opposition is concerned in this particular category. 

 

Now, I also listened to the premier today, and I am not going to deal specifically with his remarks at this time or 

with the program that he laid down. I hope to be able to deal with that a bit later on. I was rather amused, Sir, with 

his explanation as to why he didn't call a session sooner than he did. I, for one, and certainly no one in my party 

ever made the statement that it was necessary for them to carry out all of their promises immediately. But I do feel 

there was real room for an early session to deal with some matters of great urgency, and I do think perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, that what decided the premier and his colleagues were the events that were about to take place in the 

constituency of Hanley. When those results were known, I think the decision then was that he better take his 

"Walkered" down majority and call a session. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that if the government had implemented this 

one promise, that of holding a session, so that the legislature, rather than a political party, could deal with the vital 

issues of the day, that they would not enjoy the very real annoyance that is felt in this province with them today. I 

believe that the fortunes of this government have sunk substantially since they took office simply because they 

chose to do these things on their own without recourse to the legislature and the representatives of the people. 

 

I will say this, Mr. Speaker, that I most certainly share with the Premier his optimism for the future of this 

province. I have always been one to speak as he has been doing in the recent months. Wherever I have gone, 

whether on this continent or abroad, I have thought about the tremendous future and the tremendous opportunities 

that await, not only young people, but older people in this province. It is my hope that his optimism will show up 

in concrete proposals that will help this province in the way the party I represent hopes we will. I feel that only 

time is going to tell if some of the things that he refers to will be the best method of doing it. I am content, Mr. 

Speaker, in many circumstances to wait and see and pass judgement as these items are brought before the house. 

 

Now, I want to make a very brief reference to an item that concerns me tremendously, Mr. Speaker, since arriving 

here at the legislature. I had thought that with the change in government, with the new complexion of the house, 

that there might be a toning down of the type of political campaign that goes on, of charges and counter-charges 

that continue to be 



February 10, 1965 

 127 

hurled back and forth about the house. This Year, as has already noted, we are celebrating the Diamond Jubilee of 

our province. I that this is not only a time in which we can reflect with pride on the accomplishments of our 

people and of our province and the strides that we have made, but I believe that it is a time to pause and realize 

that we matured, that we have matured, that we have, in fact, begun to grow up. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that much 

of the feeling of discontent, much of the feeling of confusion that exists in the minds of people, not only in this 

province, but in Canada as a whole today, centres around the fact that: members, both in this house and in other 

houses, have usurped through their political parties, the uses and the purposes of assemblies such as this. These 

assemblies, and this one I am now referring to, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, have become nothing but battle 

arenas for political parties. I deplore this immensely, and feel that on occasions such as this, the Jubilee 

celebration year, that it might be well for the government to consider the proposition that we should start 

producing the type of Hansard, such as they have in the House of Commons, that comes out on a daily basis 

available to the public at large on a mass circulation basis. I strongly suspect, Mr. Speaker, after listening to the 

type of remarks and the tone that was set by the Premier yesterday, that if he had been on the air he most certainly 

would not have gone as far as he had. This is true, I have noticed, on both sides of this house. I believe that if 

these people knew that every word they say is recorded and available to every one of their constituents on a 

moment's notice, it would temper the tone of this house and perhaps force these people to attend to the business 

that they were here to perform. If I have been guilty of this same error, then I apologize to this house. All of us 

will have to oppose things that were mentioned by other members in order to substantiate our case and many 

times we, no doubt, will get involved in heated arguments, but we must never, in my opinion, Sir, forget that we 

are sent here primarily to legislate and to conduct the affairs of this province. If I may submit this suggestion to 

this government to take under advisement, I would feel that it would be a project worthwhile having in the 

Diamond Jubilee Year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to move adjournment of the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder with the agreement of the house, if I 

could introduce the following motion, seconded by Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): 

 

That this assembly record with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of two former members of 

this assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions each made to his community, to his 

constituency, and to this province. 

 

James Smith Aitken, former member of this assembly for Hanley constituency from 1944 to 1948, died on 

July 30th, 1964. He was born in Scotland in 1881 and moved to Canada in 1904. The following year he 

moved to Cheviot where he farmed. He was an active participant in agricultural and community 

organizations. 

 

Rupert James Greaves died in December, 1964. He was born in England in 1881, and came to Canada in 

1905, homesteading near Star City. He served for long periods as Secretary-Treasurer of the Berlin School 

District and as councillor of the Rural Municipality of Star City. He was active in community and agricultural 

organizations, and he represented Melfort in this assembly from 1929 to 1934. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement this assembly expresses its most sincere sympathies 

with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Acting Leader of the Opposition) (Kelsey): — 



February 10, 1965 
 

 128 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to join with the house leader in seconding this motion to express our sympathy and 

condolences to the members of the bereaved families and also to express our appreciation of the public service 

given by these two men. These were two very charming persons, Jimmy Aitken, a well-educated Scotsman, who 

quoted Robbie Burns at the drop of a hat to suit almost any occasion, a man of great sincerity and fine ideals. 
 

Mr. Greaves, I didn't know so well, but he was the member for Melfort constituency, which wasn't too far away 

from my home at that time. He did a wonderful job in the field of education through his work as a trustee, and he, 

too, deserves a great deal of credit for the service given to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon, I would like to say a few words in 

appreciation of the services rendered by the late R.J. Greaves, to his community and to his province. Mr. Speaker, 

I think you will agree after I have enumerated his life's work or part of his life's work, that his was a life of service 

to his fellow man indeed. He was born in Nottingham, England, the son of a lace merchant, and came to Canada 

after seeing service in the Boer War. He came to Canada first in 1904, and in 1905, he homesteaded near Star 

City. As his homestead was almost solid bush, he knew the hardships of pioneering. 

 

In 1909 he was married to his Nottingham sweetheart by which time he had succeeded in clearing 35 acres of 

land, and yet in spite of his work on the farm he found time to take on many public duties. In 1908, he helped 

organize a local school and became the first Secretary-Treasurer and remained the Secretary-Treasurer of Berlin 

School for 40 continuous years, which must be a record of service in this capacity. In 1915, he became councillor 

of the municipality of Star City and served continuously for 38 years, resigning from his councillor duties in 

1952. He was active in many farm organizations, helping to form a growers' club in 1909, and a United Farmers' 

local in 1925. He saw thirty years of service on his local telephone board, was active on the Anglican Church 

Board, was a member for the Canadian Legion and, perhaps because of all these activities in public life, it was 

inevitable that he became interested in politics. In 1925 he ran as a federal candidate on the Progressive ticket, at 

which time he was defeated. In 1929, he was elected a member of this assembly as a member for the Melfort 

Electoral District, and served one term as a Conservative under Mr. Anderson. 

 

In 1945, when the Melfort School Unit was formed, he was elected trustee and served as chairman for seventeen 

years. It was during the seventeen years, from 1945 to 1962, that he gave superb guidance to education through a 

trying period of change and helped achieve a greater degree of equality of educational opportunity as between 

urban and rural students. It was my privilege to serve with Mr. Greaves as trustee of the Melfort School Unit from 

1945 to 1952, during which time I learned to appreciate his many fine qualities. Unlike many public workers, Mr. 

Greaves, had honors paid to him during his lifetime. The Melfort. School Unit named a fine new school in Star 

City, "Greaves School" and also the previous government, Mr. Speaker, saw fit to honor him by naming a lake in 

north-western Saskatchewan, "Greaves lake", and on the occasion of his retirement from unit work in 1962, a 

huge testimonial banquet was given to him in Star City at which many educational, municipal and government 

officials paid tribute to the many years of service he had given. 

 

On the occasion of the banquet, a brief testimonial, a brief tribute to Mr, Greaves, was composed in honor of Mr. 

Greaves. This tribute was written by Mrs. Ross Morgan, a school teacher in Star City. At this time, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to read into the records this short tribute. I quote: 

 

This is a tribute to a man. The man was young, the unbroken sod, his homestead. His determination was his 

strength; his achievement was his reward; he was at once both the young and the old generation, young in 

spirit and hope, old in the responsibility of providing for homesteaders' families. The roots of democracy were 

deep within him, a heritage from his native England. He accepted the duties of citizenship and he gave 

leadership, for the spark 



February 10, 1965 

 129 

of both was in him. The fertile field challenged his husbandry and his labor increased its fruits. The right to 

education of the rural children led him to assist in the organization and the administration of the Berlin 

School. Local municipal administration caught his imagination, and claimed his energies for 38 years. 

Provincial politics took him to legislative fields, for a term of government. As years filled his mind with 

knowledge, experience and competence, so the years caused him to narrow his activities to education 

administration where he saw educational opportunities, once adequate, becoming a matter of urgency. 

 

The ways of a newer society and the needs of the grandchildren of homesteaders, had claimed his soul, until 

the years of service now close on fifty-three, and a man should finally have time to review the change of 

scene of half a century and to know, without conceit that he has given generously. 

 

That time has come. This is a tribute to a man. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this former soldier, pioneer farmer and public servant had only a short period to "review the 

changing scene of half a century". For two years after his formal retirement, predeceased by Mrs. Greaves, he 

passed on in December, 1964. At this time I would extend sincere sympathy, on behalf of this legislature, to the 

Greaves family in their bereavement and at the same time express a great pride one cannot help but feel in the 

accomplishments of a fine gentleman and a life, well and truly lived. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martin P. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to be given leave to associate myself and 

those that I represent with the sentiments that have been expressed both in the content of the motion and in the 

words of the hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale, (Mr. Willis). 

 

I, too, had the privilege of knowing this man and the other member, Mr. Aitken, only slightly, but I refer to 

remarks I made the other day in a similar context, when I feel that we in this house owe a great debt of gratitude 

to many men who have preceded us in this place, for having laid the groundwork to make it possible for us to live 

in the type of a land that we do, and I most humbly beg to be allowed to associate myself with those who have 

preceded me in this particular debate, to express my good wishes to the relatives and the family of these two 

members and to wish then well and let them know that our thoughts are with them, 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few moments to add a few words to what has 

been said by the leaders of the three parties in the assembly, with reference to the late James S. Aitken, I was one 

who had the privilege of knowing Jim Aitken and as his successor in this assembly, as the representative for 

Hanley, I would like to place a few words on the record in tribute to his memory. 

 

He was born at Milton farm near Headington in Scotland. He came to the New World in 1903, or 1904, at the age 

of 20. Two years later he came to the Cheviot district just east of Saskatoon and took up a homestead. It wasn't 

long before he came to be known throughout that district amongst the farm people as a competent farmer. He 

married Elizabeth Goodale of Milverton, Ontario, in 1914. Unfortunately she passed away in 1937, leaving them 

no children. He is survived only by one sister, living in New Zealand. 

 

Jim will be long remembered by the people of the district surrounding Saskatoon for the contribution which he 

made towards improving the quality of the community in which he lived. He always believed that there were 

greater awards to be sought after in life than that which is 



February 10, 1965 
 

 130 

known by the economists as disposable cash income. He sought instead to build a more kindly world, and his 

reward now that he is gone is the grateful appreciation of those who worked with him in his endeavors and who 

remember with appreciation his efforts. 

 

In his first years as a farmer in the Cheviot district he naturally became involved with farm organizations, with 

community projects of whatever kind. Inevitably he became Secretary of the first Progressive party organization. 

This new political organization, which he established there, was successful in electing a Progressive member to 

the legislature in the general election of 1921. Their member, elected in 1921, continued to represent the 

constituency of Hanley for the next twenty-three years and it is only a year or two ago that I had the privilege of 

saying a few words in memory of his service here. 

 

With a mind such as Jim had, always seeking progress, he had himself become active in the party which inherited 

the mantle of the Progressives — the Farmer Labour Party — and that party, as every member of the house 

knows, soon adopted the national affiliation and became known as the CCF. In 1944, Jim was the candidate for 

that party and he succeeded the member whom he had a part in launching in 1921 into provincial politics. He 

represented this constituency from 1944 to 1948. 

 

Perhaps it is worth noting in passing that every member elected to this house from the constituency of Hanley 

since 1921 was first elected as a Progressive or as a CCF member. No other constituency can make that claim. 

There are now less than six members, five I believe, in this house who sat with Jimmy Aitken in those years. He is 

remembered by all of these members as a quiet, shy-mannered man, a man of never-failing good humor and a 

man who respected the rights and feelings of his fellow mortals, whether they were members of the legislature or 

not. When Jim looked at another man, he didn't look at him as a Liberal, or a Conservative, or a CCFer, he looked 

at him as an equal. He was a kindly and gentle man; a man who did not leave any great mark for impetuosity or 

for fireworks but who left his firm mark on the minds of all who knew him as a kindly gentle person. 

 

I think perhaps this can be illustrated, or indicated best by an editorial contained in the Western Producer, just 

about the time he passed away. The Western Producer in its editorial, after his death, referred to an exchange that 

occurred in the Open Forum of the Western Producer after Jim had retired from active politics. This little 

exchange in the Open Forum, I think, illustrates better than I can the characteristics of the man. An anonymous 

contributor had written a letter to the Open Forum. This man was obviously of a different political party to the 

member who represented him in the legislature. He described his MLA as "an ignorant man, a disgrace to those he 

represents". 

 

A few weeks later Jim's contribution appeared. He replied that he he'd known the member in question, having 

served with him in the legislature, and went on to say: 

 

I fail to understand the unreasonable attitude of your anonymous reader, who was so critical of his MLA. If he 

has lived in that constituency for any length of time he should know better. This member is entitled to the 

respect of every member of the house and of all his constituents, irrespective of their political opinions. 

 

He said: 

 

I remember in 1944 we new members were also critical of this member, but our friends who had known him 

longer told us that no MLA served his constituents more faithfully nor more effectively, and after that we new 

members had sense to give honor where honor was due and there is a great deal of honor due to this particular 

member. 

 

The member in question at that time was a member who had sat on the opposite side of the house from Jim and 

who was known to both sides of the house as a doughty, political warrior who asked no quarter in political 

combat. Some of the older members here will, no doubt, know who the member was but after years of political 

conflict he came to the rescue of 



February 10, 1965 

 131 

this member of opposite political persuasion, in defence of what he considered was an unwarranted and 

unjustified attack from one of his constituents, a voter who was probably of the same political party as the late 

Mr. Aitken. 
 

The late member for Hanley (Mr. Aitken) was an extremely well informed student of Robert Burns. Many 

members may be familiar with the annual scholarly contribution which he made in the Western Producer every 

year about Burns' Day time. 
 

Like the Scottish poet, he knew what it was to follow the plow barefooted in the soil of his native land. I would 

ask the indulgence of the house and particularly the indulgence of my Scottish friends of the house for my accent 

while I read a small verse or two, one of Jim's favorite poems: 

 

Is there, for honest poverty, 

That hangs his head, and a'that? 

The coward-slave, we pass him by, 

We dare be poor for a'that! 

Our toils obscure, and a'that; 

The rank is but the guinea's stamp; 

The man's the gowd for a'that. 

 

A prince can make a belted knight, 

A Marquis, duke and a'that; 

But an honest man's aboon his might, 

Guid faith he mauna fa' that! 

For a'that, and a'that, 

Their dignities, and a'that, 

The pith o'sense, and pride o' worth, 

Are higher rank than a'that. 

 

What tho' on hamely fare we dine, 

Wear hodden-gray, and a'that; 

Gie fools their silks, and knaves their wine, 

A man's a man for a'that. 

For a'that, and a'that, 

Their tinsel show, and a'that; 

The honest man, tho' e'er sae poor, 

Is kind o'men for a'that. 

 

Then let us pray that come it may, 

As come it will for a'that; 

That sense and worth, o'er a' the earth, 

May bear the gree, and a'that. 

For a'that, and a'that, 

That man to man the world o'er, 

Shall brothers be for a'that. 

 

Ye see yon birkie, ca'd a lord, 

Wha struts and stares, and a'that; 

Tho' hundreds worship at his word, 

He's but a coof for a'that: 

For a'that and a'that, 

His riband, star, and a'that, 

The man of independent mind, 

He looks and laughs at a'that. 

 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Prince Albert): — Mr. Speaker, with the consent of the house, I would move, seconded by 

the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank): 

 

That the resolution just passed and the transcripts of the oral tributes in the memory of the deceased former 

members be communicated to the begreaved families on behalf of this assembly on behalf of Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 
 


