



















































Hansard: March 17, 1966


 

 

1259 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Thursday, March 17, 1966 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. W. E. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome a group of students from 

St. Paul‟s Separate School, which is located in the Regina East constituency. There are 27 students today 

accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Don Drozda. They are seated in the Speaker‟s gallery. I am sure 

everyone here would like to join with me in extending to them a warm welcome and in expressing the 

hope that their stay here today will be both informative and educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. A. M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw your attention and the 

attention of the house to the east gallery. The students are from the King Edward School in Saskatoon, 

and are our guests along with their teachers, Mr. Schultz and Mr. Hilton. It was necessary for them to 

leave home very early in the morning, and we all hope that this will be an educational and pleasant day 

for teachers and students alike. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE ST. PATRICK’S DAY 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day I would like to call the 

attention of the house to the fact that this is St. Patrick‟s Day. Officially there are nearly 2,000,000 

Canadians of Irish extraction, roughly 10 per cent of the total population. Mr. Speaker, on this day, 

however, the number claiming affinity with the Emerald Isle will be at least double or treble this figure. 

In anticipation of March 17th, perhaps we should give you the proper name of the man whose birthday 

we are celebrating, the Festival of Magonus Succetus Patricius, better known as St. Patrick, the Apostle 

of Ireland. 

 

According to the entries in the Irish annals, this year will be the 1,505th anniversary of his death, and in 

commemoration pilgrims from around the world will journey to Mount Patrick near the village of Saul 

in northern Ireland. Those who can‟t make it that far will be celebrating, Irish, or not. Now, the Irish are 

pretty high on themselves, and particularly on this day. There is a story about an Irishman and an 

Englishman and a Scotchman who were discussing their background. The Englishman said to the 

Scotchman, “If I couldn‟t be an Englishman, I would be a Scotchman”. The Scotchman said, “If I 

couldn‟t be a Scotchman, I would be an Englishman”. They looked to the Irishman who hadn‟t said 

anything up till then and they asked him, “If you couldn‟t be an Irishman what would you be”? He said, 

“Begorra, I‟d be ashamed”. 

 

You know the Irish are supposed to be good at analyzing 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1260 

political results. They tell a story about an Irish mayor in the city of Cork who ran for public office time 

and time again, and seven times in a row they say he received an acclamation. Finally, the eighth time he 

ran a man decided to run against him, his name was McTavish. After a very enthusiastic campaign, and 

all the results were in, the Irishman won again, but there were two votes cast against him. He was very 

disappointed, and his campaign manager was consoling him and said, “Well, it would be McTavish and 

one of his relatives”, and the Irish mayor who was elected said, “Yes, it has always been said that those 

Scotch people are clannish”. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the early history of Saskatchewan, even before this land area became a province, was 

surveyed and examined and reported on by an Irishman whose name is a household word in 

Saskatchewan. This person was John Palliser; his report on the open plains of the west is a remarkably 

accurate document even to this day. Some of his contentions and some of his criticisms of the land area 

will have been corrected by the building of the South Saskatchewan River Dam, but John Palliser‟s Irish 

insight and intuition have had a great influence on the history of the province of Saskatchewan. He was 

born in 1817. In 1847-48 he spent nine months buffalo hunting on the American plains and wrote a book 

about his experiences. In 1857 the British government asked him to lead an expedition to the Canadian 

prairies. His report, Mr. Speaker, after four years of investigation, was tabled in the British Parliament in 

1863, and is considered one of the most significant documents on the Prairie West that was ever printed. 

Palliser and his party literally scoured the west so that this report became a reference and a guide for 

those seeking knowledge about the province that we now live in. So to the descendants of Palliser, Mr. 

Speaker, to Irishmen everywhere on this St. Patrick‟s Day, I say, “The top of the morning”. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

EXPLANATION RE DELAYED DELIVERY OF LETTER 
 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I am 

Scotch and I am not going to join in making an Irish address this afternoon, but yesterday the member 

for Saskatoon rose in the house and objected because a letter had apparently been mislaid by the 

Department of Public Works, and I would like to read an explanation of what took place: 

 

The question has arisen as to what caused the delay in the above referenced letter. The following is what 

I have been able to determine. The letter was mailed in Saskatoon at 10.30 p.m. on March 13th. This 

would normally mean that this letter would be received in the 10 a.m. delivery the following morning at 

the Legislative Building. This being so, it would be sorted with the other mail immediately and placed in 

the box for pick-up by the appropriate department. This letter apparently was placed in the Department 

of Education box, the postal clerk assuming that room 263 applied to the Department of Education. This 

letter was received in the Dept. of Education mail room and it was recognized at that time as not 

belonging to the department. It was, therefore, placed in the outgoing mail for delivery back to the post 

office. It was received at the post office on the morning of Tuesday, the 15th, and as is normally the case 

with letters where the destination is not immediately known, it was placed aside until the morning mail 

had been sorted. In this 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1261 

particular instance the post office staff made calls to determine the agency which employed Mrs. 

Wallace to whom the letter was addressed. It was determined that she was employed by the opposition, 

and thus this letter was placed in the Leader of the Opposition‟s mail box on Tuesday at approximately 

11 a.m. The Leader of the Opposition‟s mail was not picked up after the first morning pick-up on 

Tuesday, March 15th, until the morning mail pick-up of March 16th. Incidentally this letter remained in 

the Leader of the Opposition‟s box from 11 a.m. on Tuesday until the morning pick-up on Wednesday at 

which time it was delivered. I might state that there are mailboxes in the post office that are receptacles 

for incoming mails for various agencies and those that concern the legislative assembly are as follows: 

There is a box for the legislative assembly wherein all mail addressed to MLAs or to a minister in care 

of the legislative assembly is placed. There are boxes for each of the ministers within the building where 

their mail is placed, and any mail received for ministers not located in the building but addressed to a 

minister of a department is forwarded to that department. 

 

There is further a mail box for the Leader of the Opposition. I regret the inconvenience but I would like 

to say to members that I know at times errors can be made and I would appreciate it very much if at any 

time there is an error made by the staff that it would be brought to the attention of the minister and the 

staff would not be embarrassed in the way that they have in this particular instance. I think I can speak 

for all the staff in the department in saying that I am quite certain that no member of the postal staff 

would purposely try to set aside the hon. member‟s letter. Of course it was not addressed to him, or any 

member of the opposition so there was some difficulty in determining just where the letter was to go, 

and so, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the co-operation of members that if they have any difficulties at any 

time with regard to the facilities in the building I would certainly appreciate them contacting me, giving 

me an opportunity to correct any errors that are made and to try to refrain from causing embarrassment 

to staff which I think is trying to do a good job for all of us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION: UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE RE FARM WORKERS 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion moved by Mr. Hooker 

(Notukeu-Willowbunch): 

 

That this assembly urges the Government of Canada to extend Unemployment Insurance Benefits to 

include farm workers, in order to overcome the difficulties of farmers in obtaining farm labour. 

 

Mr. H. A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very important resolution, and that we do 

wish to include farm help under unemployment insurance. This measure is long overdue. After all farm 

workers are people too. The resolution says that only because workers are hard to get, should they get 

unemployment insurance instead of saying the workers are in need and that if other people get 

unemployment insurance they should also. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a Liberal-sponsored resolution so 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1262 

what else can we expect. There are other areas of need also, and I would like to say a word about these. I 

think the farm worker, whether he is an owner, or a worker, should come under the provisions of the 

Workmens‟ Compensation Act. This would cover a much neglected field, and I will bring in an 

amendment to the resolution afterwards, Mr. Speaker, along this line. 

 

There has been much research done on this subject, especially in Ontario, and I will say a bit about this 

later. We read in the papers everyday about farm accidents. I have here a special edition of the Prince 

Albert Herald put out on Safety Week of last July. In the headlines in this special edition on Safety 

Week, we read such headlines, “Falls Leading Type of Mishap”. That is falls from buildings and things 

of this type. “Death Toll in Farm Fires Reaches an All Time High”, another one is “Human Problem 

Biggest Element in Accidents”, “Too many Children killed in Accidents on the Farm”, “Accidents Kill 

Farm Residents Every 3.7 Hours”, “Show Caution Near Animals”, “Over-Spraying Danger of Seeding”. 

 

This is just to emphasize the fact that there are many accidents on the farm, and that this is something 

that should be looked into, because these people do not have the normal protection that is given people 

in industry. I think that it is about time that they did get special or equal consideration in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wherever you live in Canada and whatever kind of farming we are engaged in, an element 

of danger is always present. The possibility of accidental death or injury is much too great. From the 

national averages, the survey shows that 1 out of 25 of farm population was injured in a farm accident. 

This survey that I am mentioning is the one that the Canadian Chamber of Commerce put out. Even 

more sobering is the fact that one in every 50 of these accidents was fatal. Of those injured almost 50 per 

cent were hospitalized; 27 per cent of all farm accidents involve machinery. Certain age groups appear 

to be more accident-prone than others and the survey showed 33.3 per cent of all accidents reported 

happened to those in the 13 to 20 age group. These statistics are from a survey taken by the Canadian 

Chamber of Commerce. 

 

Probably the most complete survey undertaken was by the Ontario Department of Agriculture. The 

survey was conducted on a county and district basis under the leadership of the agricultural 

representative. During January and February, 1959, local committees were formed, consisting of the 

agricultural representative and representatives of one or more farm organizations. In some instances the 

reporting group did not necessarily represent an existing organization or organizations. Each county and 

district divided into small accident-reporting areas, according to communities, telephone service, traffic 

patterns, etc. A local accident reporter was selected and made responsible for reporting all farm 

accidents in that area. All told slightly more than 5,500 farm people were enrolled as accident reporters, 

serving on a voluntary basis. In most cases they were given a short period of training before 

commencing their duties. 

 

The local reporters forwarded there reports to a county office. At the end of each third month period, the 

reports were forwarded to the Dept. of Agriculture for coding and analysis. Progress reports, 

summarizing the results, were issued by the department at the end of each quarter. These served to show 

the reporters the results of their work and to maintain interest in 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1263 

the survey. 

 

Following the end of the survey in February, 1960, the Department of Agriculture issued a summary of 

the statistics for the full 12 month period. In addition each county received a summary of its own 

accident figures to serve as the basis for a safety education program. Since then additional statistics have 

been compiled providing further detail in specific fields. 

 

Without the enthusiastic support of farm people the survey would have been impossible. Co-operation 

was given in all phases of this survey, and willingness to provide the desired information on farm 

accidents and to serve on committees or as accident reporters contributed greatly to the successful 

completion of the survey. 

 

I mention this report because it shows an enthusiastic and able participation by the various communities. 

I think this is important to make people aware of their own danger in this area. The survey was 

frightening and purposeful as it brought facts before the farm people and urban ones as well. Highlights 

from the summary of the farm accidents for a 12 month period were: fatalities — 293; permanent 

injuries — 336; temporary injuries — 5,868; total days lost — 112,493; medical bills — $700,977; 

property damage — $5,253,799. 

 

The Saskatchewan Department of Health put out some figures in 1962 on Saskatchewan accidents, and 

they showed the farm fatalities of that year were 161 as compared with 293 in Ontario. The farm 

population in Ontario is approximately 500,000 while ours is 300,000 and the rate of farm accidents 

compared with Ontario shows we are nearly as badly off as Ontario is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have done something about it and I think they have gone about it in the proper way, 

that is by letting the farm population take a look at themselves by a large involvement of the people, 

then coming up with some answers. 

 

The Ontario legislature came up with a bill in 1963 or 1964 allowing farmers to come under the 

Compensation Act in a voluntary way or on an optional basis. In March, 1965, the employee was 

covered on a compulsory basis while owner-operators were on an optional basis. Here is what the Hon. 

Mr. Rowntree, Minister of Labour, said in the house at that time: 

 

. . . but the fact is that one of the major steps indicated by this bill is the extension of the act to 

agricultural workers. Up to now it has been on an optional basis — on an elective basis. 

 

and perhaps this is the way we will have to start in Saskatchewan, I am not too sure about that. 

 

Now it will be on a compulsory basis with an optional arrangement and provision for owner-operators 

— if I could describe a farmer operating his own farm in that fashion — to provide for his wife and his 

children, depending on the relationship which exists between them and with respect to the operation of 

the farm. This is a major step forward. There is no question that accidents do happen, bearing in mind 

the nature and the type of the machinery with which a modern farm, and indeed most farms in this 

province, are equipped. I think the time is ripe to take this step, and I tell the house 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1264 

that this step is taken with the co-operation . . . 

 

Mr. J. B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I thought we were 

dealing with the resolution: 

 

That this assembly urges the government of Canada to extend unemployment insurance benefits to 

include farm workers in order to overcome the difficulties of farmers in obtaining farm labour. 

 

Now, what the hon. gentleman may be saying is quite relevant, but I think he has strayed a long way 

from the resolution. We have been into the accident involvement for some time. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I did mention the possibility . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I trust that the member will get himself in order, and possibly relate his remarks 

. . . 

 

Mr. Broten: — I have an amendment to the resolution, Mr. Speaker, which I would like to put forth at 

this time which would bring me in order. I did mention that I would bring in an amendment after and 

this would be in order. If it isn‟t I will bring this amendment in at this time, or can I keep on and do it 

afterwards? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I would suggest that the member can choose his own time if he wishes to move 

his amendment. He is speaking to the motion and after he moves his amendment, he will be speaking to 

the motion and the amendment. These are usually submitted when the member has completed his 

speech. This is the customary time to do it, but there is no law that says he has to do it; he can do it now. 

 

Mr. Broten: — It seems to me that I have seen other people in this house speak on an amendment and 

then bring the amendment in after they were through. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

I think the time is ripe to take this step, and I tell the house that this step is taken with the co-operation 

and as a joint effort — if I could put it that way — between the hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Stewart) and myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is time that we did something like this in Saskatchewan. Our farm people and 

workers need more stable protection then they are getting at the present time. Now the last part of the 

amendment speaks for itself. Under the conditions which Saskatchewan finds itself in and the farming 

operations being what they are today, our farm boys and girls and farmers themselves need more 

practical and technical knowledge and training. And I am sure that the house will agree that we do need 

more training and we are requesting more training in this area. At this time I would beg leave of the 

assembly to move the following amendment: 

 

That resolution no. 7 be amended by inserting after the 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1265 

word “worker” in the second line the following words: 

 

And also urges the government of Saskatchewan to give consideration to extending the operations of 

the Workmens‟ Compensation Accident Fund Act to make its benefits available to farm laborers and 

also to give consideration to providing in many centres in the province, vocational and technical 

course in farming operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question before the house is on the proposed amendment to the motion by the 

member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker). 

 

Mr. G. G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, on Tuesday, March 15th‟s proceedings 

you gave a ruling on an amendment and you gave a quotation from page 414 of Erskine May‟s 

Parliamentary Practice, 17th edition: 

 

The object of an amendment may be either to modify a question in such a way as to increase its 

acceptability or to present to the house a different proposition as an alternative to the original question. 

 

and further on page 416: 

 

The fundamental rule that debate must be relevant to a question necessarily involves the rule that 

every amendment must be relevant to the question on which the amendment is proposed. 

 

My point, Sir, is that the two alternatives that the preceding speaker mentioned are not alternatives. They 

are additions to the intent of the original resolution; they deal with two separate jurisdictions; they deal 

with accident insurance and also education. I would ask you to rule that the amendment is out of order 

on these grounds, also the member from Pelly (Mr. Larson) who seconded was not in his seat at the 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — To begin with I don‟t know whether he is in his seat or not. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) will second it. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order raised by the member from 

Elrose (Mr. Leith), I would like to point out that nobody suggested that the member in his amendment 

was putting up alternatives to that contained in the motion. The purpose of the motion, of course, is to 

overcome difficulties of farmers in obtaining farm labour, and the motion gives one thing that might be 

done to help overcome those difficulties. All the amendment does is suggest two other things that would 

make working on the farm more attractive to working people, would give them the benefits of the 

Workmens‟ Compensation Act. That would be one benefit, and undoubtedly some people would 

probably turn down a job on a farm because this protection wasn‟t there. The other thing it suggests is to 

take steps to ensure that there will be a supply of trained farm labor. Now, as for the point raised by the 

member for Elrose, (Mr. Leith) about different agencies, I don‟t think this cuts any ice at all. These are 

all things which we can argue 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1266 

would help to solve the problem of farmers getting the necessary farm labor. Now I would suggest that 

the amendment is in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question arises in my mind, and I am not quite sure of it myself, but here in the 

original motion we are asking the federal jurisdiction to give something, and the amendment asks the 

provincial jurisdiction to do some other thing. Until such time as I have the opportunity to consult the 

oracles, perhaps the house would let me do that and defer my ruling until later, until I have had time to 

settle my own views on that and on some of the other points that were raised by the members. At the 

moment this is the one point that I have in my own mind. It hasn‟t been touched on by any of the people 

speaking to the point of order. 

 

Mr. M. P. Pederson (Arm River): — Are you suggesting that this motion stands then, Mr. Speaker, 

until you are able to obtain a ruling on this? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is what I am asking the house to let me do. 

 

MOTION: OLD AGE SECURITY PENSION 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): 

 

That this assembly is of the opinion that the government of Canada should increase the old age 

security pension to $100 per month payable at age 65 without a means test. 

 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words on this 

resolution. First of all I think that all of us in this assembly would agree that the resolution put forth by 

the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) emphasizes and points its finger at a need in our Canadian 

society that no one will disagree with. I am sure that all of us in this assembly, and in every assembly 

across this country, and of course, the federal government as well, would agree that our old age 

pensioners are certainly in the need of help and assistance that is immediate and vital. 

 

I think that the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) did a very adequate job and was sincere in his 

approach in pointing out some of the problems that exist with our old age pensioners and our senior 

citizens. He gave us a brief resume, if I recall correctly, of the contribution of these old age senior 

citizens in the building of our province and our nation. I like to go back and think that he was very 

justified in his commendation of those people. Certainly, today we emphasize the need of higher 

education for our young people in order to meet the challenges of the 1960‟s, but when we look back on 

our senior citizens and recognize that they came west armed not with degrees, diplomas or wealth, but 

only with courage, desire and initiative, all of us will recognize that this is an area that commands our 

immediate attention. 

 

All of us are aware that the federal government one year ago, or just over a year ago, passed what is 

known as the Canada Pension Plan. As this comes in operation, of course, more and more of our elderly 

people will achieve a comfortable living. However there is one problem with the Canada Pension Plan 

and that is the fact that it is a self-contributing plan. In other 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1267 

words it is based on earning power, it is based on contributions over a period of time. Because these 

contributions over a period of time are based on earning capacity many of these elderly citizens of today 

will be unable to achieve the benefits that come from the Canada Pension Plan. I think of those senior 

citizens that are already retired, those that are already at the age that they are now receiving old age 

security assistance. I think of those that will be retiring in the next year or two and have not had an 

opportunity to contribute enough in this plan so that it will be worthwhile. I think, too, that all of us will 

recognize that the immediate problem is that $75 a month is not enough for a decent living for any old 

age pensioner, or any of our senior citizens. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I think the real question is what is the best and most effective means of looking 

after these people. For many years now the people of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada have been 

harnessed or shackled to a problem regarding our senior citizens that has been a political football. On 

every election we have had a bidding competition between the various political parties in Canada. It 

seems that the old age pensioner‟s security and his standard of living is based not on needs and rising 

cost of living but rather on the competition between political parties to achieve the votes of the general 

public. I think that, because of this, this resolution has an inherent weakness. Substantially it asks for a 

$25 a month increase for our old age pensions, from $75 to $100 a month, but it doesn‟t attack the real 

basic problem. It doesn‟t find a solution, that is a real solution or a lasting solution, it doesn‟t tie the 

income of our old age pensioners to needs, to rising costs of living, and to future necessities. It doesn‟t 

tie the cost of living to our old age pensioners to individual circumstances or individual problems. 

Therefore, next year, or the year after, we will find another resolution in this house or in other 

assemblies across the nation, asking for another increase in the old age pension. I think because of that, 

this is a weakness in this resolution which will only result, in my opinion and judgment, in another 

political football and another bidding competition in the future. 

 

Therefore, we as legislators in this assembly and assemblies right across Canada, have a very serious 

and a grave responsibility. I think that, in evaluating all welfare measures, whether they be in the area of 

old age security, whether they be in the field of health, education, or social welfare, we must take several 

very important factors into consideration. No. 1, of course, is the need of those that require assistance. 

No. 2, is the fact that there is a danger that the welfare state today, and always will, have to be spending 

huge amounts of public funds and revenues that are directed not only to people who need it, but to all 

classes of people whether they need it or not. Third, I think that this is a great drain on the public 

treasury. To use a practical illustration when you consider the fact that this increase of $25 is estimated 

to cost, or to bring about an increase in the cost of old age security from $1,000,000,000 to over 

$2,000,000,000 by 1970, I believe that the responsibility of legislatures right across the country is to 

evaluate, first of all, whether or not the expenditures by the federal treasury, or this assembly, are really 

attacking the problem itself. The second is that of facing priorities. When we consider the huge 

expenditures that are going to be required in education, in hospital construction, and, of course, in 

medicare, if this is brought about by the spring of 1967, we can realize that it is 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1268 

vitally important that any welfare measure that we recommend as an assembly, or that we recommend to 

the federal government should be directed first and foremost to those people that really need it. 

 

Two suggestions have been brought forth and received a wide public discussion in the last few months. 

The first, is to use the vehicle of the Canada Pension Plan to do this. This has several very real 

advantages. No. 1, is because it directs itself towards those who require assistance. The second, does not 

stop at $100, because I sincerely believe that $100 is not enough for many old age pensioners in Canada. 

But I think it is vital that if we are going to give an old age pensioner $100 or $125, whatever his needs 

require, that we should first of all know that he needs it, and that we are not giving to thousands of 

people who do not need it. 

 

I believe that the Canada Assistance Plan is geared to individual circumstances. It can be focused on the 

family itself; it can be directed towards rent, drugs and health, and sickness and other unforeseen 

circumstances and expenditures. 

 

There is a second suggestion that has been discussed in Canada the last few months, and, of course, the 

whole problem of old age security has received a great deal of attention because of this second 

suggestion. This interest has been added by the report of the special senate committee on ageing. If you 

recall that the recommendation of the senate committee was substantially this, that all Canadians 65 and 

over, be guaranteed a minimum income, I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is the real answer to this problem. 

It also makes some concrete recommendations for the immediate future. For example, to start, it 

recommends that a single person would receive a guaranteed income of $1,260 a years, $105 a month, a 

married couple would receive $2,220 a years. In other words, here would be a plan which would permit 

people, our senior citizens who would require and need it, to live with the pride and the dignity that all 

members of this assembly would hope that they could. 

 

There is also another suggestion, that the means test be tied to the income tax procedure, and I think this 

is rather a pleasant departure. Instead of asking people to assess their own individual needs, property and 

resources, it would be done on a voluntary return which most Canadians accept as a part of their 

everyday business. This method of tying it to the income tax return removes much of the unfavorable 

aspects of the means test. 

 

I think, too, that one of the brightest features is the fact that it would cost, instead of $700,000,000 or 

$800,000,000 or perhaps over $1,000,000,000 by 1970, it is estimated to be in the neighborhood of 

$100,000,000, and I think this in itself is a very vital and important aspect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a sound and reasonable plan to direct assistance to those Canadians 

who are most in need of it. Therefore, rather than suggest that we as an assembly ask the federal 

government to pay old age pensioners $100 a month, let‟s not tie it to $100 a month sum, let‟s 

recommend that the federal government give to all old age pensioners and to all our senior citizens, a 

guaranteed minimum income. These people will then find that their income will not be tied to political 

campaigns or political parties but will be taken out of the round of politics and instead will be tied to the 

cost of living and to their own individual circumstances. 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1269 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move the following amendment, seconded by my 

seatmate, the hon. member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher): 

 

That all the words after the word “should” in line 2 be deleted and the following words added: 

 

give immediate consideration to implementing the recommendations of the Special Senate Committee 

on Ageing so that all Canadians over the age of 65 be assured of a guaranteed minimum income. 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, in entering this debate on the motion and the 

amendment, I would like to remark first on one or two of the things that have been said this afternoon by 

the member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). 

 

First of all, he deplored the fact that he felt old age pensioners had become a political football. Well, I 

can‟t agree with that statement. The matter has been raised over and over again simply because the old 

age pensioners have never had an adequate amount to live on, and so there was pressure from people 

who felt this way. But I don‟t think that we can argue this from the basis of whether or not it is a 

political football. 

 

He stated several things that were priorities, that he felt first of all need had to be considered. I know the 

hon. member agrees with me that there is a need here to do something about old age pensions. He spoke 

about the dangers of the welfare state. Well, you know, after all the welfare state is just a state which has 

the greatest concern for the welfare of its people. That is what governments are for, and that is what true 

democracy means. He talked about the drain on the funds. Well, I would like to deal with that later in 

my speech. He talked about placing priorities. I know we have to place priorities, education, medicare, 

but one of the top priorities in my point of view is to see that our senior citizens are well looked after. 

 

Now, he talked about the fact that in the amendment they are suggesting in the terms of the Senate 

sub-committee, there wasn‟t a means test of the embarrassing type; but it was just filling out income tax 

forms, and that is better. But in the same breath, or just a little bit before, he pointed out that the amount 

suggested was really not enough in itself, and that the additional amount necessary should be handled by 

the Canada Assistance Plan. They would require the same type of means test to which we do object. 

 

Now, I think there is general agreement, I can say this on starting out, on both sides of the house, in this 

day and age, and in the light of the steeply rising cost of living, that no person can live in decency and in 

dignity on $75 a month. I think that we should use that as a starting point that we all agree on that. But 

there is a difference here between the amendment and the motion, quite a significant difference. The 

motion asks that federal government raise the old age pension to $100 a month, payable at 65, which is 

the normal age to retire. Now as an alternative, the member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) is 

suggesting in his amendment that we adopt what is essentially the Senate committee‟s recommendation 

of a guaranteed minimum of $105 a month for all those single people at age of 65, and $185 for a 

couple. Apparently they feel this is a better way of handling the situation. Now, I will agree with the 

hon. member 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1270 

that there is some merit in this type of plan, but I can also see some very obvious and very serious 

weaknesses as well. It seems to me that actually the arguments boil down to this, that for the Senate‟s 

recommendation of a guaranteed wage, that a guaranteed income would be less burdensome on the 

taxpayer and would channel aid to those most in need. That was the first. Secondly, I noticed that the 

Hon. Mr. MacEachen when he was here spoke about this. He said it would remove what he called the 

anomalies in the old age pension plan of paying higher pensions to many people who may not need such 

assistance. 

 

I wouldn‟t be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if this is exactly what the Liberal government in Ottawa has in 

mind. I think they feel there has been pressure not only by other political parties but within their own 

party. I know many people said after the last election that the chief reason the Liberals did not get their 

majority, that they refused to do anything about old age pensions, and we have heard remarks from 

various Liberal members down in Ottawa to this effect. So I feel that there is a fair possibility that in 

order to get themselves off the hook that they might accept this instead of the other suggestion which is 

included in our motion. 

 

The Liberals have been in trouble many times over old age pensions. You remember some years back, 

when the old age pension was raised only $6 a month, that during that election the term “Six Bucks 

Harris” was spoken all across the country; and I think they don‟t want to again be in such a position. 

 

Now coming back again to the amendment, which the hon. member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) 

moved, much the same arguments were used by the hon. Premier when he sat in the House of Commons 

with the CCF group there. Much to the horror of his colleagues in the house, at that time he spoke 

against the universal old age pension, and he wanted to replace it with a pension on a means test. His 

argument again was that some people were going to get it that didn‟t need that pension. Of course, Mr. 

Speaker, in the case of wealthy people, most of the old age pension goes back to the Treasury anyway, 

in the form of income tax. 

 

Now, I would like to point out what I feel are the basic weaknesses in the amendment, or in the Senate 

committee‟s recommendation. Here is one weakness of the guaranteed income plan. What about a 

person whose income is slightly more than $105 a month, perhaps $106, $110, $125, and so on? These 

people would be left out, and yet these people certainly need an additional $25 a month. The Toronto 

Metropolitan Planning Council some time ago estimated that the very minimum an elderly person could 

possibly live on was $127.47 a month. Of course, that was some time ago, and costs of living have risen 

substantially since that time. I noted also that the sub-committee which recently had a national 

conference of the ageing stated that the absolute minimum for a single person is $138.96 and for a 

married couple $232.82, which is considerably more than the $105 and $185 suggested by the Senate 

committee and by the amendment. 

 

Of course, to make that up you would have to go to the Canada Assistance Plan and have a humiliating 

type of means test. The Senate recommendation then denies much needed financial assistance, that extra 

$25 to a very large group of people, all those with incomes over $105 a month. Mr. Speaker, there are 

thousands of people in this category who would be left out. 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1271 

Now, coming to the matter of costs, the Prime Minister in the House of Commons suggested that the 

idea of paying $100 a month to old age pensioners at 65 on a universal basis without a means test was an 

irresponsible suggestion, and he estimated that the cost would be somewhat around $855,000,000 a year. 

He said that the cost of dropping old age pensions to age 65 would be $630,000,000 and to raise the 

pension to $100 a month would mean a total of $855,000,000. But, Mr. Speaker, these figures require 

much closer examination than this and I would like to do that. 

 

Remember this, and this was pointed out in the House of Commons, that the government is already 

committed to lowering old age pensions progressively to 65 starting this year, in 1966. When this 

transitional period is over, paying only $75 a month to this age group, will cost $475,000,000 in any 

case; so now we are not talking about $855,000,000, we are talking about $380,000,000. Then I would 

like to point this out too, that in the fiscal year 1955-56, the Old Age Security Fund, there was a surplus 

there of $216,500,000. Instead of adding to this surplus if the surplus was used, that reduces the extra 

amount to $163,000,000 so it is getting down. Then there are so many more things to consider, the 

federal and provincial governments are now spending $100,000,000 under the Old Age Assistance Act, 

and, of course, this would become absolutely unnecessary if the motion that we are suggesting is 

adopted. There is a further $100,000,000 reduction. Millions more will be spent under the Canada 

Assistance Plan, much of which would be unnecessary if the Old Age Assistance was raised to $100 at 

the age of 65. Then there are other things to consider as well. If the amendment was to be adopted and 

the Senate plan implemented this would add substantially increased expense by the income tax branch in 

checking the returns of many thousands of people to determine whether or not they are eligible for this 

extra $25. This would be a substantial cost, make no mistake about it. 

 

Of course, you must remember to add to this a sizable amount that will be returned to federal treasury by 

way of extra income tax payments for those in the higher tax brackets. So that when you think of all 

these things you realize that the additional cost of raising the old age pension to $100 a month at 65 is 

nowhere near $855,000,000, considerably less, probably less than a third of the amount that was 

suggested by the Prime Minister. 

 

Now then speaking earlier in the debate, the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) asked this question, 

“Where will we get the money?” Well, of course, we have shown that it isn‟t going to be so much 

money; it is going to be considerably less than that $855,000,000, not even a third of that. As Mr. 

Knowles pointed out in the House of Commons debate on this subject, when the New Democratic Party 

suggested $100 a month and lowering the age to 65, government spokesmen said that this would cause a 

tax increase at one point or another. However, after the Canada Pension Plan Committee turned down 

this motion, the government had a change of heart and announced that the eligible age would be 

gradually brought down to 65 a year and that this step could be taken without an increase of taxation 

because of our growing productivity. And we must consider our growing productivity when we think 

about old age pensions and we must consider that our old people have a right to share in this growing 

productivity. But to answer the hon. Minister of Social Welfare‟s question, “Where would we get the 

money?” Well first of all we could abolish the Senate and that would be a substantial saving 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1272 

in more ways than one. We would save $2,800,000 a year and that would pay a lot of $25 to a lot of old 

age pensioners. Secondly, as you know the old age security pension plan is financed by 3 per cent sales 

tax, 3 per cent surcharge on Corporations and 4 per cent surcharge on the first $3,000 of taxable income. 

Now I can see no good reason why we should stop at that first $3,000 of taxable income. If we need to 

raise money for pensions so that they can be on the acceptable level, there is no good reason why a 

person who earns $20,000 a year shouldn‟t pay more into the fund than a person who earns say $5,000 a 

year. Another thing you could do to raise some of the money would be to raise the surcharge on 

corporation taxes to 4 per cent and make it the same as the surcharge on income tax. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — We should have done that in the first place. 

 

Mrs. Cooper: — Yes. Then you could recapture, and this is important, a good part of the increased 

amount in the form of income tax. Next there would be a greater return to the federal treasury simply 

through the impetus that the payments of such a pension would give to the general turnover of the 

commerce in this country. Raising the old age pension as we suggest, and this is very important, would 

replace many welfare payments already made. Now in the light of this amendment I would like to give it 

a little further consideration, probably say a little bit more on it, so I would beg you to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. lady member has asked me to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: AMENDMENT RE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Blakeney. The debate 

continuing on the motion, in amendment thereto, it was moved by the Hon. Mr. Heald, seconded by the 

Hon. Mr. Gardiner: 

 

That paragraphs (2) and (3) be deleted and the following words added: 

 

(2) Urges the Government of Canada to convene immediately a federal-provincial Conference on 

constitutional amendment to determine the precise nature of the objections that the Province of 

Quebec has to the proposed Act contained in the White Paper issued by the federal government 

entitled “An Act to provide for the amendment in Canada of the Constitution of Canada”; 

 

(3) Instructs the representative of the Government of Saskatchewan attending such a Conference to 

report to this Assembly the result of this constitutional Conference so as to permit full discussion in 

this Assembly of the objections put forward by the province of Quebec; 

 

(4) Recommends to the Government of Canada that, in view of the objections of the province of 

Quebec, the matter of constitutional amendment be referred to a committee of the House of 

Commons for consideration and that such 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1273 

committee be directed to hold public hearings and report thereon to Parliament; or, alternatively, that 

the matter be submitted by the Government of Canada to the Senate of Canada with a request that it 

be considered by a committee thereof appointed for such purposes and that the committee hold 

public hearings and report thereon to Parliament. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, in my remarks last year in this house to a 

resolution involving the proposed formula for the amendment of our constitution, or as it has become 

popularly known the Fulton-Favreau formula, I reviewed in considerable detail the provisions of the 

formula. Now today, Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to dwell on these provisions again this year, as every 

member of the house received a copy of the White Paper tabled in the House of Commons on the 

subject. However, I believe that to appreciate the resolution before us, moved by the hon. member from 

Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), it is necessary to briefly recall to hon. members the basic provisions of the 

formula and the environment within which our constitution must operate. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, 

that I told members of the house last year that in 1964, agreement in principle had been obtained with all 

the provinces in Canada on the proposed formula, whereby any major change in the distribution of 

power in the constitution would require the unanimous consent of all provinces and, of course, the 

federal government. You will also recall that this unanimity included the matter of the French language, 

education and the amending formula itself. I also stated at that time when I spoke in the house last year, 

Mr. Speaker, that included in the formula, the Fulton-Favreau formula, were sections allowing the 

delegation of legislative power to and from the federal government, up and down. This, I suggested, 

would provide a degree of flexibility to the constitution because, as I intimated last year, I think it is 

generally recognized that the requirement of unanimous consent commits the constitution to a degree of 

rigidity that might prejudice certain provinces, certain members of confederation, due to the local nature 

of the particular matter involved. 

 

At that time, Mr. Speaker, I also mentioned that the practical position of our constitution at this point in 

time is that no important amendment to the constitution would be sought by the federal government 

without the consent of all the provinces. This fact, I think, is very well brought out by the White Paper 

which the hon. members have read, I am sure. You may recall, Mr. Speaker, that I advised the members 

of the house last year that attempts had been made over the past many years to arrive at an acceptable 

formula. Now the Fulton-Favreau formula, of course, in my view, has come closest to obtaining the 

necessary consent of all the provinces. The resolution passed by the house last year approved the 

formula but recommended to the government of Canada that the proposed act be submitted to a 

committee of the House of Commons for consideration and this committee be directed to hold public 

hearings and report to parliament. And alternatively in the resolution last year, it was suggested that the 

proposed act be submitted to the Senate with the request that it be considered by a committee 

empowered to hold public hearings with a subsequent report to parliament. Mr. Speaker, I think it is fair 

to say that the resolution contemplated such hearings either before or after the formula domiciled the 

constitution in Canada. In January of this year the province of Quebec advised the government of 

Canada and here I am quoting from the Canadian Press release: 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1274 

Quebec was shelving indefinitely the Fulton-Favreau formula to amend the Constitution in Canada. 

 

It may be difficult to appreciate why the sudden change in heart of the province of Quebec, although I 

would suggest that there is a hint of the reason for it in the statement made by Premier Lesage which 

was referred to by the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) when he moved his resolution the 

other day. At this moment I don‟t know what action the Prime Minister and the government of Canada 

intend to take in view of Quebec‟s refusal to approve the formula. I think I can say that one of the 

considerations is probably a parliamentary committee of some sort to consider various methods of 

providing for the Constitution‟s amendment. I think also that the Prime Minister feels, as most of us who 

are involved in federal-provincial relations and in dealing with interprovincial problems, that some 

answer, and a fairly immediate answer is required to our constitutional problem in this country. For a 

moment however, Mr. Speaker, I would like to leave this question of what, in the view of Quebec‟s 

refusal, comes now, and turn to a consideration of the resolution before this house. 

 

As I said last year, there is no real issue or difference between us in this house as to the desirability of 

domiciling our Constitution in Canada. I am certain that all Canadians would agree generally that the 

proper place for the amendment of our Constitution is in the federal government. What may be an issue, 

and is probably an issue, is the degree of urgency in the matter of bringing the Constitution to Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, if I interpreted properly the remarks made by the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. 

Blakeney) the other day in moving his resolution, he felt that there was no real urgency about this matter 

and that rather than institute the Fulton-Favreau formula we could go along as we have been doing in the 

past, gaining an amendment here and there with the consent of the provinces. Now, Mr. Speaker, I do 

not agree with this view because I think there is more urgency than the hon. member from Regina West 

is willing to concede. Aside completely from the international image which we project in world affairs 

in the international community, I think there is a domestic urgency for the repatriation of our 

Constitution. Mr. Speaker, there are national issues facing us today that demand an immediate solution, 

and until we find the solutions Canada cannot operate as effectively as she might do in both national and 

international matters. I spoke of many of these issues last year, Mr. Speaker, and, if anything, in my 

view, the urgency at arriving at solutions to these has become more apparent in the past 12 months. I 

don‟t think I am alone in my concern and alarm for immediate action on the Constitution. As long ago as 

January of 1962, over four years ago, the former Attorney General, the member for Hanley (Mr. 

Walker), through his department, the Department of the Attorney General, published what was then the 

province‟s position with respect to the amendment of the Constitution. This resume, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, was tabled in the house. I would like to quote from it, particular portions of it. The heading of 

the document was called “Practical Considerations” and I quote: (The former Attorney General was 

reporting on this conference he had attended or that representatives had attended.) 

 

The following matters were cited by Saskatchewan at the January, 1961 conference in Ottawa, as 

examples of the sort of problems the ultimate solution of which must lie in Constitutional amendment. 

Some of the necessary Constitutional changes are even now overdue, 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1275 

This is Mr. Walker talking three or four years ago: 

 

and if (as provided in the draft act) the agreement of every province must be obtained then this nation 

can expect to see few if any such changes or any other necessary changes which may become apparent 

from time to time. 

 

And then he detailed some of the problems which I would suggest have become even more acute in the 

period since that time. He listed four or five areas of concern. 

 

(1) In the field of legislation for the prevention of fraudulent transactions in securities, the need for 

federal intervention is very apparent. There are many possible constitutional pitfalls in present 

legislation centering on such knotty problems as the overlapping of criminal law and provincial 

regulatory legislation, provincial regulations or interprovincial trading and so on. Of more importance 

there is a great need for uniformity of securities legislation and administration across the country. 

 

Of course if it was true then, I think it is true with even more force today. The second point mentioned in 

this document which was tabled at that time and I quote again: 

 

(2) For 30 years it has been apparent that the marketing of natural products is a matter best suited for 

federal control, particularly with respect to those commodities entering into interprovincial and export 

trade. After years of inconclusive constitutional litigation on this subject some reform is called for. 

 

And I would certainly agree with that. And the third point that he made at that time: 

 

(3) The conciliation of industrial disputes and the regulation of collective bargaining in nation-wide 

industries with national-wide union organizations, such as steel and packing houses should be carried 

out at the national level. At the moment the federal authorities have jurisdiction only where the 

industry involved happens to be one which for some reason comes under federal control. In the 

meantime individual provinces and individual provincial tribunals are trying to cope, on a provincial 

basis, with problems which are really national in scope. Similarly the federal government should have 

concurrent powers over certain labor standards. 

 

The next point which was mentioned in this document: 

 

(4) We still have in this country the anomalous situation that the federal government, which is always 

capable of making treaties and multilateral convention, is frequently incapable of implementing them. 

Surely this is the sharpest reminder of our international immaturity. 

 

And the fifth area of concern which was quoted in this document: 

 

(5) Concern has been expressed in some quarters about the significant role of foreign corporations in 

the 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1276 

developing of Canadian resources and industries. In this matter the federal government can exercise 

certain powers of control through taxation and tariffs and so on. On the other hand the provinces can 

exercise other controls particularly with respect to foreign development of our natural resources. Some 

people may feel that a certain realignment of powers, perhaps those of both the federal and provincial 

government, could aid in the solution of this problem. 

 

That‟s the end of quotations from that document which my predecessor tabled in this house a few years 

ago. I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that I share with the hon. member from Hanley (Mr. Walker), 

my predecessor, a concern for the immediate amendment of the Constitution. I do not, however, hold the 

same pessimistic view of the Fulton-Favreau formula as the then Attorney General (Mr. Walker) 

indicated in this publication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of this urgency I am most concerned that our attention in Canada will be turned not 

to strengthening the position of the government in Ottawa to increase its legislative powers to effectively 

control these problem areas, but rather that we will be immobilized, rendered immobile, by a sort of 

fascination or preoccupation as to how the Constitution of Canada should be amended. I fear, Mr. 

Speaker, that we will be so busy negotiating and discussing an amending formula that we will ignore the 

present problems facing Canada today. I know in the meetings that I have attended in Ottawa, 

Constitutional meetings, every time the question of particular amendments to the Constitution was raised 

it was pushed to the side, sort of swept under the rug and covered up with a statement that this could be 

the subject of discussion and negotiation later on after an amending formula was agreed upon. Well now 

there have been numerous Constitutional meetings since 1935 and it appears now that we are once again 

at an impasse that will take another series of Constitutional discussions and negotiations over what 

shape the amending formula should take, rather than facing the real issues that confront Canada as a 

nation today. Mr. Speaker, for this reason I was most disappointed at the stand which Quebec took in 

this matter, since I think I have some appreciation of how difficult it will be to go back to the conference 

table to try to arrange a formula acceptable to the province of Quebec and at the same time acceptable to 

the rest of Canada. And it will be more difficult, I suggest, because of certain statements to which I will 

refer later on, made in the past few months by various ministers of the Quebec provincial government. I 

fear that we may now find other parts of confederation, other provinces, will be more difficult to 

persuade and they will be viewing suggestions made by the various parts of confederation perhaps with 

a degree of hostility and suspicion. With all honesty, Mr. Speaker, I must say at this time that I 

sympathize with the attitude these provinces will undoubtedly take in view of Quebec‟s present position. 

What I am really saying, Mr. Speaker, is that, quite contrary to what previous speakers have said, there 

is an immediate need to bring our Constitution home and to get about the task of molding it into an 

effective instrument that embraces 100 years of progress and transition in this country. We have seen yet 

another year go by without anything being accomplished to resolve our problems. Perhaps what faces us 

now is a return to the conference table before or after some sort of committee meetings have been held 

throughout the nation. I don‟t wish in anyway, Mr. Speaker, to minimize the value of public discussion 

and the value of a parliamentary inquiry on the Constitution. I would agree that this is desirable. The 

criticism I do have in holding these meetings 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1277 

before an attempt is made to resolve our constitutional difficulties is that these must necessarily involve 

an immense amount of time before the information can be gathered, studied, and recommendations 

made. 

 

We need only look at the committee on biculturalism to understand the magnitude of the Constitutional 

Committee‟s inquiries, if a committee was set up. Without doubt such a committee would have to 

consider the desirability of rewriting the Constitution and if so the proper form of the new Constitution. 

This would probably mean an investigation of financial considerations as well as many, many legal 

problems and we don‟t need much imagination to agree that the length of time such an inquiry would 

involve would be quite considerable. So, Mr. Speaker, I would have hoped that we could have brought 

the Constitution back to Canada on the basis of the Fulton-Favreau formula and that these public 

hearings could have gone on at the same time that the particular amendments to the present Constitution 

were being discussed between the federal government and the provinces. These amendments would have 

been made either under the amending sections to the Constitution itself or under the delegation sections 

so that we could have strengthened our federal government. We would then see instituted the programs, 

which, I think we all agree, are necessary to be carried on at a national level. Now this would, I suggest, 

have freed any parliamentary committee from any crash program, they wouldn‟t have been up against 

any deadline. It would have freed them from any crash program for investigation and recommendation 

and then could have taken as long as was necessary to deal with such a complex matter. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the second part of this resolution that we are debating today calls on this assembly to 

express its disapproval of the Fulton-Favreau formula. As I stated previously, Mr. Speaker, this 

assembly last year approved the formula. I stated last year in the debate that, if this province had been 

the only one required to approve the formula, we would have been prepared to seek a formula that 

committed less of the provincial and federal powers to the unanimity rule. I also told the house last year 

that I advised the conference in 1964 of Saskatchewan‟s position but it appeared that on this issue we 

stood alone. We thought at that time that there was perhaps a better formula for amendment, so I asked 

in the resolution that I introduced last year that a committee of the commons or of the Senate 

alternatively be established to investigate the entire matter and this was part of the resolution which was 

passed last year. I should mention again, Mr. Speaker, that the proposed act was as far as all the other 

jurisdictions were prepared to go and because, firstly, we felt that Constitutional amendment would 

result from the acceptance of the formula and secondly, we viewed the formula with considerably more 

optimism than the former administration, we acceded to the wishes of the majority. If we had not, the 

impasse would have been reached once again, as it has now with Quebec‟s recent refusal. I still believe, 

Mr. Speaker, that this was the wisest course even though I was then, and I still am of the opinion that 

less entrenchment is desirable. Most of this, of course, Mr. Speaker, is past history now in view of 

Quebec‟s position. 

 

We must now fact the question of what must be done to obtain an acceptable formula. I think that before 

this can be answered we have to examine the present state of confederation. I regret to say that in my 

opinion I think I can detect certain disturbing trends in a movement toward more complete provincial 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1278 

autonomy. I am certain all members of this house have seen this trend manifested in a number of 

different statements made by various representatives of various provincial governments. Now it is 

difficult to pin-point the reason for the attitude of many provinces within confederation, but I think it 

undoubtedly springs partly from the prosperity enjoyed by most of the provinces. I think as well, Mr. 

Speaker, that some blame at least must be assessed against the federal government in failing to meet 

national issues as quickly and effectively as might have been desired. The December, 1965 edition of the 

Monetary Times in commenting in respect to the role of the federal government in the middle 1950‟s 

had this to say in an article entitled “More Power for Provinces”. In referring to the extent to which the 

provinces have extended their jurisdictions into areas where formerly the federal government was 

unchallenged, it stated: (This is from the article in the Monetary Times). 

 

It is now virtually impossible for the federal government to move in the general area of fiscal policy 

including expenditures for welfare without trespassing on provincial grounds. It is worth noting that 

Ontario‟s resentment against the substitution of a funded pension plan on Quebec‟s terms for the 

original federal plan was directed against the federal, not the Quebec government. To understand how 

this has come about one must look back to the election of the Conservative government in 1957. 

 

And the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) is not going to like some of this, and I continue quoting: 

 

That government, as the Bennett government before it, had no grasp of the nature of the economic 

issues confronting it. The recessions that followed through the late 50s and early 60s were as puzzling 

to the one as the great depression of the 30s was to the other. In the absence of purposeful direction the 

initiative was lost by default to the provinces. Many of the specific economic correctives which have 

since contributed to the business expansion — the development and investment agencies, planning, tax 

incentives and so on — originated with them and are playing an increasingly active role in their 

respective areas. 

 

Mr. Pederson (Arm River): — May I ask what you are quoting from, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Yes, I am quoting from the Monetary Times, issue of December, 1965. I will be glad to 

send it over to you. I recommend it for reading to all members of the Progressive Conservative party. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Yes, I thought you would. 

 

Mr. Heald: — 

 

By the time the Liberals returned to office with an army of measures originating in the federal 

ministry, the provinces were too actively committed in their own programs to readily accommodate 

themselves to the federal programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concept of too much provincial autonomy in my 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1279 

opinion destroys the opportunity for a vigorous and dynamic Canada. This province has always 

supported the principle of a strong central government in Ottawa. This was so, of course, under the 

previous administration, although after hearing the hon. member from Regina West the other day, it 

appears to me that the NDP may be abandoning this principle for one reason or another. That we 

supported a strong central government has been made abundantly clear to everyone. In Ottawa in 1964 I 

put this position to the conference, which is still our position. It is simply this that we will not agree to 

any formula that presents any opportunity of an undue erosion of federal powers and this province will 

resist any attempt by any province to place our Constitution in a form that may for one reason or another 

jeopardize the power of the federal government or place it in a subordinate or even an equal position 

with any other province. The member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) stated that the reason this 

principle of a strong central government was supported by Saskatchewan was, if I interpreted what he 

said correctly, that it best served our financial interest. The hon. member stated that for decades or 

perhaps centuries it was likely that this province would be economic losers resulting from a tariff 

structure favoring eastern Canadian manufacturers. He said that this was probably a price that we would 

have to pay and should pay for our Canadianism. I think there is some merit in what he said, Mr. 

Speaker, but whatever the financial considerations are of having a strong central government, I would 

hate to think that this principle is predicated solely on this factor. In the past we have had to look to 

Ottawa for financial assistance or perhaps you could state it more properly, our fair share of the nation‟s 

productivity. This but emphasized that Canada was and is one economic unit in which the parts are 

interdependent on each other for their strength. Now, Mr. Speaker, it is probably true that in the past this 

province fell into the category of the “have not” provinces so that we may have gone to Ottawa fairly 

often with our hands out. 

 

I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that this province today is no longer regarded by the other members of 

confederation as a “have-not” province. I think it is fair to say that we are regarded by most other 

jurisdictions as being one of the more fortunate provinces in confederation and one which already shows 

signs of utilizing its great potential resources. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is reflected in the 

standard of living enjoyed by our people and in the purchasing power that the people of this province 

represent. Diversification of our industries and the development of mineral resources have led us, I 

believe, into an enviable position within confederation. So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, and I am 

firmly of the opinion that it is not solely economic considerations that prompt this province to advance 

the principle of a strong government in Ottawa. 

 

I believe that there is a genuine feeling of nationalism, of Canadianism and not of regionalism, operating 

at the base of this principle within our province. We are proud of being Canadians, not of being a new 

Canadian, second generation Canadian, or French-Canadian, but a true Canadian. I believe in this 

province we have learned that all nationalities can live together, work together, enjoy each other‟s 

culture and that we gain immeasurable strength from this process. We complement one another in the 

various ethnic groups. We cannot in Saskatchewan, I am sure, see a Canada that is limited in any way to 

provincial boundaries. And I say again, Mr. Speaker, we feel that this is not because of economic factors 

alone, but in the profound belief 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1280 

that this is the only way in which all of the people of Canada can benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think generally that this feeling of nationalism is shared by most of the people in our 

country. Premier Robarts of Ontario made a statement that he doubted very much whether Ontario can 

accept a federal system which is not based upon the principle of a single national economy and 

furthermore, a single national government, which has control over the economy. He felt that, if the 

process of regional economic development is carried too far, it will in the end prove as much a force for 

disunity as anything else. With this concept of a strong central government in mind, Mr. Speaker, what 

changes, if any, can be made in the formula to provide the flexibility which I think we all feel is 

necessary, and yet at the same time preserve the power of the federal government? I think we have to 

anticipate the demands of the province of Quebec when this matter comes up again for discussion. It 

appears to me at this time, Mr. Speaker, that these demands may be difficult to anticipate and to 

catalogue. We have seen in the past few months Premier Lesage asking for a special status in 

confederation, or perhaps propounding the concept of an associate state for that province. It is difficult 

to contemplate how this status or this state could be effective without destroying utterly the concept of 

Confederation. We have seen ministers of the Quebec government asserting themselves in areas which I 

think are recognized as being exclusively within federal jurisdiction. The fact that a provincial cabinet 

minister would take it upon himself to write to Washington protesting the action of the U. S. government 

certainly to my mind indicates the length to which Quebec would like the Constitution to go. 

Furthermore, there have been negotiations with foreign powers. With examples of this nature in mind it 

is difficult to see that Quebec is after anything but a complete and separate state. 

 

The other day in his remarks, Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina West, suggested that Quebec does 

have a special status in confederation. I think what he was saying was that this is a defacto status which 

should now be recognized legally. He seemed to feel that Quebec is not just like any other province 

because it is the homeland and heartland of the French Canadian majority and therefore that it would be 

appropriate to prove special provisions and protection for Quebec, which need not be given to other 

provinces. He stated that he would have no objection to seeing a provision — and I think I am quoting 

him correctly — that would prevent an amendment to the Constitution from affecting Quebec unless 

ratified by the legislature of Quebec. The member in this seems to be echoing the pre-federal election 

statements of his national leader, Mr. Douglas, who seems now bent on convincing the French 

Canadians in Quebec that his is the enlightened policy for them. It is impossible for me to appreciate 

how the honorable member could suggest such a formula, if his is a party that stands for strong central 

government. I say this, Mr. Speaker, because I have not seen one plan of a special status, or associated 

state concept that would not destroy confederation. Whether the province of Quebec likes it or not, she 

is an integral part of confederation, as much dependent on the rest of Canada as we are on her. All this 

talk about special status that one hears has been in vague generalities, because no one dares put any meat 

on the dry bones of these words, because no one has figured out how to grant this special status, even if 

it falls short of an associate state idea, without completely disrupting confederation. So one must always 

talk in vague generalities when referring to a special status. 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1281 

It represents a selling point, I suggest, but the product is really never identified in this sort of an 

argument. That does not mean, Mr. Speaker, that I am entirely in disagreement with arguments put 

forward that Quebec enjoys a special place within confederation. Undoubtedly it does. But aside from 

protecting its language and culture, I cannot really see that it does occupy any other special place. As I 

said, Mr. Speaker, it is as much dependent on the rest of Canada for its economic growth as we are on 

Quebec. Therefore, surely the province should be subjected to whatever national policies the federal 

government feels are necessary. 

 

I want to assure the honorable members of the house that I have an open mind in this area, but no one I 

know of has come forward yet with a special status plan which does not seem to sacrifice federal 

autonomy for provincial autonomy, not even the spokesmen for the Province of Quebec have been able 

to really get across to the rest of Canada what sort of special status they require. Again it seems that it is 

their program or design to never make their demands too specific because this might alert the rest of 

Canada. 

 

If we suppose that Quebec does gain an associate state status, or even a special status, then are we to 

have tariffs between parts of confederation and how do we enforce matters of a national nature if one of 

the larger provinces is not a participant? Again would there be members of the Canadian parliament 

from Quebec? If so, would they be able to vote on issues not affecting the province of Quebec? Could 

there also be ministerial responsibility where there was a cabinet minister from Quebec administering a 

program that had no affect on Quebec? What happens also in the field of corporations where head 

offices are in Quebec but trade and carry on business throughout the rest of the nation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have to be a great deal more convinced than I am now that Quebec has a valid 

argument for special status. Mr. Speaker, the reason that I believe the Fulton-Favreau formula is 

unacceptable to Quebec is that they very well know that there would never be even the remotest 

possibility that they would gain this special status in confederation. I think this is apparent in the letter 

that was written by Premier Lesage to the Prime Minister which the member opposite read into record. 

You recall that Mr. Lesage stated that he was as early as the spring of 1965 under the impression that 

any increase in provincial powers, which of course could only be done at the expense of federal powers, 

would require that two-thirds of the provinces assent representing one-half of the population. You will 

recall that the unanimity provision applied to any law affecting any provision of the Constitution relating 

to the power of the legislature of the province to make laws. Mr. Speaker, if the interpretation of that 

phrase was not apparent, it seems to me, I can‟t understand this because it was always represented and I 

think the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) who attended some of these earlier conferences would agree 

that it was always represented to the conference as providing for unanimous consent. 

 

This, however, does in my opinion indicate that Quebec is concerned that the present formula cannot 

and will not deliver the kind of Quebec Mr. Lesage and the other members of his government 

contemplate. Mr. Speaker, what then is the position this province should take in this matter? I suggest 

that it is only this. Because we do not know what the official position of Quebec is, although we know 

they have some reservations on the 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1282 

Fulton-Favreau formula, we must find out what they are and if an adjustment can be made in this 

formula that would satisfy them and the rest of the provinces as well. Without knowing Quebec‟s 

official objection entirely we cannot know whether the Fulton-Favreau formula is unworkable and is as 

dead as a dodo as some of the speakers have said, and as Mr. Lesage said. 

 

It may be that the provinces could agree to less severe entrenchment provisions. I think that all of us 

would agree that the formula then would be more desirable and would meet some of the criticism 

presently levelled at it. If this were the case, Mr. Speaker, we may very well have an acceptable formula 

without too much further delay and this I think is a highly desirable objective to be shooting for. I‟m not 

too optimistic that this will happen as I think Quebec‟s demands might very well go beyond a slight 

modification in the formula. But until we hear from them officially I suggest that it is difficult to 

condemn or in any other way act on a constitutional amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have one further comment to make and that is with respect to the suggestions made by 

the members opposite that the proposed formula would create ten little Canadas. Under any system of 

constitutional amendments the ultimate responsibility for an amendment must rest with the federal 

parliament and the concept of a federal state places upon that body a duty to see that any amendment is 

in the best interests of the country as a whole. Mr. Speaker, I can‟t see any government in Ottawa, 

irrespective of its political beliefs, abdicating and giving up its powers to the provinces to such an extent 

that ten separate countries would in fact be created. After all, Mr. Speaker, this goes to the very root of 

the obligations owed to the electorate by any elected body. I can‟t see under our system of government, 

democratic government, any political party subjecting themselves to criticism that they have acted 

unwisely in such abdication of powers. I think, therefore, we would really see only those powers 

transferred to the province that are absolutely necessary to be transferred for the good government of 

Canada. 

 

Now if the hon. members opposite who have spoken meant that the delegation sections would create ten 

little Canadas I think that in that event they are ignoring the fact that the proposed act allows for 

rescission of any consent given to the exercising of the delegated powers. It can be cancelled, rescinded. 

Suppose, Mr. Speaker, that some federal government does unduly delegate its powers in any one field, 

then surely it would be held responsible for its actions by the electorate and a succeeding government 

could simply rescind the consent and return the power to Ottawa. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the 

requirement that in national matters at least four of the provinces concur in the delegation seems to me 

to further prevent the balkanization of the country mentioned in the speeches on this debate previously. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the principal control of the Constitution from any undue abdication of powers 

till rests in the fact that no federal government would commit political suicide, and I think it would be 

committing political suicide by transferring necessary federal powers to any of the provinces. I think that 

such a transfer is so impossible that it hardly warrants our discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must state for the reasons that I have given that I can only vote against the resolution in 

its present form. I am going to vote for the amendment as moved by myself and seconded by the hon. 

Minister of Public Works, Mr. Gardiner. 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1283 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, that the amendment asks that the federal government bring the provinces 

together once again to determine Quebec‟s position. It is implied in the resolution that before any action 

is taken to approve or disapprove the amended formula a report is to be made to this legislature so as to 

extend to the members of this house the opportunity to express their views. I believe that is only fair, 

Mr. Speaker, and I invite all members of the house to accept this amendment. I regret however, that this 

procedure — if these recommendations are followed by the federal government — may delay 

constitutional amendment but I will now urge upon the government of Canada that, while we are 

discussing the amending formula consideration will be given to particular amendments to the present 

Constitution to combat the problems which I have been speaking about for the last some little time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would, therefore, beg leave of the assembly to move this amendment, seconded by the 

Hon. Mr. Gardiner. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He bounced across there with the most graceful alacrity, didn‟t he? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

The amendment was agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS—(31) 
 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher Howes McFarlane 

Boldt Steuart Heald 

Gardiner (Melville) Guy Merchant (Mrs.) 

Loken MacDougall Grant 

Coderre Bjarnason Trapp 

Cuelenaere McIsaac MacDonald 

Gallagher Breker Leith 

Radloff Romuld Weatherald 

Maclennan Larochelle Hooker 

Coupland Gardner (Moosomin) Mitchell 

Pederson   

 

NAYS—(23) 
 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd Cooper (Mrs.) Wood 

Nollet Brockelbank (Kelsey) Blakeney 

Davies Thibault Willis 

Whelan Nicholson Kramer 

Dewhurst Berezowsky Michayluk 

Smishek Link Baker 

Snyder Broten Robbins 

Pepper Brockelbank (Saskatoon City)  

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I moved the original motion and it may be in 

order to warn the house I am about to . . . 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1284 

Mr. Speaker: — To close the debate. Yes, I think despite the fact that the motion has been amended 

that the mover of the original motion has the right to close the debate on the motion as amended. I think 

I am correct in this. I must warn the house that the mover of the motion is about to close the debate, if 

anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t propose to detain the house long. I want to say that while I did 

not support the amendment I will support the motion as amended since I believe that the motion as 

amended is a preferable statement of the position of this house to the position which we took last year. I 

agree in large measure with the comments of the Attorney General (Mr. Heald). I agree on the need for 

urgency in finding solutions to problems which are facing Canada. He itemized five or six and I don‟t 

need to trouble the house in itemizing them although, if I may say so, Mr. Speaker, it is a very 

different-looking house than when he was itemizing it. I see some new faces. 

 

Where the Attorney General and I part company is on the issue of whether or not the Fulton-Favreau 

formula is better or worse for Canada than the existing set of arrangements, whatever you want to call 

them. He feels that the adoption of the formula would forward the progress of substantive changes in the 

Constitution. I am not so sanguine. I feel that the adoption of the formula would, on balance, be an 

impediment rather than a contribution to substantive changes to the Constitution being made. 

 

I appreciated the comments of the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) with respect to the origin of the 

problems which Canada is facing, and I must respectfully agree with him that a number of the problems 

stem from a lack of action on the part of governments in Canada during the mid and late 1950s. There 

was at that time, what seemed to me a distressing lack of co-operation between the elected Ministers of 

the Crown and the Public Service of Canada, for whatever reason, and I don‟t propose to ascribe praise 

or blame at this time. But the result was a government which was, it seemed to me, unable to come to 

grips with complicated problems which faced Canada. 

 

I want to say that in my initial remarks I indicated why I felt the Fulton-Favreau formula was 

unacceptable to Saskatchewan and at that point I emphasized the narrow interests of Saskatchewan. I 

went on in a later section of my remarks to indicate why I felt the Fulton-Favreau formula was 

unacceptable to Canada and at that point I made the points which ought to be made by any person 

having a patriotic feeling for Canada as a whole. I would not want anyone to assume from the separation 

in my remarks that people living in Saskatchewan don‟t think as Canadians. I was simply dividing my 

remarks into two classes. 

 

I want to say only one more thing. With respect to the special status for Quebec, I agree with the 

remarks of the Attorney General that we in Canada cannot permit the province of Quebec to have a 

highly special economic status in Canada. It is not possible to have an economic state within a state. The 

special status for Quebec is going to have to be reserved for things which are essentially of a cultural 

nature. I think there will be general agreement with the idea that the French language should be given a 

special status in the province of Quebec, with the idea if the federal government moves into the field of 

education it would not be necessary for all of the policies of the federal 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1285 

government with respect to education to have equal application in the province of Quebec. If I may refer 

to a field of federal jurisdiction, that of divorce, if the federal government decided that there should be 

extended grounds for divorce in Canada I could contemplate a situation whereby the province of Quebec 

would be especially dealt with. I don‟t know whether I would necessarily agree with it but I can easily 

contemplate that this would be an effective way of meeting that problem if it arose. The Quebec Civil 

Code has a number of provisions which are, we are advised, at Federal-Provincial conferences at least, 

very dear to the people of Quebec protecting certain family rights and interests. These might be able to 

be protected where they might be invaded by a particular federal program, whereas similar protection 

might not be given in respect of laws of other provinces. 

 

One can think of the administration of welfare programs such as the Canada Assistance Plan or the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. I would like to see a nationwide plan. We in this house have spoken of 

joining the Canada Assistance Plan and we call our joining the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. It is 

possible, I think, that Canada could live with a plan which was somewhat different in the province of 

Quebec, somewhat different provided the area of difference was defined as it is now in the Federal 

Hospital Plan. These are the sorts of things which I have in mind when I think of special status for 

Quebec. They are untidy for someone who thinks in national terms or Canada-wide terms; they will 

make for administrative inconvenience, and for inconvenience to citizens when they move from one 

provide to another. However, they are things which we could live with in one Canada, and in some they 

would confer a special status on Quebec. I agree wholeheartedly, however, with the Attorney General 

that such special status could not run to the imposition of tariffs by the province of Quebec, the carrying 

on of international relations by the province of Quebec notwithstanding their evident views to the 

contrary, nor could it contemplate Quebec assuming the role of federal government in such important 

fields as national defence, or banking, or a number of others that I could mention. 

 

I think, therefore, that there will not be that wide measure of disagreement between the Attorney General 

and me that the phrasing of my earlier remarks might have suggested. As I indicated, Mr. Speaker, I find 

the resolution in its present form not unobjectionable. I will be supporting it and I invite all members of 

the house to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Motion agreed to as amended. 

 

MOTION: RE—APPOINTMENT OF OMBUDSMAN 
 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West) moved, seconded by Mr. Lloyd: 

 

That this assembly recommends to the consideration of the government the appointment of a 

committee composed of members of the legislative assembly to conduct an enquiry, following 

Prorogation of the Assembly and during the inter-sessional period, into all matters relating to the 

appointment of a Legislative Commissioner or Ombudsman in order to provide further means of 

redress for grievances of citizens against administrative injustices. 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1286 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as a reading of the resolution will indicate the purpose of the resolution is to 

recommend for the consideration of the legislature the appointment of a committee of members of the 

legislature to conduct an inquiry during the inter-sessional period into matters relating to the 

appointment of a Legislative Commissioner or Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we discussed at the last session of the legislature a similar resolution and I think that the 

debate at that time was useful in allowing us to give some thought to this matter. Mr. Speaker, I am 

personally satisfied as to the usefulness of a Legislative Commissioner in Saskatchewan so that I would 

welcome an amendment by the government to the effect that the inquiry by the committee should be 

directed not to the question of whether or not a Legislative Commissioner should be appointed but rather 

to the terms of reference under which he should operate and the legislation under which he should be 

appointed. However, I am aware that some hon. members may not have had an opportunity to make up 

their mind on this problem and may feel that the more prudent course of action would be to have a 

committee of the legislature examine the merits of introducing an Ombudsman into Saskatchewan. 

 

There has been a good deal of interest in recent years in the appointment of a Legislative Commissioner 

or Ombudsman to act on behalf of citizens who may be trying to pursue complaints with respect to their 

dealings with various agencies of government, and this interest has not been confined to Canada. It has 

been evidenced widely throughout most of the western world; or at least that part of the western world 

which doesn‟t rely upon Roman law; the French and the Italians have a different way, rather a better 

way, really, of coping with these administrative problems. But those of us who have based our law on 

German law and English common law have been looking at this idea of an Ombudsman. The idea has 

been particularly popular in the Scandinavian countries; Germany has a military Ombudsman, and 

interest has been shown in Britain, in the United States and in various countries of the Commonwealth. 

 

There is no real mystery about why people are turning their attention to the appointment of an 

Ombudsman. In the last few decades and particularly since the Second World War there has been an 

enormous increase in the activities of government, and with this activity there has been a great increase 

in the role which government plays in the lives of ordinary citizens. 

 

Legislatures have enacted many laws which involve activities by government agencies and complex 

administrative organizations have been established. We have had corporations and boards and 

commissions and departments, large and small, which deal with problems which citizens have asked 

their governments to deal with. Our executive and administrative arms of government have been given 

wide powers and wide authority to make decisions. And these decisions in many cases have a major 

effect on the lives of ordinary citizens. The authority is exercised by people in administrative capacities 

from the level of cabinet minister right down to the level of file clerk, and by a host of tribunals and 

quasi-tribunals which decide your rights and mine. 

 

I think that, in general terms, the administrators and tribunals have carried on their work well; they have 

carried it on in a way which has satisfied citizens. Certainly these citizens keep calling for more 

governmental intervention in the general 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1287 

lives of the people. But because these programs are widespread the number of decisions is numerous, 

and decisions are frequently of a discretionary nature. When you have a large number of decisions 

which must necessarily be discretionary, it is not surprising, indeed it is inevitable, that many of these 

decisions will be the subject of complaints by ordinary citizens. Whether these complaints are justified 

or not, is really not the point now; ordinary citizens will feel themselves aggrieved. 

 

But such is the complexity of modern government that a citizen who feels aggrieved, even when he has 

a legitimate complaint, often find himself in a position of not knowing to whom to complain and 

sometimes even in the position of not having anyone to complain to. This general situation is not 

confined to Saskatchewan or to Canada; it is one which has exercised the minds of students of 

parliamentary government. Many of them have suggested that one of the possible ameliorating moves 

would be the appointment of a Legislative Commissioner or Ombudsman. I don‟t mean to suggest that 

an Ombudsman will solve all of the problems, or even most of the problems, which confront citizens in 

dealing with complex government. We will have to be vigilant on a whole series of fronts. We have 

made some progress in Saskatchewan in protecting the rights of citizens. I don‟t want to bore the house 

with a long list, but I mention the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights; The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, 

The Fair Employment Practices Act; the Regulations Act; The Proceedings against the Crown Act, 

whereby people can sue the Crown without any special fiat; a relatively well developed system of 

Magistrate‟s Courts with trained personnel, where magistrates are given some status, and some tenures. 

But Mr. Speaker, in my view these safeguards are by no means enough. There are very good reasons for 

believing that a country which has a type of government which is based on the British Parliamentary 

system, has a special need for someone like an Ombudsman. In this connection I would like to refer hon. 

members to a book entitled “The Ombudsman — Citizen‟s Defender”. It is edited by Professor Donald 

C. Rowat of Carleton University at Ottawa, published in 1965, and it contains 29 contributions on the 

general subject of Ombudsmen. 

 

One of the articles deals with the Canadian position and points out the special reasons why an 

Ombudsman might be a good idea for Canada. We in Canada have a parliamentary system and therefore 

have executive and legislative powers closely linked in a dominant cabinet. Because we have single 

member ridings, we frequently have very large majorities in parliament, not too frequently of late, I 

concede, but I would ask you to turn your eyes westward rather than eastward and view the majorities 

enjoyed by the Premier of Alberta for 10 or 15 years, and you will see how this type of a majority will 

reinforce a cabinet even when the cabinet may fall into error. We have a tradition of secrecy which 

permeates our whole administrative structure and makes it very difficult to get at the person who 

actually made the decision. In addition we have very severely limited opportunities for appeal or for 

judicial review of administrative decisions. 

 

These above comments apply to almost any parliamentary system, but there are a couple of reasons 

which apply especially to Canada. In Canada we don‟t have a Bill of Rights enshrined in the 

Constitution, we have an act which parades as a Bill of Rights but it can, of course, be changed by any 

sitting of the parliament of Canada. We have rather fewer administrative tribunals than most countries 

where people can appeal against the 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1288 

decision of an administrator. We have no general rules about how administrative tribunals ought to 

work, we don‟t have any general council supervising administrative tribunals, we don‟t have any act 

governing procedures before administrative tribunals. We have in some parts of Canada very antiquated 

rules about crown privilege and crown liability. We have, and I think this is really an area where we 

have fallen down badly, very poor arrangements for legal aid to needy persons. It is not easy for such a 

person to pursue a remedy against a bad administrative decision either in the courts or before a tribunal. 

To top it all off we have a federal system which sometimes makes it confusing in one‟s efforts to find 

out who makes the decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could spend a lot of time outlining why there are problems which a citizen may encounter 

in dealing with one of his governments, but I think that this will be generally conceded; citizens do have 

problems in dealing with their governments. The difficulties exist. And I think it will also be conceded 

that the citizen unaided has very considerable problems in overcoming the difficulties. But this doesn‟t 

quite dispose of the question. You can get general agreement on the proposition that citizens have 

difficulties in dealing with big governments, are frequently met with two types of arguments; firstly, that 

there are already remedies open to the citizen, and secondly, that even if there aren‟t adequate remedies 

open to the citizen, the Ombudsman won‟t help much. 

 

Dealing first with the argument which says that there are existing remedies, it is usually put in the form 

of saying that the citizen has his member of parliament, or member of the legislature, and, therefore, in 

Saskatchewan there are already 59 Ombudsmen. I have never been impressed with that sort of argument. 

As I see it, members of the legislature have neither the time, the knowledge, nor the facilities to 

follow-up in any detailed way a complaint which a citizen might lodge with one of them. Certainly I 

think we all try to be diligent in following up the complaints which are lodged with us. But it is simply 

not possible for the MLAs who are essentially part-time persons, and most of whom do not live in the 

capital city, and most of whom have few facilities, to do a satisfactory job of follow-up on behalf of 

their constituents. 

 

Really the chief reason for this is that when the MLA inquires he must accept the statement of the 

administrator, or of the minister in charge. There is no way that he can have access to the documents and 

frequently there is no way that he can have access to the person that actually made the decision. I have 

seen this process work on the government side and on the opposition side, and I have never felt that I did 

a very effective job in following up on complaints except where the complaint was with respect to a 

problem which came under the department where I happened to be the minister. If it came under the 

department where I happened to be minister I could call of the file, look at the rationale of the decision. 

When the complaint arose in some other department when I was a Minister of the Crown, I found myself 

having to accept the position put to me by the minister. I might complain to him, ask him to talk with his 

officials, but I couldn‟t as of right, because of the nature of relationships with one‟s cabinet colleagues 

say, “Send me over that file, I don‟t think your officials have made the right decision, I think they 

booted the ball”. I didn‟t find myself in that position. And I don‟t find myself in that position when I am 

in opposition. 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1289 

I think, therefore, that . . . 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — You have but to ask. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have but to ask? Well, I am delighted at the offer of the House Leader to allow us to 

have access to the files. I think we ought to make no mistake in having that recorded, Mr. Speaker, 

because there are several that I would like to call for post-haste. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You bring back the old files . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) will find that every file that was 

ever created in the Department of Public Health is still over there; he has perused most of them and 

indeed he has been filing great bundles of documents from most of them, all the while professing the 

desire to retain the anonymity of citizens. But be that as it may, I am delighted at the offer he made that I 

may have access to the files. But it hasn‟t always been thus, Mr. Speaker, and I am not sure that it will 

always continue to be thus. I am not sure that the goodwill which has been expressed today, and that 

generally pervades the house today — I think partly by reason of the excellent example of Mr. Speaker 

— will always prevail and I expect that on some occasions I will not find it quite so easy to get access to 

the files. 

 

My point, I think, doesn‟t need laboring. An MLA is not, in my view, a sufficient protector of the 

citizen‟s rights in respect of administrative abuses. I am not really impressed with the idea that an 

MLA‟s prerogatives would be interfered with. Most of the MLAs I know would only be too glad to have 

an official to whom a complaint would be referred in the full knowledge that the official could and 

would investigate the complaint impartially. We all know that many of the complaints we get are not 

justified, but we don‟t know which ones are justified until we have investigated them. Many of us would 

feel greatly relieved if we could know that a complaint which we have been unable to dispose of, and 

which perhaps we feel is not entirely justified, could be referred to an official who could confirm the 

matter by having an examination of the files in question. 

 

If anybody thinks that the appointment of an Ombudsman would mean that MLAs would have no 

complaints to deal with, I think that he can disabuse his mind of that notion forthwith. An Ombudsman 

only deals with cases of administrative abuse; he is not empowered to question the policy of the 

government. That puts it rather more strongly in fact than it exists. But if the government says, “This is 

our policy”, the Ombudsman must accept it; it is not his job to urge a change of policy unless the policy 

is essentially one of administrative trivia. But MLAs do, in fact, have the job of trying to convince the 

governments that they ought to change a policy which bears harshly on a particular citizen or on a 

particular class of citizens. I don‟t think that the MLAs need worry that the appointment of an 

Ombudsman will relegate them to the ranks of the unemployed. 

 

I now turn to the other point which is sometimes disputed. This question is whether or not, even if there 

are problems, and even if it is conceded that an MLA cannot effectively deal with 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1290 

all of them, an Ombudsman will be very effective. 

 

Before going into this narrow problem it might be helpful to review very briefly the history of this office 

of Ombudsman or Legislative Commissioner, and by and large, Mr. Speaker, when I am referring to this 

matter I am relying heavily on the New Zealand experience. Broadly speaking, an Ombudsman keeps 

watch over the way in which the government officials apply the laws and the regulations in dealing with 

the public, and he investigates complaints by private citizens with respect to the actions of such officials. 

He does not have power to overrule an official. His sole power is to report the matter to the legislature 

but he is in a strong position to suggest that injustice be corrected. Ordinarily he will report annually to 

the legislature and it is the threat of an adverse report that may cause an administrator to reconsider a 

position brought to his attention by the Ombudsman. He will be given powers to investigate similar to 

those of a commissioner under the Public Inquiries Act, or so is the custom in New Zealand. 

 

Last year in the house I reviewed the very interesting history of this office, pointing out that in some 

way the old Lord Chancellor of England as he existed somewhere around 1600 performed some of these 

functions. An office somewhat similar to this grew up in Sweden in the 18th century; the first formalized 

office along these lines appears in the Swedish Construction of 1809. Then this has been followed by the 

appointment of an Ombudsman in Finland in 1919, Denmark in 1955, Norway, 1962 and New Zealand 

in 1962. 

 

The New Zealand Ombudsman has been carrying on his functions since 1962, and I think that it has 

been the appointment of the New Zealand Ombudsman which has stimulated, or re-stimulated the 

interest in the office in Canada. Certainly there has been a good deal of interest in Canada. The New 

Zealand Ombudsman, Sir Guy Powles, visited Canada in 1964 when he appeared before a committee of 

the House of Commons; he addressed the annual meeting of the Canadian Bar Association. He has again 

appeared in Canada in 1966 and as we all recall we had the honor of greeting him in this legislature a 

few weeks ago and he spoke to two meetings in Regina on the subject of Ombudsman. 

 

Many people in many parts of the world have called for the introduction of this office. Organized groups 

of lawyers in Canada — in Alberta, to be precise — have recommended the appointment. Legislatures in 

Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia have discussed it and I think in some other provinces. In Britain there 

has been considerable discussion of it, particularly surrounding the Wyatt report, and there has been 

consideration given to the idea in Ireland, Holland, India and other places. 

 

But I think we can get the most help in considering whether or not this would be a useful innovation for 

Saskatchewan by considering the New Zealand experience. Now I admit readily that there are 

differences between New Zealand and Saskatchewan. New Zealand isn‟t a federal state; it is a unitary 

state, and accordingly, the Ombudsman in New Zealand will be dealing with some matter which would 

be under federal jurisdiction if he were in Canada, and some matters which would be under provincial 

jurisdiction. But I feel that, judging by the number of complaints which Sir Guy Powles deals with, and 

the nature of the complaints, there would be sufficient work for one qualified Ombudsman in 

Saskatchewan. New Zealand isn‟t a populous country, two or three million people, and indeed there is 

some reason to believe that 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1291 

the idea of Ombudsman will work better in an area which is not heavily populated. There is some reason 

to suggest that part of the real essence of the office of the Ombudsman is the unofficial influence which 

he brings to bear by reason of the senior administrators and the members of the cabinet. He can, as an 

Ombudsman working in a small jurisdiction, come to know the persons personally and come to gain 

their confidence. And certainly I gained the impression from discussing the office with Sir Guy that the 

senior officials in New Zealand have not resented his appointment. In fact it has been the other way. For 

the most part he will have vindicated their judgments because officials even when they are complained 

against are usually right, although by no means always right. And secondly, he has brought to the 

attention of officials weaknesses in their administration which they were only too happy to hear about 

and wanted to hear about at the earliest possible moment before the weaknesses got out of hand. For 

these reasons and because of the fact that he has recognized the difficulties with which officials have to 

cope, he has gained their confidence and he has in fact endeared — if that‟s not putting it too strongly — 

the office of Ombudsman, to the senior officials of New Zealand. The coolness that some predicted 

would arise between the senior officials and the Ombudsman, and between members of the cabinet and 

the Ombudsman has simply not come to pass. 

 

In reading Sir Guy‟s reports I am struck by the similarity of some of the situations which he describes 

with the conditions which arise in Saskatchewan, and I am sure arise in other provinces of Canada. I 

want to refer hon. members to the reports of the New Zealand Ombudsman. They have recently arrived 

in the Library, there was only one in the Library last year, but all three of them are here now. The one 

last year was an appendix to a report of a committee of the House of Commons but this year we have the 

three reports in original form: the one for the six months ending March, 1963, the one for the year 

ending March, 1964, and the one for the year ending March, 1965. And I really do commend these 

reports to hon. members. They have a very short general statement of the work of the Ombudsman. This 

one which I am holding runs to 17 pages and it has headings so you don‟t have to read all the 17 pages. 

You could read seven or eight pages and get the gist of what he is saying. It also contains appendices of 

case studies of the cases which he has actually dealt with. They are short, two or three on a page; they 

give you a good idea of the problems which he has had to cope with and how he has dealt with them. In 

fifteen minutes or half an hour one can pick up these reports and get a better idea of how the 

Ombudsman works than one can in listening to speeches on the subject however learned, Mr. Speaker. 

And so I do commend these to hon. members. 

 

He makes some very interesting comments. He points out that it is in the nature of administrative 

organizations to develop a somewhat defensive attitude. Accordingly it is not enough to provide for a 

review of the decisions of minor officials, it is necessary to provide for a review of the decisions of 

senior officials. I think that cabinet ministers fall into this trap of backing up their officials. That‟s the 

position you have to take in the beginning of a problem. Thereafter you have to be, in the privacy of 

your own office, somewhat less uncritical of your official‟s point of view. But nonetheless it is fairly 

easy to fall into the trap of backing up the man below you because this is the only way that 

administration will work in the first instance. In the experience of Sir Guy, on several occasions, 

decisions have been reviewed three or four times by 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1292 

departmental officials but when he brought a fresh point of view to bear, the department people changed 

their position and remedied the complaint. From this the New Zealand Ombudsman concluded that some 

form of responsible and independent representation in proper cases is not only desirable but necessary if 

the private citizen is to receive proper consideration at the highest levels within departments. 

 

If you want a general statement of his philosophy in capsule form I suggest you look at the report of 

March of 1965 under his heading “General Comment”, which is just half a page and gives the essence of 

what he is driving at. He says that in the past year the general pattern of cases and the nature of the 

complaints made have been consistent with the previous years. He says that there are three broad 

avenues leading to administrative injustice; (a) the proper exercise of administrative discretion, (b) the 

granting of a fair hearing to the potentially aggrieved person and (c) the explanation of departmental 

policies and procedures to the public. In all these respects there has been progress in the year under 

review and the office of Ombudsman has had some influence in this, although the major share is due to 

the administrator‟s concern for these problems. So he says that the office of Ombudsman has been 

influential in causing departments to be more careful in the proper exercise of administrative discretion, 

to be more careful in granting of a fair hearing to a potentially aggrieved person, and to be more careful 

in explaining departmental policies and procedures to the public. Mr. Speaker, for any who may be more 

interested in this topic there is a fairly good library on the subject in the legislative library. The Library 

staff prepared a comprehensive bibliography and one can, in a fairly short time, review some of the 

relevant literature on the idea of an Ombudsman. I know I have had the opportunity in the last year or so 

not only to talk to Sir Guy Powles but also to Professor Stanley Anderson from the University of 

California, San Diego, who has written a goodly number of articles on this topic. And members might be 

interested in knowing that there are a good number of states in the United States which have been 

introduced to the idea of appointing a Grievance Commissioner or an Ombudsman or whatever you wish 

to call him. I merely say this to indicate that the literature is growing and the interest generally in the 

Anglo-saxon and Scandinavian world is growing. Members will know that there has been a good deal of 

discussion in the House of Commons about this. The Glassco Commission suggested this idea. A bill 

was introduced in 1963. Another one was introduced in 1964 by Robert Thompson, the Social Credit 

leader. This latter one was exhaustively debated on second reading and was considered in detail in 

committee. I refer members to the records of the House of Commons, Bill C7 in the second session of 

the 26th parliament and the committee reports are those of the Committee on Privileges and Elections. I 

have in my hand the dates of the committee reports if anyone is interested in them and I won‟t bore the 

house with reading them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there has been general agreement that there is a real problem. I think that there is 

also general agreement among legislators that they themselves can‟t do an effective job on following up 

complaints. I feel, too, that anyone who has looked at the problem will agree that a number of changes 

could be considered in our administration to deal with these complaints. I don‟t want to go into this 

general area of rationalizing our administrative tribunals, or the proposal of enacting a statute which 

might outline the procedures which a person might use before administrative tribunals. But having said 

all that and having admitted that there are many other avenues 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1293 

open to us to provide remedies for citizens I think that impartial observers will reach the conclusion that 

an Ombudsman — a Parliamentary Commissioner — can do an effective job to remedy in part, and in 

part only, the problem which exists because of big government. 

 

I do not suggest that all of the questions with respect to having an Ombudsman in Saskatchewan are 

answered. That‟s why, Mr. Speaker, I am suggesting an inter-sessional committee to look into the idea. I 

think that such a committee could review the available literature, could talk to some people who are 

more familiar with this device and reach a sound conclusion as to whether or not this would be a useful 

device in Saskatchewan. I have further reason for suggesting that this ought to be something considered 

by a Legislative Committee. I think that if the office of Legislative Commissioner is established, it will 

have a far greater chance of success if it is established with full consent of all parts of the house. An 

Ombudsman is obviously not something which a opposition can foist on a government but I am 

suggesting that it is also not something which a government can usefully foist on an opposition. I think 

that it is a measure which will work best if it commands support from all parts of the house. This isn‟t a 

matter for partisan division but rather for careful consideration by all persons who wish to make our 

parliamentary system work better and own legislature here in Saskatchewan work better. When this sort 

of problem arises I think that a valuable contribution can be made by an inter-sessional committee of the 

legislature. I would anticipate that the committee, after reviewing the material an obtaining such 

assistance as they can, would make a recommendation at a future session. At that time if there are valid 

objections to the idea they can be considered. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that on the basis of the experience in other jurisdictions there is a clear case for 

Saskatchewan to give the idea careful study. The study may result in a recommendation either for or 

against a Commissioner, either way I cannot help but think that the study will enhance our appreciation 

of how the legislative process works and our ability as legislators to work successfully in the service of 

our constituents. 

 

All of us, Mr. Speaker, have an obligation to keep our system working well. There is no doubt that 

governments in Canada and in Saskatchewan have been placed under strain as they are asked to assume 

more and more complex duties. We certainly can‟t be smug or complacent about this parliamentary 

system of ours. It was never designed to do the job which it is now being asked to do. Adaptations have 

been made but I am not sure they have always been happy adaptations. Certainly the system has been 

remarkably adaptable but I don‟t think that we can say that it is working perfectly. It‟s simply not true 

that the public has universal confidence in the parliamentary system. There is a good deal of scepticism 

and even cynicism about the whole process. And I suggest that there is some urgency in our giving our 

attention to seeing that our system works, and not only to seeing that it works but to attempting to 

persuade the public that it works. 

 

The final point that I was going to make I think is the obvious point. When any country is reaching the 

point where the public is losing confidence in its parliament, this is a dangerous point. And it behoves us 

as legislators to turn our mind to seeing whether or not we can remove some of the grounds for public 

scepticism and public cynicism. 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1294 

Mr. Speaker, I have made my point, I hope that I have not made it in a controversial way. This was not 

my intention. I simply want to urge on all members of the house that as one step to enhancing the public 

image of our parliamentary system we could consider the appointment of an Ombudsman who would, as 

I suggest, make our system a more efficient and a more effective way to deal with the problems of the 

citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore, beg leave of the assembly to move this resolution, seconded by the hon. 

member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd). 

 

The assembly recessed at 5:30 until 7:30 p.m. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I would like 

to make a few observations as a result of the observations made by the hon. member from Regina West 

(Mr. Blakeney) when he moved the resolution. 

 

We, as you know, Mr. Speaker, had a lengthy and I think quite rewarding debate on this topic last year 

in this house and the hon. member from Regina West spoke at some length as did I. It is not my purpose 

tonight to repeat or rehash what I said at that time. I would like to say though, Mr. Speaker, that in my 

opinion it is difficult or would be difficult to vest in an Ombudsman the kind of power that he would 

need which would have to be superimposed generally over the field of government. And I have a 

concern as to what effect an Ombudsman would have in the province of Saskatchewan on the 

fundamental concepts of our parliamentary system. What I am trying to say is that it is one thing to 

advocate the establishment of the office, but is quite another thing to integrate the office satisfactorily 

with existing institutions. Mr. Speaker, I have the feeling in studying this matter, and in my department 

we have conducted studies and are still continuing to conduct studies, that the office of an Ombudsman 

in the province of Saskatchewan would be superimposed over existing institutions unless it were 

severely limited in its application. I am, therefore, reluctant at this time without some more experience, 

being able to study the experience in New Zealand, to advocate the creation of the office at this time. 

Now the member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) said the New Zealand Ombudsman has been in 

operation since l962. We have two or three years, probably two years, the benefit of experience of 

probably two years there. But I don‟t think this is long enough, Mr. Speaker, to adequately study this 

situation. There is, of course, as the member for Regina West pointed out, quite a difference between the 

situation in a province in Canada and in a state like New Zealand, which is not a federal state. In New 

Zealand the Ombudsman, of course, has the opportunity to review many programs. In Canada with our 

federal system and its division of legislative jurisdictions of course the powers of a provincial 

Ombudsman would have to be restricted to those matters coming within the jurisdiction of the provincial 

legislature. The report, the last report that I have seen of the work of the Ombudsman in New Zealand 

for the year ending March 31st, 1964, would seem to indicate that a great number of the cases that came 

before Sir Guy Powles and his officials and in which he intervened, if the situation was in Canada, in 

Saskatchewan, these would be matters which would fall within the jurisdiction of the federal 

government here in Canada. I am not convinced that there would be, in view of his necessarily limited 

powers and in view of the population of this province, sufficient complaints of a legitimate character to 

go into it at this time. 

 

Now I don‟t reject it out of hand, we‟re doing a great 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1295 

deal of work and a great deal of study in my office on this point. I don‟t think that I can go along. I agree 

with quite a few of the things that the member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) said before dinner, but 

I can‟t go along with him. He and I part company in this debate too when he says that the members of 

the legislature and the Ministers of the Crown cannot do an adequate job of tending to, adjusting or 

looking into, or investigating the complaints of our citizens at large. He was a Minister of the Crown for 

a number of years, many of the hon. gentlemen opposite were, most of you have been members of the 

legislature for many years, and you know that a very great part of your work consists of bringing 

complaints to the attention perhaps of various departments of government, to the attention of various 

ministers. I know that many of you and many of the nom. members on this side of the house have 

brought to my attention, have asked for information with respect to things happening in my department. 

Matters have been raised which have been looked into and I think, in most cases, adjusted to the 

satisfaction of not only the hon. member who referred the complaint to me but to the satisfaction of his 

constituent. I think that this is a very great part of the work of an MLA and a cabinet minister, and I 

don‟t worry at all about the lack of contact between the people in the province and the duly elected 

representative of this province. I think there is a very good liaison. 

 

An example of it is today and this week in the province of Saskatchewan, in the city of Regina. We have 

a very large convention, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. I am sure you have all 

had gentlemen, representatives of local government, to see you in the legislative buildings. Many of you 

have been down to the hotel, I know that practically all the ministers, my colleagues and I, have met 

delegations dealing with various problems from people all over the province. I think this is the function 

of the members of the legislature and the Ministers of the Crown and I do not agree that MLAs and 

Ministers of the Crown are not doing a good job. I am not convinced that a need has been demonstrated; 

I am not convinced that a legislative committee would accomplish too much. We have the reports from 

New Zealand, we have had the opportunity of hearing Sir Guy Powles speak on a number of occasions. I 

had the opportunity to have lunch with him when he was here a couple of weeks ago and I took 

advantage of the occasion to find out as much as I could about his office and to get his views as to how 

he felt it would apply to a situation in a province of Canada. For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, mainly 

because I think the New Zealand experience is still too new that it should have be studied for at least a 

little longer, and because I am not convinced at all that the present process is not working satisfactorily, 

I will therefore have to vote against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, I will say just a very few words to indicate what I am 

certain is the universal disappointment on this side of the house that the government is adopting the 

point of view which I presume the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) has just expressed. 

 

This is the second time in two days that a minister of the government has got up and said in effect, “oh, a 

pretty good idea, but the time isn‟t right.” It seems to me that this is too frequently the kind of refuge 

which is taken. I want to ask the Attorney General what it was that was being suggested 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1296 

here. The resolution quite plainly does not suggest that we ask the government to proceed with the 

establishment of a Legislative Commissioner or an Ombudsman in the province of Saskatchewan. What 

the resolution does suggest is that a Committee composed of members of this legislature have an 

opportunity to inquire into matters relating to the appointment of a Legislative Commissioner in order to 

provide further means of redress to the grievances of citizens against administrative injustices. With all 

due deference to the Attorney General and the members of his department when he says, “We‟re 

studying it”, there seems to me there is at least some possibility that a committee of members of the 

legislature might do a more thorough, comprehensive, intensive job of studying the situation than the 

minister and the members of his department. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we miss out on not making use of 

members of the legislature for this kind of function. Here, I believe, was a excellent opportunity for the 

government to make it possible for members of its own group who are not Cabinet ministers, for the 

members of the two parties on this side of the house to study a means, as the member from Regina West 

(Mr. Blakeney) put it so well, of making our democratic institutions work even better than they are. I 

think we need not always wait for the results of experience in countries like New Zealand and other 

places. Surely we are capable and competent of taking initiative ourselves. Surely this province has on 

more than one occasion proven its capability and its competence to experiment, to explore and to do 

some worthwhile things without having waited years and years until something or other is provide in 

other parts of the country. 

 

That, of course, is the step which we are asking the government to take. This, of course, is not the first 

time this particular matter has been discussed in this legislature. In the 1964 session it was discussed 

during, as I recall it, both the Budget Debate and the Throne Speech to some extent. In the budget of 

1964 there was a sum of money which was to be used and there was a statement in the Appropriation 

Act which provided for the establishment of such a committee. It was discussed again last year. The 

government in 1964 having made a decision not to proceed to implement the decision of the legislature 

at that time. It was discussed last year again, and I understand the answer was that, “It was not yet time”. 

It is discussed again this year and the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) says again, “It is not yet time”. I am 

afraid that if it is discussed again next year and if the same Attorney General and the same government 

happens to sit over there that the answer will again be, “It is not yet time”. I submit that we should not 

have to take refuge in this kind of excuse for this kind of program and it is with regret that I listened to 

the Attorney General express his point of view. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us hold this whole procedure of democratic practice and the institutions which make 

it work very dearly. But all of us should realize too that each generation should be expected to add 

something to the workings, to the effectiveness of the system. As the member from Regina West (Mr. 

Blakeney) pointed out so very aptly this afternoon one of the characteristics of the times in which we 

live is that the activities of governments of all kinds, local, provincial and federal, do continually touch 

the lives of more and more people at more and more places. Certainly this has been the history of recent 

years. There is no reason to believe that this particular trend in history is going to be reversed. There are 

many of us who think, of course, that this can be a good thing, but there 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1297 

are many of us who also realize that along with this must go some added assurances, some added 

guarantees that people may always feel that they have the opportunity to have redress from decisions 

which are made. And that, of course, is what the office of the legislative commissioner would provide. 

What we are interested in, Sir, is the reputation of government itself, not this government or any other 

government as a particular political group but the reputation of government itself, the extent to which 

people accept that government is a fair institution and one with which they have every possible chance 

of getting a square deal, one which people realize that governments are sensitive in every possible way 

to every possible human individual right. This is one of those kinds of institutions which would help to 

develop that kind of confidence, that kind of security of feeling in the minds of people generally. It 

would be good for them in terms of encouraging them to participate more. 

 

The member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) did not, of course, suggest as the Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) seems to think, that the members of the legislature or members of the cabinet as the case might 

be were not doing a good job in respect to representing their constituents. What he did suggest and what 

he suggested very properly, I think, was that in many cases the members of the legislature and even 

members of the cabinet were handicapped in providing for their constituents the certainty which they 

ought to have that decisions which concern them were the best decisions, not only the best decisions but 

also decisions that appears and appealed to them as being the best decisions. I agree with what the 

Attorney General has said. Very frequently cases are taken up with ministers and cases are adequately 

solved and explained. I have had that experience myself with the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) and with 

at least some other ministers of the government. I wouldn‟t say that I have had it universally. I am quite 

sure that when many of us sat over there that many people came to us and had a satisfactory experience 

but again I wouldn‟t say universally satisfactory experience. This is not through any fault of the 

members of the legislature or of the ministers. It is frequently simply that the machinery is not there to 

make available the kind of information, not only the right kind of information but also to convince 

people that the kind of information has been looked at and studied by persons who are separate and apart 

from those who have made the initial decisions. I submit that so long as the only referee in the case is 

the person who has already made the decision then there are a great many people who are going to be 

worried and concerned as to whether that decision is a right one. Not until there is access to some person 

who has not been involved in making the first decision will it be possible to give the kind of confidence 

in government institutions that we could have. Mr. Speaker, I would hope again that the government 

may not find it too long before it is soon enough to make this kind of study. I am sure that when it is 

done members of the legislature generally will appreciate the opportunity of looking further into this 

means of making our parliamentary institution work more effectively and reflect more sensitively the 

real needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

The motion was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1298 

YEAS—(23) 
 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd 

Cooper (Mrs.) 

Wood 

Nollet 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) 

Blakeney 

Davies 

Thibault 

Willis 

Whelan 

Nicholson 

Kramer 

Dewhurst 

Berezowsky 

Michayluk 

Smishek 

Link 

Snyder 

Broten 

Larson 

Robbins 

Pepper 

Brockelbank 

(Saskatoon City) 

 

NAYS—(23) 
 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher 

Howes 

McFarlane 

Boldt 

Steuart 

Heald 

Guy 

Merchant (Mrs.) 

Loken 

MacDougall 

Grant 

Coderre 

Bjarnason 

Trapp 

Cuelenaere 

Gallagher 

Breker 

Leith 

Radloff 

Romuld 

Weatherald 

MacLennan 

Larochelle 

Coupland 

Gardner (Moosomin) 

Mitchell 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION: CANADIAN LABOUR (STANDARDS) CODE AND MINIMUM WAGE 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Smishek (Regina East): 

 

This assembly endorses the Canada Labour (Standards) code enacted by the Parliament of Canada and 

urges the government of Saskatchewan to take appropriate measures to establish conditions in 

Saskatchewan not less favourable than those provided in the Canada Labour (Standards) code, and to 

give first priority to raising the minimum wage to $1.25 per hour. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to talk on this resolution, I first of all want to 

commend the member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek) for his excellent and painstaking presentation in 

justifying the contentions he advanced when he was presenting the case for the resolution. Mr. Speaker, 

I think he very carefully documented his case and he also pointed to the beneficial social and economic 

consequences that would arise from a favorable consideration of the resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tonight I would like to refer for a moment or two to the remarks of the Minister of Labour 

(Mr. Coderre) who followed the member from Regina East in the debate a short time ago. We saw the 

spectacle in this house of the minister not speaking specifically to the issue concerned but attempting to 

obscure the essence of the matter under discussion by an offensive in an entirely different direction. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, this is an old dodge that almost 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1299 

every member of the general public let alone most politicians recognize as a nice device for escaping the 

uncomfortable realities of the moment. You know, the minister talked about the CCF “not acting in 20 

years”. This is so often echoed from the other side of the house, Mr. Speaker. The CCF had 20 years to 

do certain things. I seem to hear this same comment coming from the Premier this evening as on another 

occasion. The reason why the CCF did have 20 years as a government was because of its continual 

activity. At the same time it seems to me that it is very unlikely that the premier will see that period of 

office precisely because of the period of less than two years during which he and his party have 

occupied that right part of the house. 

 

In any case, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) the other night again raised this question of the CCF 

“not having acted on labor matters in 20 years”. I think that was almost his precise language. This 

comment must have reached the height of absurdity. On one hand we have listened, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Liberals over the years including the hon. Premier when he was in opposition talking about labor 

legislation that was too extreme, had gone too far, was “too fancy”, had done too much. Yet we are now 

told by the Minister of Labour that the CCF has not done anything for labor in its 20 year period in 

office. 

 

This kind of assertion does not really need to be taken very seriously or really needs much of an answer. 

In every province of Canada authoritative bodies of labor and indeed the national body of labor, the 

Canadian Labour Congress, have consistently recognized that labor legislation in the province of 

Saskatchewan in the period from 1944 to 1964 was the most advanced, the most humane, and the most 

progressive of any province. It‟s a fact, Mr. Speaker, and every one in this house must know it‟s a fact, 

that the steps taken by the CCF government in labor legislation were followed in other provinces 

because of the pressures that were engendered for like measures in each of these provinces. This is a 

straight matter of record. I won‟t transgress either on the time or on the rules of the house, Mr. Speaker, 

in referring to all the cases, I think they are too well known for very much discussion. 

 

Now, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) told us the other night that the first minimum wage was 

instituted in 1917 in this province. I didn‟t check his figure. I took it at face value. Who on earth is 

disputing the fact that there was a minimum wage type of law in Saskatchewan in 1917. There was a law 

of sorts granting the most bare protection, very sparse, very threadbare, indeed in that time and in the 

years that followed. I want to remind the house, Mr. Speaker, that in 1944 when the CCF assumed 

power, minimum wages in this province were as low as $6 a week. In some instances people had to 

work for six months before they got the full minimum wage on the job. Minimum wage protection at the 

end of some 38 years of Liberal power in this province was of the most skeleton kind. That description 

would certainly be concurred by many of the unfortunate workers who had to endure the benefits of the 

legislation at that time. 

 

Generally speaking I think the minimum wage law of Saskatchewan has been considerably in advance 

of that of other provinces. It hasn‟t always been the highest rate for any one job but the minimum wage 

has been during the period of office of the previous government the highest single rate existing across 

the country. The probationary period which exists in many provinces were done away with in this 

province many years ago; I think 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1300 

quite properly so. A minimum wage should be just that. It should not be a kind of incentive range for the 

employer to work within. The minimum wage should rather be the bottom of an incentive wage for the 

employer. 

 

As well, over the years the minimum wage law in this province has under the previous government 

provided benefits such as public holidays, overtime payments on holidays, just to name one or two of 

the benefits in this connection that exceeded the benefits in all other provinces in Canada. However, the 

major argument over the years by many members of the legislature has been that it would be too 

difficult, too hard to see more advanced minimum wage protection until such protection existed on a 

more national basis throughout Canada. Of course at that time the Canada Labour (Standards) Code was 

not in existence. But the coming into force of the Canada Labour Code clearly confronts every province 

now, especially, it seems to me, provinces under Liberal administration, with the responsibility of 

implementing like protection in their own jurisdictions. There is no longer the excuse that could be 

sheltered behind in earlier years namely that it was unwise to go too far, too soon. 

 

The Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) has referred rather disparagingly to the Canada Labour Code by 

saying that since it came into force there have been hundreds of orders of exemptions, if I am quoting 

him accurately; and I think I am. Well, there certainly must be a transition period for the Canada Labour 

(Standards) Code but I don‟t think that anyone can challenge the fact that these exemptions or 

variations, if you like, because I suppose they follow these two pattern, are to be made only temporarily. 

They are made to accommodate some special situations and only that. Undoubtedly, and I think the 

former Minister of Labour may be taken as an authority for this statement, the Federal Department of 

Labour hopes to eliminate as far as possible all orders of exemption and all variations that don‟t provide 

the fullest possible benefits, just as soon as this is reasonably possible. 

 

Of course, argument by itself doesn‟t mean anything in any case simply because you have to have some 

exemptions or variations, and I think a fair case could be made at least for some, does not mean that the 

basic protection should not be guaranteed and provided for as many people as possible. I believe too that 

the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) spoke about the Labour Code having “upset all schedules”. I 

cannot feel that he in the use of this language is a very active supporter of the principles of the Canada 

Code. 

 

Really the crux of the argument for the adoption of $1.25 per hour rate, the rate that is now stated in the 

Canada Labour Code, is that average wages and indeed the earnings of many people in society have 

marched forward much more rapidly than have minimum wages in general in this province, or apart 

from that, across the country. The fact is—and this has been pointed out already by the member from 

Regina East (Mr. Smishek) — that relatively minimum wage protection has declined in relation to 

average wage and salary conditions, and average income conditions in Saskatchewan. On this bare 

argument alone, there exists the need to update the minimum wage protection just as soon as possible. 

 

I am sure that members of the house are aware of the phenomenon that has been referred to more than 

once in every legislature in Canada, certainly in the House of Commons, that conditions 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1301 

of abject poverty exist among 20 to 30 per cent of the families in this country. Conditions are not getting 

better. The situation is actually resulting in the income spread growing larger. This is not healthy. I am 

convinced that one of the reasons for this is that minimum income protection — and I don‟t care 

whether it is in minimum wages or through some other income, although we are talking tonight about 

minimum wage protection — has just not been keeping pace with the general income movement in 

society. What I am saying is that an inequitable situation has developed so far as minimum wage are 

concerned. Action, remedial action, to correct this whole matter, should be taken just as soon as it is 

possible to do so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, who can get up in this house and argue that the rate of $1.25 per hour is high in this 

day and age, and that it should not be implemented without delay throughout this province? And who 

can dispute the crying need for a greater measure of buying power among the low wage earners and the 

classes of people that I made brief reference to. (In the midst, so far as the urban areas of this province 

are concerned, of one of the highest food price areas in Canada as was revealed in a survey by one of the 

newspapers just a week or so ago). There is in this a paradox. While this exists we find the farmer‟s 

share of the food dollar is at this time declining. Good evidence can be found for this in recent figures of 

the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if it can be shown as some people would like to argue that training periods are 

necessary in some occupations before full minimum wages are paid because of the type of job that is 

concerned, I would argue that this is not a matter of subsidy for the workman. This should be a matter of 

public subsidy for the workman. This should be a matter of public subsidy if it is necessary. I know of 

few, if any, cases where indeed it is necessary. In any case I doubt that in reality anything of this kind 

needs to be done except in the most extreme cases. 

 

The fact is that one has only to look at many of the burgeoning restaurant, hotel, motel complexes across 

this province to realize that this is a generally booming industry which at the same time has extremely 

low rates of pay for its employees. As an industry it pays to a large proportion of its staff rates of 

remuneration which are something less than princely. In many instances, in my opinion, they could 

generally be termed substandard. I remind members at the same time that a good part of the same 

industry is by no means charging low rates for the services sold to the public. 

 

The United States Secretary of Labour, Mr. Willard Wirtz, recently made a statement that I think is 

worthwhile to refer to tonight. He said in a recent article: 

 

. . . a heightened national purpose to ensure against anyone in this country remaining poor except by 

his own default has reawakened recognition of the place of minimum wage law in the arsenal of 

weapons for the war against poverty. 

 

And Mr. Wirtz has gone on to comment about the effect of the 1961 amendment to the federal minimum 

wage laws in the USA. He said that between three and a half and four million workers were benefited by 

the action that was taken in 1961 to raise total remuneration and, generally speaking, improve conditions 

across the USA. He commented that there was about $1,200,000 in additional 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1302 

remuneration provided each year to these very low wage earning sections. He also said there were other 

favorable side-effects of these increase and I‟m quoting him directly again: 

 

During the period in which these amendments had become effective, employment has risen 

dramatically. So have profits and there has been remarkable price stability. The record negates any 

suggestion that these statutory changes have retarded economic expansion, adversely affected 

employment, reduced profits, or contributed to inflation. 

 

In the same speech Secretary Wirtz came down hard on what he called the half-truths which have had a 

large influence in the history of the Fair Labour Standards Act, namely that an increase in the minimum 

wages increases unemployment. Mr. Wirtz told his audience that after increases in minimum wages in 

the United States were provided, employment always went up. He said that: 

 

. . . it usually went up more in the lower paid occupations most directly affected by the statutory 

requirements than in other occupations. 

 

Mr. Wirtz said also that employment increased after 1961 when minimum wage changes went into effect 

in USA and that in 1965 after the last change in minimum wages had been effected in that country there 

was an 8,000,000 increase in employment. Unemployment dropped from 7 per cent in 1961 to 4.1 per 

cent in 1965. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wirtz has also stated that minimum wages have not had an upward effect on prices. In 

fact he said that the period after the 1961 minimum wage changes in federal law in the USA had been 

one of “extraordinary price stability”. He said that the wholesale price level in April, 1964, and this was 

seven months after the final stage of $1.25 per hour minimum wage went into effect, was almost the 

same as it had been in April, 1961. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want again to remind the house that we are dealing with a resolution that primarily 

assists, not the organized employee of this province, but unorganized people. Most of the people who 

are organized into unions already receive rates much in excess of $1.25 per hour. We should be more 

concerned for tonight that those who don‟t have union protection should get some protection, some real 

protection granted by law, and through minimum wage rises at this time. Again I say that in a period 

when Saskatchewan has record revenues, at a time when industry and economy are burgeoning, as never 

before, any increase that is contemplated in the minimum wage and as suggested by the Minister of 

Labour (Mr. Coderre), should be at least very near to the $1.25 figure. 

 

I come now to the amendment that has been proposed by the Minister of Labour to the resolution that 

was moved by the member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek). In passing may I say again that while I 

defer to the decision that was made by Your Honour in accepting this amendment, I must respectfully 

hold to the opinion that the amendment is inconsistent and incompatible with the original resolution. 

However, since it has been deemed to be in order I would like to discuss it just for a moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that the amendment begins by commending the Saskatchewan government for 

endorsing the Canada Labour 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1303 

(Standards) enactment by the parliament of Canada. I would like to be apprised of any public statement 

or of any correspondence from the Minister of Labour or from the Premier that has forthrightly endorsed 

the Canada Labour (Standards) Code. I would also like to ask what are the measures that have been 

quoted in the amendment to the resolution by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre), “to establish 

conditions in Saskatchewan comparable to those provided in the Canada Labour (Standards) Code.” If a 

statement of support has been made by this government for the Canada Labour (Standards) Code, it has 

certainly been made very, very quietly, because I can assure you that most employed people, and 

unemployed people, know nothing about it. Apart from that there is nothing before this assembly and 

nothing before the Saskatchewan people to establish that conditions comparable to those provided in the 

Canada Labour (Standards) Code are, in fact, being contemplated or considered by this government. 

 

I take it, Mr. Speaker, that if consideration has been given to this comparability that we would shortly be 

hearing a most exciting announcement from my friend the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre). We should 

legitimately expect then, Mr. Speaker, to see an announcement that will establish a rate of minimum 

wages in Saskatchewan of at least $1.25 per hour with the 40 hour week conditions that are part of the 

Canada Labour (Standards) Code; that is, if the amendment is on all fours with genuineness and 

sincerity. 

 

Although I have said that I believe the amendment is far, far removed from the concise nature of the 

motion, I have also come to the conclusion that this may be at least one way of putting the government 

on record, even if in a rather left-handed fashion, so rather unwillingly, to support something more than I 

believe it had previously intended to do. 

 

I therefore believe that it might be well to strengthen the amendment so that the rather weak intentions 

of the government can be bolstered and shored up. I would, therefore, Mr. Speaker, beg leave of the 

assembly to move, seconded by the hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) that an amendment be 

made to the amendment as follows: 

 

That the following words be added at the end: 

 

and recommends that the government proceed expeditiously in these changes with the least possible 

delay. 

 

Sub-amendment agreed to. 

 

Amendment, as amended, agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended, agreed to. 

 

MOTION: INCLUSION OF DRUGS IN MEDICAL CARE PLAN 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): 

 

That in the light of the promise of the government of Canada to implement a National Medical Care 

Plan by 1967 and to pay one-half of the cost of such a plan, this assembly urges the Saskatchewan 

government to give consideration to the immediate inclusion of drugs prescribed by physicians under 

the Saskatchewan Medical Care Plan; 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1304 

and the proposed amendment moved thereto by the Hon. Mr. Stewart: 

 

That the words from “That” in line 1 to the word “this” in line 4 be deleted and that all the words after 

word “assembly” in line 4 be deleted and the following words added: 

 

congratulates the government of Canada on its proposal to introduce a National Medical Care Plan by 

July 1, 1967, and to pay half the cost of such plan, and that in the light of this proposal this assembly 

recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan give consideration to the introduction of a drug 

insurance program to commence as soon after the National Medical Care Plan is introduced as 

feasible. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I rise tonight to speak very briefly on the 

resolution and the resolution as amended. I recall not so long ago doing a little research with regard to 

some of the figures on sickness in Canada and in this province. I have been considering the beneficial 

effect that the provision of drugs in a medical care plan and a fuller health plan would have for the 

residents of our province. 

 

It has been estimated that we lose annually about 30,000,000 man days due to sickness. An extrapolation 

of figures on the basis of a rather small daily wage will give you the annual figure of about 

$1,500,000,000 lost in terms of production and lost wages. If we think only of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and use the same kind of estimates you will come to a figure somewhat in excess of 

$100,000,000 a year, as a figure for lost wages and lost production because of sickness. 

 

Everyone, I am sure, knows that in this day and age one of the prime means of fighting illness is the use 

of all kinds of drugs, especially the new drugs that have come to the fore in the last twenty years. It is 

fair to say that the physician today who is not equipped with modern, life-saving and other types of 

drugs would be in a very unhappy position indeed in the way of providing service. A great many people 

would be sick longer and in many cases would die, and would have died as a result of failure to get these 

modern life-saving drugs. But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that many people today are being ill longer and 

that many people are, in fact, dying because of the fact that they cannot pay for drugs which in many 

cases are extremely highly priced, so highly priced as to be beyond their reach. 

 

I know it will be said where people are in need, where they exhibit that need, that persons who sell 

drugs, people in government welfare departments and other appropriate agencies will see to it that they 

do not suffer a lack of these drug needs. The fact is, however, that the very many people having an 

honest pride, not wishing to accept welfare, not wanting, indeed, to go to a doctor because of fear that 

they will have to pay for highly priced drugs, neglect themselves, neglect their health and thus contribute 

to the kind of situation that at the outset of my talk this evening I suggested had resulted in some 

incredible losses in human treasures, in production, and in wages in Canada today. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the amendment that has been proposed to the motion is somewhat deficient 

in that it does not 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1305 

do what the mover and the seconder of the motion wished to be done. This evening before I sit down I 

would beg leave of the assembly to move an amendment to this resolution by deleting therefrom the 

words in the last line: 

 

After the National Medical Care Plan is introduced. 

 

It is moved by myself and seconded by the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). 

 

Mr. B. D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t a copy of the sub-amendment here but it 

would seem to me that it would make more sense, Mr. Speaker, if it had stopped at “insurance program” 

in line six, and also deleted the words “to commence as soon”. In the way it would read now, there 

seems to be a sort of a dead end. I was wondering if the member for Moose Jaw had forgotten to delete a 

couple of more words. It doesn‟t quite make sense the way it is. 

 

Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I think you have already seen that the words “as 

feasible” are included in the last line so that it reads: 

 

to commence as soon as feasible. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The house agreed to take the motion as read. Probably what I should do is read the 

motion and the amendment. The motion is: 

 

That in the light of the promise of the government of Canada to implement a National Medical Care 

Plan by 1967 and to pay one-half of the cost of such a plan, this assembly urges the Saskatchewan 

government to give consideration to the immediate inclusion of drugs prescribed by physicians under 

the Saskatchewan Medical Care Plan; 

 

and the amendment thereto: 

 

That the resolution be amended by striking out all the words after the word “that” in the first line to the 

word “this” in the fourth line and by striking out all the words after the word “assembly in the fourth 

line to the end of the resolution and to substitute therefor the following: 

 

congratulates the government of Canada on its proposal to introduce a National Medical Care Plan by 

July 1, 1967, and to pay half the cost of such plan, and that in the light of this proposal this assembly 

recommends that the government of Saskatchewan give consideration to the introduction of a drug 

insurance program to commence as soon after the National Medical Care Plan is introduced as 

feasible. 

 

and the sub-amendment would delete the words: 

 

after the National Medical Care Plan is introduced. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word or two to the house on this 

sub-amendment. You notice that in the amendment 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1306 

and for that matter in the motion itself, reference is made to the National Medical Care Plan, and it is 

called a proposal to introduce a National Medical Care Plan by July 1st, 1967. Now, we know that 

certain roads are paved with good intentions, and there is many a slip „twixt the cup and the lip, and we 

don‟t know . . . 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — All is well that ends well. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — That is what I will say to you a little later, “All is well that ends well”, 

and we are just trying to end this resolution well. But we don‟t know for sure, no one knows when 

exactly we are going to get a national medical care plan, not even my friends in the Liberal party know 

because the Liberal party has said this is what they are going to do. But you know they said in 1919 they 

were going to do things with regard to health and they haven‟t got them all done yet, and that is a long 

time, Mr. Speaker, 

 

I think it would be foolish for this legislature to shackle itself and tie itself to some action of the federal 

government. I think what the members of this house want, I think everybody agrees that it is a good 

thing to have insurance cover the cost of drugs. I think what the members of this house want is to have 

this kind of insurance come into effect just as soon as we can. Now, that is what the sub-amendment will 

ask for. When the sub-amendment is put into effect then it asks that the government of Saskatchewan 

give consideration to the introduction of a drug insurance program to commence as soon as feasible. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it may not be feasible to commence it until July 1st, 1967, I don‟t know. But I would 

certainly like to see it in these words rather than tie ourselves to the possible actions of some other 

government. Let‟s get on with the business here in Saskatchewan. This will not, doesn‟t commit the 

government to doing it immediately. We are not even asking them to consider it for immediate action as 

the original resolution asks, but as soon as feasible. And I think it would be very sensible for the house 

to vote for this sub-amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, why wait? Why wait for the federal government to bring 

in its medical care plan. My heavens, according to the Premier, the government is swimming in wealth 

now, rolling in it, it is just pouring in. We can give $8,000,000 in Homeowner grants. What are you 

afraid of? Why are you waiting for the federal government? We have been waiting for them since 1919, 

and they are less predictable than the weather in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this basis alone, there is poor justification for hon. members opposite supporting this 

simple amendment. Let‟s do it as soon as we possible can, and let‟s not wait until July, 1967. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the sub-amendment, I don‟t intend to support it. I don‟t 

think it is necessary. I can assure the members opposite that we are confident that the federal 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1307 

government will have a National Care Plan by 1967. I can further assure them that if by any chance they 

don‟t have one, because of the obstructive tactics of the opposition down there, or for some other reason, 

I can assure them that we in Saskatchewan intend to implement our promise, that we intend to have a 

drug insurance program introduced in this province and working in this province before 1968. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, that being the case then, there is 

absolutely no reason for the members of the government to reject the amendment which has been 

offered. This is just to keep the record straight, perhaps help to keep them a little bit honest, with a little 

bit of pressure on. We ask them to support this particular program now. 

 

Obviously what we are concerned with on this side of the house is that again we will get, when next year 

rolls around, the answer from the government that we have had so many times, “the idea is good but the 

time is not right”. We have had it once already tonight, we had it once yesterday, we have had it I don‟t 

know how many hundred times during the years that have passed. This little amendment is, just as I say, 

to keep them on the track, hopefully to help keep them honest in terms of what the Minister of Health 

(Mr. Steuart) just now said they were going to do and what they said they would do during the election 

campaign. He, himself, has removed every vestige of reason for anybody over there voting against the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — It is very interesting to hear the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Steuart) at this time say that he, and I presume his colleagues, are going to vote against the 

sub-amendment. 

 

I have a program here of the Liberal party, their election promises, and no. 7 says that they will maintain 

medical care insurance and extend it to cover major drug costs. Now, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, who the 

Liberals are fooling? Were they fooling the electorate when they made this promise? Or were they just 

foolhardy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now they are going to vote against this very platform plank that they presented to 

the people only two years ago. I say that if you vote against this platform then the people of 

Saskatchewan will know just who you are. Your promises were not meant to be kept. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Is that the only answer you have got. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, Order! 

 

The sub-amendment was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1308 

YEAS—(22) 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd 

Cooper (Mrs.) 

Wood 

Nollet 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) 

Blakeney 

Davies 

Willis 

Whelan 

Nicholson 

Kramer 

Dewhurst 

Berezowsky 

Michayluk 

Smishek 

Link 

Snyder 

Broten 

Larson 

Robbins 

Pepper 

Brockelbank 

(Saskatoon City) 

 

NAYS—(26) 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Grant Romuld 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Bjarnason MacLennan 

Steuart Trapp Larochelle 

Heald Cuelenaere Coupland 

Guy Gallagher Gardner (Moosomin) 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Mitchell 

Loken Leith  
 

The amendment was agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS—(26) 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Grant Romuld 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Bjarnason MacLennan 

Steuart Trapp Larochelle 

Heald Cuelenaere Coupland 

Guy Gallagher Gardner (Moosomin) 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Mitchell 

Loken Leith  

 

NAYS—(22) 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd 

Cooper (Mrs.) 

Wood 

Nollet 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) 

Blakeney 

Davies 

Willis 

Whelan 

Nicholson 

Kramer 

Dewhurst 

Berezowsky 

Michayluk 

Smishek 

Link 

Snyder 

Broten 

Larson 

Robbins 

Pepper 

Brockelbank 

(Saskatoon City) 

 

The motion was agreed to unanimously. 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1309 

MOTION: AMENDING THE SCHOOL ACT RE MENTALLY HANDICAPPED CHILDREN 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Nicholson (Saskatoon): 

 

That this assembly believes that every child has the right to develop his potentials to the maximum, 

and recommends that the government of Saskatchewan give consideration to amending the School Act 

and other legislation if necessary, to make mandatory the education of all educable and trainable 

mentally handicapped children, and to recognize in its grant structure the additional costs of such 

education; 

 

and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Leith (Elrose): 

 

That all the words after “Saskatchewan” in line 3 be deleted and the following words added: 

 

encourage school boards, through the grant structure, to accept the responsibility of providing an 

appropriate education for exceptional children. 

 

Mr. D. W. Michayluk (Redberry): — In adjourning the debate on the amendment moved by the hon. 

member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) I wanted more time as I had not had the opportunity to consider what this 

amendment to the original resolution introduced by the senior member from Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) 

had meant. 

 

In perusing the amendment and the original resolution, Sir, I may say that the original resolution, as 

presented by the hon. member for Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) would make it mandatory for the school 

boards to provide education for the mentally retarded, that is the educable and the trainable retarded 

children. The resolution, or the amendment to the resolution, as proposed by the hon. member for Elrose 

(Mr. Leith) suggests that encouragement be given to school boards through a grant structure, to accept 

responsibility in providing an appropriate education for exceptional children. Now “exceptional”, Mr. 

Speaker, could be taken to mean two different ways. It could mean students with the high mental ability, 

or the students that are exceptional due to mental retardation. 

 

When this resolution was brought before the house, the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) made a brief 

comment, “While I agree wholeheartedly that much must be done in future years in this regard, I do not 

think that the time is right at the present to make it mandatory for all school systems”. 

 

Now, I am somewhat perturbed and surprised, Mr. Speaker, at this particular statement by the Minister 

of Education at the time when this resolution was brought before this house. 

 

I have, Sir, before me the annual report from the Department of Education for the year 1964-65. The 

word mentioned in the amendment to the resolution, is to encourage. I want to quote some statistics 

from the annual report of the Department of Education for 1964-65. Education for the educable and 

trainable that is being provided by various school units and public school boards in the province of 

Saskatchewan is something of this nature. For the educable retarded there are five school units providing 

education. There are thirteen separate and public school boards, there are some 67 teachers in the 

employment 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1310 

of these jurisdictions and the total enrolment that are educably retarded is 998. In the trainable retarded, 

Mr. Speaker, there are some ten units out of 59 that are providing facilities and training for this group. 

There are seven public school boards and also four special boards. They employ some 51 teachers and 

have a total enrolment of 452 pupils. In the two groups, Mr. Speaker, and I want to bring this to the 

attention of the hon. members of this house, a total enrolment in the educable retarded and the trainable 

retarded is 1,450 students. Now, these jurisdictions and school boards and school units that are 

responsible for the education of school children need no more encouragement. They have already taken 

the initiative. What these jurisdictions need is a grant structure and a financial responsibility by the 

province of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) says that the time is not yet ready or 

right. Now, I know that some school jurisdictions are not in the financial position to provide facilities of 

this nature. Take the school unit where I am teaching, assessed at $7,000,000, employing some 77 

teachers. They are not in a position to provide special facilities and qualified teachers due to the fact that 

the enrolment for this group does not warrant providing facilities and engaging a teacher. However, 

school boards could do it collectively. Well, what is being done? What does the Blaine Lake School 

Unit do in respect to the mentally retarded children? Well, it undertakes to pay the tuition fee. Some of 

the children go to the John Dolen School in the city of Saskatoon. Other students go to the school for the 

mentally retarded in the city of North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, I have a clipping, and with your 

permission I would like to quote in part: 

 

Non-resident student fees remain the same. 

 

But it further says this: 

 

Public school boards chose to approve a non-resident fee schedule which will increase the fees for 

non-residents in the retarded class . . . 

 

And this is the group for which this resolution is to speak 

 

. . . in the retarded class increased to $350 from $240. 

 

In other words a parent or a school jurisdiction that wants to send a mentally retarded student to the 

school for the mentally retarded in Saskatoon is by one stroke obligated to pay an additional $110 in 

increased tuition fee. 

 

This is precisely the reason why the hon. member for Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) brought this resolution 

to this legislature. It is to obligate the Department of Education to provide a grant structure to assist the 

school jurisdictions in the education of the mentally retarded. And it also states further that it is to make 

the education of the mentally retarded obligatory or mandatory. The School Act as it exists today states 

clearly that all children from the age of seven to the age of 16 must attend school. There is no provision 

in the School Act to make the education of the mentally retarded obligatory. I think that this resolution 

would make it possible for all the children, be they normal children, be they brilliant children, or be they 

mentally retarded to get educated to some degree, provided they are educable and trainable. We as a 

society must assume and the government must assume full responsibility for their training and their 

education. 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1311 

All this costs money. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that in the last budget when we were the 

government, we provided grants to the school jurisdictions of Saskatchewan whereby we made an 

additional increase in grants up to 14 per cent of the total cost of education. When this government 

assumed office they provided only 7 per cent of the costs over the previous year. What happened? Mill 

rates for school purposes were increased to the taxpayer anywhere from 3 to 7 mills. Not only were they 

increased last year. I have, Sir, clippings from papers that will indicate precisely what is happening in 

this fiscal year where the school boards, or the school units are setting the budget for 1966. What has 

happened? North Battleford board approves a budget boost of how much? A 4.4 mill increase. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Lower taxes. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — For the unit board the total overall figure is $944,670 and this is the North 

Battleford School unit. Their mill increase is three mills. Another area had a 1.4 mill increase. No 

School Board is aware of what the new incentive grants or its formula will do to keep down the mill 

rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am certain that we are all in accord or in agreement with the resolution that was moved in 

this legislature. I am not sure that I favor the amendment moved by the hon. member for Elrose (Mr. 

Leith) because I think that as a province we should assume financial responsibility for the training of the 

mentally retarded children. School Boards certainly are aware of the need and require little 

encouragement as I have demonstrated by what is being done throughout the various units and public 

school boards in the province of Saskatchewan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the 

members of this house defeat the amendment and support the original resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. G. J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — I think I said previously on this subject that the word 

mandatory is most unfortunate here because I think the time is not ripe to force all school systems to 

take on this extra burden at this time. I think I also pointed out that great strides had been made in the 

last two years in the number of boys and girls, the number of students who have and who are now 

receiving education by the school systems. 

 

I think I would be more struck by the sincerity of the opposition in urging this point at this time if there 

had been some lapse of time, 10 or 15 years, but when you think, Mr. Speaker, that in less than two 

years a member of the opposition can get up and say there is great urgency in this matter. Well, it‟s 

nonsense. If there is great urgency there must have been for a long time and they were the government 

when this urgency was here and did nothing about it. I am going to tell you that before very long there 

will be something done about it. I don‟t think it will be done in a mandatory attitude. It has not been our 

attitude that we will demand people to do this and to do other things. I think we will achieve our 

objective by encouraging, financially and otherwise, boards to take on this extra burden. I am convinced 

that if you look at the figures, the improvement that we have had in the last year and a half or two years, 

it is amazing. I am convinced also that the best way to achieve this educational opportunity for the 

mentally retarded, 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1312 

and for other exceptional children, is to encourage it financially and by grant structures which we are 

very seriously considering. We have had consultations with school systems on the matter. For this 

reason I very much favor the amendment and the motion amended, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, once again we have heard from the 

members opposite that phrase for which they are most famous, “It‟s a good idea but it isn‟t the right 

time”. Three times tonight, we heard it yesterday, and as I said previously this evening, we have heard it 

many times over the years. 

 

When it was proposed that larger school units be established in this province, the members of the Liberal 

Party who then sat here said, “It‟s not the right time. It‟s a good idea.” When it was proposed to 

establish hospitalization plans in this province, the members of the Liberal party then sitting over here 

said, “The idea is good but it‟s not the right time.” When it was proposed to establish a comprehensive 

medicare program in the province, the members of the Liberal party said, “The idea is good but the time 

is not ripe”. I should think, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn‟t be too long before they think up at least some 

original way of saying “The time isn‟t ripe” instead of just repeating the same phrases one after the 

other. 

 

Let me look just for a moment at the resolution, Mr. Speaker, and draw the attention of the Minister of 

Education (Mr. Trapp), in particular, to what the resolution says. It asks the government to give 

consideration to amending the School Act, asks them to think about amending it and other legislation, if 

necessary, to make mandatory the education of all educable and trainable mentally handicapped children 

and to recognize in its grant structure the additional costs of such education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate the argument which the member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) advanced the other 

day that in a number of instances it is not feasible, not practicable to establish these services in each and 

every district in which there might live one of these handicapped youngsters. But I submit that we can 

take mandatory action in ways other than this. The member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk), who has just 

taken his seat, drew attention to the particular situation of one youngster and her parents in the school 

system today. He drew attention to the fact that it is possible under the provisions of the School Act as 

they now exist for a school board to exclude itself from any financial responsibility whatsoever for this 

particular type of youngster. Once that has happened then the parents, if they are lucky enough to find a 

place where this youngster can be trained, are in the position of having to pay the entire cost themselves. 

I submit that one method, one step, one stage, of making mandatory some responsibility for these is to 

say to school boards that for these youngsters, as we have already said for other youngsters, there shall 

be a mandatory financial responsibility. If there is a youngster of this kind in the community and if the 

area is not capable itself of providing the facilities for this kind of training, or education as the case may 

be, then the school board at least ought to be responsible for supplying the fees at the institution to 

which the youngster can be sent. That is a fact of the resolution, that is a fact which is entirely ignored 

by the amendment and that is one reason why the amendment 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1313 

ought to be voted down. 

 

One further point, Mr. Speaker, and all of us are aware of the fact that this is not just a question of 

providing school facilities and of providing teachers. It is also a question of doing more than we have 

done in providing teachers who have the right kind of training. So there needs to be financial assistance 

and encouragement and organization to that end. It is not just a matter either of providing teacher who 

have the right kind of training, it is a matter also of providing many of other persons with the kinds of 

skills that are needed also — the teacher psychologist, the social worker, the psychiatrist, as the case 

may be. I would hope that the time is not too long before we much more adequately provide this whole 

group of disciplines which are needed if we are to make the kind of contribution which society can 

make, if we but will it, to the development and the achievement of at least some greater degree of 

satisfaction for these unfortunate young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to go back specifically to the resolution I submit that when the amendment omits any 

consideration on the part of the government of preparing for school boards to accept in a mandatory way 

financial responsibility for the education of these youngsters, then that amendment falls short of what is 

necessary because if that is the case, then the amendment ought to be defeated and the original motion 

ought to be supported. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I must draw your attention to the fact that I moved the amendment 

and I intend to close the debate. 

 

Mr. A. M. Nicholson (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) and the member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) for their constructive suggestions in connection 

with this important resolution. Mr. Speaker, the arguments used by the Minister of Education (Mr. 

Trapp) were the arguments which were heard 100 years ago when the question of education for all 

children was a matter of public controversy. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the original resolutions sets out 

that this assembly believes every child has a right to develop his potential to the maximum. We are 

discussing a group of children who are citizens and future citizens of this province and this country. I 

think the resolution in its original form in the very affluent Saskatchewan of today was very reasonable. 

I think that the Minister of Education is correct in saying that the passing of this resolution and acting on 

the original resolution would place additional costs on the taxpayers. That‟s true, Mr. Speaker, but there 

are unreasonable costs which are being carried by the parents of these children in many sections of the 

province. I hope that the assembly will reject the amendment that has been proposed and that all children 

will have the advantages which they should have in this country as we plan to move into the second 

century of Canadian history. 

 

Mr. H. A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I have had occasion to live close to four children that are 

retarded. In fact all four children, in the last eight years have lived within four miles of my home. So I 

have been brought into fairly close contact with this, probably more than the average person has at this 

time. We have started a schoolroom in the town of Viscount and it has been quite successful. What is 

needed in this whole program is public education. We realize that we are not going to teach these 

children 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1314 

too much in two half days in a week. But we do know that we will be bringing to the attention of the 

people of the Viscount area, the people in the Lanigan unit, that these children have as much right to, 

and the parents of these children have as much right to the help, and the children themselves have as 

much, shall we say, right to the amenities that this society can give them. I think that when we talk about 

mandatory I think that brothers and sisters of these children find their way to school because in many 

cases it is mandatory that they do find their way. I think we are working close to a time when it will be 

mandatory that these children and parents get help in the situation that they find themselves in. 

 

I think what we fail to realize in many cases is that parents of these children, as the member for 

Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) mentioned, have an extremely rough road. They have someone in hand that 

is active and uncontrollable for a much longer time than the normal child. That is as the child gets older 

sometimes, the child is more troublesome. I think that any help that these parents can receive from 

society should be made available. I think that this legislature in saying that we should make it mandatory 

that education to all educable and trainable children be given and that consideration be given to this type 

through encouragement of grants through the grant structure to this type of need, would all be to the 

good. 

 

I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that the work that is being done by the Association of Retarded Children is a 

tremendous thing in bringing forth the all important fact that there are so many children that are 

retarded. I think that if you have a group of ten people in a room that there will at least be one of them 

that will know of a retarded child and that child will be either a relative or a very close neighbor. 

Because of this I think we haven‟t added up the number and the important of this. I also think that by 

opposing the amendment and passing the resolution we would be just recognizing the problem in the 

way that we should in this house. 

 

Before I sit down, Mr. Speaker, I would very much like to give credit to the school boards that are 

giving help in this area. I think it‟s very commendable because some of us who have had very close 

contact with this find it easy to be sympathetic and knowledgeable as far as the problem of the parent is 

concerned and also to some degree, the child itself. But I found out from experience that not too many 

people do realize that there are as many retarded children in Saskatchewan as there are. So I will oppose 

the amendment and support the resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

The amendment was agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the members to the fact that the mover of the motion is 

about to close the debate. If anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. He didn‟t move the original 

motion. He spoke to the motion and moved an amendment. He has no right to speak again. He has 

exercised his right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You are right. Point of order is well taken. I‟m 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1315 

sorry. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

MOTION: PRIVATE PENSION PLANS 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Davies (Moose Jaw City): 

 

That this assembly urges the government of Saskatchewan to consider as soon as possible the 

introduction of legislation and the adoption of any other necessary ways and means by which the 

interests and the welfare of employees affected by private pension plans can be fairly and reasonably 

protected; and that consideration be given specifically to changes that would provide that in the event 

of the termination of the employment of an employee, the amount of money to his credit in a private 

pension plan or like benefit, be vested in him through a deferred pension, or transferred to his credit in 

another plan, including one operating in a concern in which he subsequently accepted new 

employment, to the end that reward for service rendered and the principle of pension portability may 

be recognized and secured. 

 

Mr. W. A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — When I was discussing this problem with respect to 

portability of pensions and vesting of the employer‟s contributions to the employee, I stated that it was 

my belief that the economic premise in the Income Tax Act with respect to Income Tax Approved 

Pension Funds is that the employer‟s contribution on behalf of an employee is, in fact, a deferred wage. 

This, of course, can only be completely true if we achieve early vesting and complete portability. I 

expressed the opinion that the coming of the Canada Pension Plan should facilitate an increase in the 

vesting clauses in relation to private pension plans and therefore speed up portability. I mentioned the 

fact that since the Canada Pension Plan, and many private pension plans are operating, some adjustment 

had to be made between these private plans as they previously operated and the Canada Pension Plan. I 

mentioned the fact that generally speaking people assume there are two courses open. One usually 

referred to as “decking” or “stacking” and the other as “integration”. I mentioned that I felt there was a 

third course, much preferable perhaps to either of the first two, in which cognizance or recognition was 

made of the fact that contributions must indeed be made to the Canada Pension Plan and, therefore, 

some adjustments should be made in the private pension plans. 

 

I mentioned the fact that I had done a considerable research study on 1,140 trusteed pension plans in 

Canada and that under the present vesting clauses in all of the average earnings, final earnings, final 

average earnings, and career average earnings plans I looked at and indeed, some of the money purchase 

plans, actual portability is not achieved or complete vesting attained prior to actual retirement. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, in a large number of these particular private pensions plans, the employer in effect takes 

back the contributions he has made on behalf of employees when they terminate employment prior to 

normal retirement, simply through the legal loophole of reducing remittances to the pension trust in 

future months, by the amount which was not made available to the department employee by reason of 

the fact that the employer‟s contributions were not vested in him. 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1316 

I have mentioned the fact that only three real factors occur in a pension plan, the contributions made by 

the employee, and by the employer on his behalf, the time factor and the earnings factor. The latter two 

are closely related because it can be clearly demonstrated that the time factor is of great importance in 

the multiplicity factor of interest return credited to the employee in terms of his final pension. 

 

Using the example of a person having a $5,000 a year income with a 4 per cent contribution to a private 

pension plan plus the contributions that he must make to the Canada Pension Plan, we see results 

achieved, if employed for 35 years, at an assumed average compound interest return equal to the return 

we have achieved in our pension society that would provide a pension, along with his Canada Pension, 

of $407 per month. This figure compares with a combined pension of $482 if a “decking” program is 

used in the above example and a combined pension of $363 when an “integration” approach similar to 

the one apparently in mind by the government in relation to superannuation or pension funds under the 

jurisdiction, is utilized. It should be realized that it is most important that the individual retain his 

purchasing power, which is of vital importance not only to him as an individual upon reaching 

retirement, but to society as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would submit, that due to the fact that we have increasing productivity in terms of our 

economy, we simply must achieve wider distribution of income to maintain the purchasing power which 

is essential in terms of consumer economics, the vital factor in our modern day. 

 

To illustrate the prime factor here, I cite as an example: If the same individual had earned the same 

$5,000 income, made exactly the same contributions to a private pension plan, plus the contributions of 

$79.20 a year matched by his employer which he is required to make to the Canada Pension Plan, with 

only 20 years of participation, his monthly pension would reduced from $407 a month down to $210. 

Now, I would like members of the assembly, Mr. Speaker, to take note of the fact that although this 

individual would have approximately 60 per cent for as long a period of service, his actual pension is cut 

roughly in half. 

 

Further if you took a third individual at the same rate of pay, that is $5,000 annually, and with the same 

contribution to his private pension plan, plus the regular contributions which he must make to the 

Canada Pension Plan and similar contributions made by his employer, with the time factor reduced to 10 

years, this individual‟s pension would be reduced to $143 a month. Although this individual has a bonus 

in relation to the Canada Pension Plan it is clear that the vesting clause should credit to the employee at 

as early a date as possible all of the various contributions on his behalf. This occurs completely with 

respect to the Canada Pension Plan, and, Mr. Speaker, I submit should occur in terms of private pension 

plans. I think we can ask some very pertinent questions with respect to pensions, and a perusal and study 

of pension plans brings these readily to mind. 

 

Does the pension plan regardless of where it operates have a reasonable representation system for its 

employees? Does it have a reasonable representation system for its employer or employers? Often we 

have group trust type plans with more than one employer involved in the pension. Does the computation 

of service in terms of that vesting occur from the date he begins his service, or is it delayed until the time 

he retires and is 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1317 

based on total service? 

 

Does the plan supply to the participating employee an annual statement, clearly outlining what his equity 

is in the plan in relation to his own contributions and the earning accrued thereto at the beginning of the 

year? Does it supply the contributions of his employer and earnings accrued thereto at the beginning of 

the year? Does it supply the contributions of his employer and earnings accrued thereto at the beginning 

of the year. Does it list the contributions made by the employee and the employer during the year, plus 

accrued earnings credited to the account during the year and with final totals listed for that employee? 

 

It is most important that this be done. Mr. Speaker, I find in surveying pension plans across this country 

that in the main this is not done. Quite frankly many people you talk to will simply say, “I have a good 

pension”, but they have no idea what kind of pension results they are going to attain. I think it should 

clearly indicate the actual percentage of earnings realized and credit each year. I note pension bills 

introduced into the house this year indicating raising the returns, in terms of pension earnings, from 

percentages of 2 ½ per cent to 4 per cent. I submit this is most important. In fact, one-tenth of one per 

cent in earnings on a pension over an average of 35 years of participation means $1,000 to the pensioner, 

therefore, one percent means $10,000, two per cent means $20,000. Since $11,000 is required to achieve 

for the average male $1,000 per annum income on a guaranteed basis for a period certain of 10 years, 

$13,000 required for a female for $1,000 annual income per year, it is most important that people have 

some reasonable understanding of the costs of pensions involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cite, as an example, that it cost $11,000 to acquire $1,000 pension for a male at 65, and 

$13,000 for a $1,000 pension for a female at 65. This is basically due to the fact that women live longer 

than men. They are not the weaker sex. They are tougher and they last longer. I would simply state to all 

of the members in this assembly that they should accept the fact that a male can‟t beat a woman in the 

long run. 

 

I think these pensions should also state quite clearly what provisions, if any, are made for additional 

assistance over and above the actual contributions made by both the employee and the employer on his 

or her behalf, for long service personnel who happen to have a relatively short contributory periods. Mr. 

Speaker, we are approaching a period in the history of pensions when we will see increasing portability. 

About this there is no doubt whatsoever. Again it is a question, of course of timing. We have in this 

province and I am not sure of the actual title of the act, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) perhaps 

could give us this information, The Disclosures Act, I believe, and I think after the present government 

was elected it was found not necessary to continue to gather this data. I note a year ago the Minister of 

Labour did inform us that there were 984 registered pension plans in Saskatchewan, that they held some 

$464,000,000 in pension funds, that they had some 22,800 persons participating at that some 2,000 of 

them had already been retired, 1,900 of them males and 100 of them females. A breakdown was given 

with respect to the types of pensions listed. 

 

In addition to this, of course, other provinces have taken action. The most notable one is the Ontario 

Pension Benefits Act, 1962-63, amended in 1964, and declared to be effective as of 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1318 

January 1st, 1965, one year prior to the institution of the Canada Pension Plan. Quebec has a 

Supplemental Pensions Act with a reciprocal agreement with Ontario. Manitoba introduced a bill two 

years ago, Bill no. 107, with respect to some measure of control and some uniformity over private 

pension plans. That bill, however, did not pass their legislature. So, in effect, what we have today are 

three acts, one in Ontario, one in Quebec, one in Saskatchewan, currently inoperative in the main. The 

two in Ontario and Quebec, of course, cover the largest percentage of the total population in Canada, 

and they do have a reciprocal agreement so that they have complete uniformity in relation one to the 

other. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is most important. I mentioned previously that pension conferences had 

been held in Canada and I felt that there was some intimation that the government of Saskatchewan 

would go along with the idea of a uniform approach in this regard. It is most important that this be done. 

The Ontario Pension Benefits Act, of course, leads the way in this respect and points up very clearly the 

questions that I mentioned with respect to perusal of pension plans. The Ontario Pension Benefits Act 

says that all of the funds accumulated on behalf of a person in a pension plan which is income tax 

approved, after that individual has attained 45 years of age, and after he has 10 years of participation in 

their plan, must if her terminates employment prior to normal retirement, have 75 per cent of that total 

used for the purchase of pension at normal retirement. 

 

This is important, if we are to get portability and I sincerely hope we will, if we are to get speeded up 

vesting in terms of employers‟ contributions on behalf of employees. The other side of the coin is to 

make reasonable assurance that the money is used, in fact, for the purposes intended, that is the purchase 

of pensions. 

 

Now it is interesting to note that the Ontario Pension Benefits Act calls for: 

 

1. After age 45 and 10 years of participation, if termination of employment occurs prior to normal 

retirement, 75 per cent of the contributions and accrued earnings accumulated after January, 1965, 

must be used for pension purposes payable at normal retirement. Twenty five per cent is available to 

the individual who may have lost his job as a rehabilitation credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other night when I was speaking on this particular resolution, I cited specific examples 

in terms of dollars and cents to illustrate the impact of this rule. 

 

Three other rules are very important: 

 

Administrators of pension plans must supply annual reports to the participants of pension plans, 

including an annual financial statement, a copy of the regulations, and an individual equity statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform this house, in our pension society, we have been doing this for 22 

years. 

 

The pension administrator must provide annually a cost certificate to the Pension Commission of 

Ontario, to provide 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1319 

evidence that the pension plan is, in fact, solvent. 

 

In my study of the pension plans that I have mentioned, I came to this conclusion and this is backed up 

by a study carried out in Pennsylvania with respect to pension plans in that area of United States; that in 

actuality pension plans which call for specific levels of retirement pay have, in fact, no guarantee that 

there will be funds to meet those payments, and at any given time there almost never are sufficient funds 

to meet the obligations to which they are committed. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it is most important that the provisions of the Ontario Pension Benefits Act 

which I have summed up briefly do three things: (a) they speed up portability; (b) they insure that, in 

large measure, the money shall be used for the purposes intended; (c) they permit a 25 per cent 

settlement as a rehabilitation credit. I think there is merit in the fact that a rehabilitation credit is 

available, because as I previously pointed out there may be persons over 45 who lose their jobs and 

require funds in terms of rehabilitating themselves because they may find difficulty in securing 

employment. 

 

Lastly, it is vital that pension funds prove that they have solvency to meet the commitments they have 

made in relation to pensions. Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that the members of this assembly will 

unanimously endorse this resolution which simply calls for the speeding-up of portability and the 

improvement in vesting clauses relating to pension plans. 

 

In summation, I would say, pension plans generally mislead people, not necessarily intentionally, but 

this is what is actually happening. It might be summed up in two brief lines, “Things are not just what 

they seem; skim milk masquerades as cream”. There is a lot of truth in this in relation to pensions 

because most of the people who are involved in pensions have really very little grasp of what they will 

get in terms of final pensions. 

 

I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, sincerely hope that every member of this assembly will give support to this 

resolution, and that the government of this province will consider early action in relation to legislation 

which will supply reasonable uniformity throughout Canada as some of the other provinces are now 

taking action in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw attention to the fact that the mover of the motion is about to close the 

debate. If anyone wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to repeat anything that has been said, I 

assure you. I rise this evening to close this debate and to answer some of the questions that were raised 

by the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac), when he spoke on this resolution. 

 

Before proceeding, however, to an examination of what he said, may I congratulate the co-operative 

member from Saskatoon (Mr. Robbins) for his contribution to the debate. I think that he has reinforced 

the underlying contention of the resolution. I believe he has contributed a great deal of very good 

information 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1320 

that we would not otherwise have had. 

 

When the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) spoke, Mr. Speaker, he belittled the need for the 

legislation, and the adoption of the necessary ways and means to deal with portability of private pension 

plans. As I understood him he felt this was virtually impossible within the confines of one province. As I 

further understood the minister, he said that since the co-operation of all provinces and the dominion 

was required, we could do little or nothing until the federal government finally decided to do something. 

 

The first comment I would like to make here is that Pension Disclosure Legislation to start with is a 

matter for the provinces. Of course, some of the provinces have done something about it. The second 

thing that I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that while the federal government is now proceeding 

rather cautiously to considerations involving manpower and, therefore, probably eventually pensions, 

there is no evidence thus far that they have given any positive consideration whatsoever to the 

portability of private pension plans. All of the Canada Pension Plan considerations have been revolving 

around the public plan, not private plans. 

 

Now, I say, too, that even if action had been taken by the federal government—and I am submitting that 

it hasn‟t been taken effectively to this moment—that this wouldn‟t preclude action by the provinces. In 

fact, any action by this province to encourage portability in private pension plans should enhance and 

should encourage and stimulate the federal government to make some effort in this direction. 

 

Now, I want to point out here what I think is an extremely important point, Mr. Speaker, apropos the 

remarks of the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) the other day in this debate; and that is, that 

the frustration of some of the matters that are suggested in my resolution have been accomplished 

because of actions of the present Liberal government in this province to the fact that sections 4 and 5 of 

the Pensions Disclosure Legislation were last year deferred for a two year period until January 1st, of 

1967. I say this to the government that, in my opinion, the legislation had within it no power whatsoever 

to defer the reporting of all pension plans and the doing of all those things that are required by the two 

sections. They only authority that is given to the government is with respect to the temporary delaying of 

the filing of information on classes of pension plans. This obviously means that where there is a group 

of private plans where they may have some difficulty in filing information, then the government may for 

a short time defer the obligations that are inherent for private pension plans to file these reports. But the 

government, I suggest and submit here, did not have the power to completely defer the section required 

by sections 4 and 5 in the Pension Disclosure Legislation, and for a period of two years to wipe out all 

the reports, wipe out all the filing of information that would be most germane to the considerations that 

we must face in preparing for portability of private pension plans. This is another classic example of the 

delay of the government in this province. I suggest to the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) 

who is responsible for the Pension Disclosure Legislation, which is now as I understand, invested in the 

Public Service Commission, that he should immediately get an opinion from the Department of the 

Attorney General as to whether the action of the government in deferring the whole effect of 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1321 

sections 4 and 5 is legally justified under the circumstances. 

 

The minister has referred to the province of Ontario and made some brief mention to this. When I rose to 

speak in the instance, I reminded the members that the province of Ontario had made a commendable 

effort to achieve some degree of portability which I suggested nonetheless was rather of a conservative 

nature. But there is no reason to believe we could not do in Saskatchewan at least what has been done in 

the province of Ontario. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) has said that Ontario is a large province, that it has a 

large number of employees and, therefore, that in some way this means that Ontario is better able to 

cope with the problem. He has said it is a larger problem and, therefore, there is more reason for Ontario 

to do something that Saskatchewan does not need to do. 

 

This again is simply a matter of relativity. We have a large number of employees, and these have every 

bit as much right to consideration as the employees of another province. Again I say that this is no good 

reason for not proceeding as has been suggested in the resolution, in this province. 

 

I also say that the more provinces that do undertake the kind of action that is suggested in the resolution, 

the greater possibility there will be for some kind of interprovincial and federal co-operation to the end 

that more complete portability in private pension plans is achieved in the long run. 

 

The government of Saskatchewan has already in effect legislation for portability and pension rights for 

members of the public service; that is, those members of the public service that move from province to 

province. This step was taken not only to accommodate employees concerned, but to advantage the 

government of this province in securing employees from other areas. We do stand to lose some 

employees but in the end result the results are beneficial for ourselves and for other provincial 

jurisdictions. The idea of freezing people in their positions in the civil service across this country would, 

I think, in the long run deter progress in all aspects of public administration. But my point here is that we 

have already taken some steps in the reform of pensions in public employment. There is no real reason 

to believe why some similar remedial action cannot be undertaken in connection with the employees in 

private industry. Surely what is good for one section is good for another. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, whatever the arguments that have been advanced by the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

(Mr. McIsaac), it is clear that there is nothing whatsoever in the resolution that commits the government 

to any action that would be deemed to be adverse after that investigation had been completed. The 

resolution simply asks for consideration of legislation and the ways and means by which the welfare of 

employees affected by private pension plans can be fairly and reasonably protected. In other words, any 

investigation would inevitably precede any action, any possible action by the government. Whether or 

not any action was taken would finally depend on the government‟s attitude after that study had been 

made. 

 

I believe quite confidently that some study would reveal even more need to proceed than has been 

suggested by myself or the member from Saskatoon (Mr. Robbins). I submit to the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) therefore that apart from 

 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1322 

all the argument that he has advanced, the government has a responsibility and he has a responsibility as 

the minister in charge of the Public Service Commission, and the Pension Disclosure Legislation to see 

to it that there exists in this province the largest possible public measure of responsibility for private 

plans. 

 

With these words, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that members opposite would support us and show 

unanimous approval of the resolution this evening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

The motion was negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS—(20) 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd 

Cooper (Mrs.) 

Wood 

Nollet 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) 

Blakeney 

Link 

Whelan 

Nicholson 

Dewhurst 

Berezowsky 

Michayluk 

Smishek 

Willis 

Larson 

Robbins 

Pepper 

Brockelbank 

(Saskatoon) 

Davies 

Broten 

 

NAYS—(26) 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Grant Romuld 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Bjarnason MacLennan 

Steuart Trapp Larochelle 

Heald Cuelenaere Coupland 

Guy Gallagher Gardner (Moosomin) 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Leith 

Mitchell Loken  

 

MOTION: INCOME TAX EXEMPTION 
 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mrs. Merchant (Saskatoon 

City): 

 

That this assembly urges the government of Canada to amend the Income Tax Act to permit 

exemption of costs incurred in the purchase of equipment and instruments used by workers in their 

employment and to permit exemption of the cost of workers‟ transportation to and from their places of 

employment. 

 

Mr. J. E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — I would just like to say a few words on this particular 

resolution with regard to the changes in the Income Tax Act to allow working people similar 

concessions that other people now enjoy. There seemed to be many architects working on this particular 

resolution the other day, superfluous as a matter of fact, 



 

March 17, 1966 

 

 

1323 

so many that one of them was out of order. There seemed to be a certain degree of unanimity among the 

members of this chamber that even the resolution that was offered, that was out of order, had some 

appeal, and I would like at this time to beg leave of the assembly to offer an amendment and ask the 

legislature to vote in favor of the resolution as it will be amended. The amendment reads as follows: 

 

That after the word “purchase” in line 3, the words “and repair” be inserted and that the following 

words be added at the end: 

 

And further this assembly urges the government of Canada to amend the Income Tax Act to permit 

exemption of travel and living expenses incurred by persons who are required to live and work away 

from their normal place of residence. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion, as amended, agreed to. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, before the house adjourns I might say I 

understand that tickets to the Horse Show have been given out to all the members, but since we are 

sitting Monday we have been arrangements for the ticket to the Horse Show for Monday to be 

exchanged at Gillies Agency for Wednesday night. It has been suggested that we do so immediately so 

that we can have choice seats. I would now beg leave of the assembly to move that this house do now 

adjourn. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 9:59 o‟clock p.m. 

 


