



















































Hansard: February 16, 1966


209 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session – Fifteenth Legislature 

7th day 

 

Wednesday, February 16, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTION RE STRIKE 
 

Mr. D.G. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Before orders of the day I beg leave to ask the Minister of 

Labour and Co-operatives (Mr. Coderre) a question: If the minister is aware of the possible strike 

between the Sherwood Co-op Association Limited and the Retail and Wholesale Department Workers, 

and if so, has the government been asked to take nay action to help prevent such a strike? 

 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — In answer to the hon. member‘s question, we have been 

aware of some attempts by both management and labor to resolve the dispute they have and for the last 

few days our conciliation officers have been attempting to assist in the resolving of this dispute. At no 

time does the government enter into a dispute unless they are asked to do so; at no time does the 

government tell either management or labor what position it can take, thought it can help to advise them 

in that respect. I understand, of course, there has been a strike vote. The conciliation officers of the 

department are still there and I certainly hope that every effort will be made by both management and 

labor to avert a strike. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, may I also ask the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) since this one question has been raised whether there is any reason to believe that the dispute 

between the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers Union in Saskatoon and the British American Oil 

Company, of course, involved at the same time, is near settlement, and if the department is currently 

endeavoring to find a new formula for settlement. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Again the same applies. Conciliation officers have been attempting to try and find 

what are the basic issues at stake. Certainly, one conciliating officer, particularly, has been there 

constantly. He is doing everything he can to resolve it. I am sure that members of this house would not 

like to see the government or the Department of Labour issue any statements derogatory to either 

management or labor, in these disputes. 

 

I respect the bargaining table, and this is the way it should be. 

 

INQUIRY RE INDEX FOR REVISED STATUTES OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address an inquiry to the Hon. 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald). I have been looking through the statutes of Saskatchewan, the revised 

statutes, and I have been unable to find any index. I would like to ask the 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

210 

Attorney General if it is his intention to provide one, and again I would like to ask him when the 

members may expect to have a copy. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, there is, of course, an index being prepared. 

The index is not ready yet and I can‘t give you a date on it. But I can assure the hon. members that as 

soon as the index is available, the members will be the first to get the index. I don‘t have an index 

myself, and it will be ready, I hope, before too long. 

 

Mr. Wood: — I don‘t know if my question is quite plain. I asked the minister when we might expect to 

receive copies of the statutes as well as the index. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I‘m sorry I think perhaps I must have misunderstood the question. I take it that you do 

not yet have copies of the statues. 

 

Mr. Wood: — We have them in our members‘ room. I am asking when each individual member will 

receive them. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I will take steps to see that is done immediately. I though you had individual copies. 

 

Mr. Wood: — No, we haven‘t. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I will see that is done forthwith. 

 

QUESTION RE MONTANA PAPERS – RE HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION 
 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant), on a matter that could be of great importance to many 

people in Saskatchewan. I would like to ask the minister is it true that the Department of Highways is 

advertising in Montana papers for tenders from the United States contractors on work to be done on no. 

1 highway west of Regina? 

 

Hon. G. B. Grant (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that is correct. 

 

Perhaps I should elaborate on the answer I gave the hon. member. The advertisement he had reference to 

was in connection with tenders calling for paving, that is concrete paving on highway no. 1 west of 

Regina. The reason for this is that there are no, there is no supply of concrete paving contractors in 

Saskatchewan for highway work. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER ON THE BLUE ORDER PAPER FOR THIS AFTERNOON 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The bills which are set out from 19 to 28, immediately after the Special Order, should 

have appeared in the correct place under Government Orders. I draw this to the attention of the members 

that number 19 should be immediately below number 18. 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

211 

This is an error in printing for which, as it is my responsibility, I apologize to the house. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE MR. GUY’S REMARKS ON FEBRUARY 15TH. 
 

Mr. Speaker: — During the debate yesterday the hon. member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) made certain 

statements to which objection was taken. I have now had an opportunity of checking the official report, 

and I find that the hon. member said the following: 

 

Nor did they show any concern when friends and relatives of former cabinet minister bought these 

same shares at $0.60 while the public was paying $5.40 for them . . . this was a scandal that the former 

government could never adequately explain. 

 

After a complaint had been raised at these words, the hon. member later withdrew any personal 

imputation that they might contain. But he then repeated the statement that: 

 

there were shares available at $0.60 which the public did not have the opportunity to purchase and that 

to my knowledge they were being purchased by friends and relatives of the government. 

 

Both these cited statements seem to me to carry the implication that members of the former government 

had condoned a state of affairs in which their friends secured financial advantage from an issue of shares 

that were not available at the same price to the general public. 

 

According to Beauchesne (Parliamentary Rules and Forms 4th Edition, Citation 154(3)) it is disorderly 

to impute bad motives, or motives different from those acknowledged, to other members. Erskine May‘s 

Parliamentary Practice makes clear that reflections must not be cast in debate on members of the house, 

unless the discussion is based on a substantive motion drawn in the proper terms and admitting of a 

distinct vote by the house. (17th Edition, pages 396 and 454) 

 

I therefore rule that in making the statements he did, the hon. member was out of order and I would ask 

him to withdraw them. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — In deference to your wishes Mr. Speaker, I will certainly withdraw any 

imputation that may have been made during my remarks. 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, when we adjourned debate last night, the hon. 

member for Lumsden (Mr. Heald) and the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) were still in a 

state of confusion. According to the Leader Post, this morning‘s edition, the hon. Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) had said that ―the contract‖ and I quote, ―was not completely executed and was not signed‖. 

They were talking about a contract regarding the sale of Saskair. 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

212 

The Leader Post also says, and I quote: 

 

The Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources), the minister who was in charge of Saskair, 

said that the full story on the sale of the airline would be outlined in a few days, and the contract will 

be tabled. 

 

Apparently, one was saying that the contract was not signed and the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. 

Cameron) was trying to table on that was. This is a little bit late, I suggest, almost a year too late. Yes, it 

took them one year almost to file a ridiculous return saying that there was, and I quote the return: 

 

No copies of any agreement, or agreements, providing for or relative to the announced sale of Saskair. 

 

The fasts are, Mr. Speaker, the order for the return was dated March 25th, 1965, three days before: the 

hon. member for Maple Creed (Mr. Cameron) mentioned the contract 12 times when reporting to the 

house on March 22nd, 1965 and the hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) once, in which he said and I 

quote him from Hansard, ―which was signed‖. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Don‘t call it ridiculous because it is right. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — It is crystal clear that we don‘t want the contract the hon. member from Lumsden (Mr. 

Heald) dreamed up. We want the one the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) mentioned 12 

times, three days before we asked for it . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . and the one that the hon. member from Lumsden (Mr. Heald) said was signed when 

he spoke on March 22nd in this house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I admire the courage of the hon. member for Lumsden but I think it would be safe to say 

that this kind of defence in the courts would get him and his client thrown out of court, because even his 

client disagrees with him. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Have to get counsel, I guess. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) can talk about oil 

wells, and he can talk glowing terms about his accomplishments, but hanging over his head is this 

return. No contract was signed contrary to pages 1255 and 1256 of Hansard from March 22nd, 1965. 

 

The hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald), who has not been in the house as long, but holds a responsible 

position and is a learned member of the assembly, obviously was quite sure there was a contract, and 

obviously heard the discussion which we all heard on March 22nd last, and it is quite evident that he has 

submitted a return that is inaccurate. 

 

As I said earlier in this debate, I am not prepared to believe any of the political exuberance when we are 

being denied this contract, and I am prepared to suspect consistently that 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

213 

assets are being given away, that our natural resources are being filched, unless the details are made 

available to us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the hon. member for Lumsden (Mr. Heald) and the 

hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), unless there is an explanation to this house for the 

discrepancy between what appears in Hansard, pages 1255 and 1256, March 22, 1965, and the return 

that has been filed this session, sessional paper no. 30, I shall consider a motion of censure against both 

hon. members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the hon. member would permit a question? Would the hon. 

gentleman like his explanation now? I her would, I will be pleased to give it to him. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. gentleman who has just been on his feet and had his say, 

had a whole year and a good many days since this house was called to order, to give us an explanation, 

and he gave us the wrong explanation just a few days ago. I am prepared to wait to have it brought down 

in the proper form but right at the present time I am making a speech. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I will be pleased to give it now, or I will be pleased to wait, as you desire. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have waited a year. I will wait a day or two more but I am 

warning him that I want it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a question, as in the case of Rivard in the House of Commons, where one person 

is supposed to have told some other person and everyone denied knowledge of the actual situation when 

confronted with the facts. No, this is a case where the ministers were present and heard the discussions, 

and entered into it, and now have made an outright denial in writing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all hon. members opposite are interested in the appointment to the 

Senate that is about due, and I thought I might be able to enlighten them . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — McDonald is back. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . and a friend of mine sent me a clipping from one of the Ottawa papers. I thought I 

would give them one version of it that came from Saskatchewan, and I am sure that they are all 

interested. It is from the Globe and Mail, January 29th, 1966, editorial page, Patrick O‘Dwyer, and he 

said this: 

 

The report that Mr. Argue may be appointed to the Senate has startled the dyed-in-the-wool Grits who 

have never accepted the former Commons leader of the CCF as one of their own. 

 

If lifelong Liberals are startled and chagrined at the 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

214 

prospect of the Argue appointment, senior members of the provincial Liberal cabinet are politically 

petrified. 

 

I‘m trying to figure out which ones they are talking about, I have been watching them. I wonder if I 

might continue: 

 

One minister said the appointment could cost the party the Bengough seat in the legislature. This is a 

strange twist in Saskatchewan politics, when a Senate appointment could, even speculatively; 

influence the outcome of a by-election. Bengough provincial riding is within the federal Assiniboia 

seat in which Mr. Argue was the candidate. 

 

Mr. Argue is not active in the by-election now, although he is the party‘s provincial organizer. He has 

been asked by the local provincial Liberals to remain inactive because of antagonism toward him 

among Bengough Liberals. 

 

I thought all hon. members would be interested in this little quotation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might turn to something that I am sure all of us are interested in. It 

seems to me in presenting the best interests of Saskatchewan, that those of us who are elected members 

of this legislature must always present the province accurately, as a democratic part of Canada, rich in 

natural resources, and populated by an industrious people. On a number of occasions when I have been 

outside the boundaries of Saskatchewan, both as part of the government and now as a part of the 

opposition, I have deliberately refused to criticize in the public press those in the opposition, as was the 

case when I was in the government or, as the case is now, those in the government. Mr. Speaker, there 

has been an unprecedented performance by leaders of this government, when they have rushed from hot 

line to hot line, from one place to another, all over North America, addressing every conceivable group, 

criticizing their own province, using exaggerated, illogical half-truths to condemn their opponents. 

 

This performance by government spokesmen has left some of their own supporters, and certainly the 

average citizen of Saskatchewan, disappointed and disgruntled. I am sure those outside Saskatchewan 

have questioned the propriety of this behaviour. I have a good number of clippings that I could introduce 

to prove my point. But since some of my time has been taken up by the interruptions, perhaps I should 

refrain. Mr. Speaker, our province cannot gain in stature, cannot maintain national respect, if such 

practices are to be the order of the day. I say to the distorted half-truths, the place to do it is in the 

province of Saskatchewan and particularly here and now on the floor of the legislature. I assure you we 

will do our best to keep the record straight. 

 

A few days ago the Premier talked in terms of certain positions of this country making unfair demands 

and getting results. There are times, Mr. Speaker, when all of us through misunderstandings and perhaps 

because we are not well acquainted with the situation, have not been able to grasp the significance of 

events beyond the borders of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of Confederation, and in 

the interest of the future of this country, I plead with the government to invite citizens of 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

215 

Quebec, hundreds of them, to this province to tell their story and also obtain invitations for 

Saskatchewan people to visit Quebec and set out the thinking of the people in this province. 

 

In this day and age, Mr. Speaker, when we have situations such as we have in Rhodesia, Viet Nam, the 

Dominican Republic, South Africa, India and Cyprus, surely we are not going to gain any stature or 

develop a spirit of co-operation by condemning the minority group which has certainly made a great 

contribution to building this country. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to be most explicit in this regard. I think the government does little good, 

and impresses no one in this province or beyond this province, when the Premier makes a statement in 

jest or otherwise, suggesting that should Quebec leave Confederation, we might consider joining the 

United States. I want to tell the hon. members opposite that this kind of logic, and this kind of 

leadership, and this kind of statement may get headlines, but it is not good leadership and does not 

represent the thinking of even a small percentage of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) reports on his department to this house, I hope he includes 

some reference to steps that are being taken at the national level to combat dope smuggling, the 

bankruptcy racket, gambling and other activities of international crime. This is a serious situation in part 

of this country and has cast a shadow on the former chairman of a government caucus, cabinet ministers 

and people in high places. To date there has been no effective control of these anti-social groups who 

would ruin the lives of our young people with narcotics, who would steal from innocent people, and who 

make a mockery of business transactions. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it is unrealistic to talk of a new super-police force to control organized 

crime, when we have a Canadian police force now. In the Royal Canadian Mounted Police we have the 

personnel, the leadership, administrative knowledge. Perhaps because of new techniques and new 

methods being used, an analysis of the entire training technique should be made in order to meet the 

problem of organized crime, a problem that has developed rapidly within the last few years. The federal 

government should be encouraged to spend huge sums on equipment and new instruction techniques and 

facilities to develop the RCMP Special Division to meet the threat of organized crime. Perhaps, you say, 

they are not in Saskatchewan now, but unless they are controlled, in whatever part of Canada they 

appear, by the use of a re-organized, strengthened and enlarged special section of the RCMP, we may 

have them in our midst in this province. There is a need to enlighten the public, to make them realize 

that we place in jeopardy the future of our country, the future of our young people particularly, and the 

public attitude toward morality, unless positive steps are taken. 

 

When I heard the hon. minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance bragging about his 

tender care of this Socialist publicly-owned insurance miracle, which has been described by Consumer 

Reports as providing the best and lowest cost auto insurance in North America, I became alarmed. It is a 

strange liking that he is taking to this Socialist venture, one that under the circumstances, in view of 

efforts by members opposite down through the years to cripple it, might be compared to a wolf being 

given the job of a shepherd. I have a challenge for the hon. minister. I would ask him, if he is so sure 

that govern- 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

216 

ment insurance rates are high and that private enterprise, without competition from government 

insurance would lower the rates, that he convince his private free enterprise insurance friends to 

immediately, forthwith, and without delay, reduce the insurance rates on homes in the Alberta side of 

Main Street, Lloydminster. Furthermore, if the free enterprise rates on schools are so low, then I suggest 

to him that he bring into this house the rates on school buildings in Calgary, Edmonton, Vancouver, and 

compare them with the rates in effect before the sudden burst of generosity of his friends, which he 

claims lowered the rates. But compare them with the rates of Government Insurance in effect prior to the 

time that the field was opened up and all companies welcomed to bid. If they were so generous, they 

might start at Prince George, a small city in British Columbia, much smaller than Regina, where the rate 

for automobile insurance is two and a half times as high as it is in the city. He should then ask them to 

quietly reduce the rates in order that the people of British Columbia may get the advantage of the 

righteous competition which has suddenly developed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance, in a most dramatic 

performance, stacks up the losses he claims were the result of operation of Saskatchewan Guarantee and 

Fidelity Company. I suggest to him that he stack up the gains made by the people of Saskatchewan, the 

savings in insurance costs because of the existence of Saskatchewan Government Insurance against the 

charges by private insurance companies in Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario and Manitoba. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — There is no doubt in my mind that, without Saskatchewan Government Insurance in the 

field to challenge private insurance companies, there would be a rapid and drastic increase in rates; and 

in my estimation the savings to the people of Saskatchewan in the operation of Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance over the years represented $200,000,000 or more. The hon. minister, excited 

about this recent responsibility, and infatuated with his ability to add and subtract, suddenly introduces 

himself as a grant saviour of Government Insurance. One day doesn‘t make a summer, Mr. Speaker, and 

I say, and I say it emphatically, and it is worth thinking about, as far as the hon. minister‘s performance 

is concerned, it is a short term and his friends, the people who have under-cut rates against Government 

Insurance, have only one motive, to get rid of Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 

 

What I want from the hon. minister is his assurance and declaration to this house and to the people of 

this province, that he will maintain the rates, the ownership and the policies of Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance. The hon. minister in charge of SGIO says that they will not sell Government 

Insurance. Has he consulted the Premier? No, I don‘t think so. Now, I will admit that what the Premier 

says in Saskatchewan is very different from what he says in Montreal. I think the hon. Minister of Social 

Welfare (Mr. Boldt) should sit down and have a heart to heart talk, a real serious discussion, on a 

confidential basis, with the Premier and tell him to quit making contradictory statements. If he is going 

to sell Saskatchewan Government Insurance, he should tell the owners first and he should 

 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

217 

not continue to mislead them. 

 

Oh, I know that the number two man in the government told him how things looked pretty bad in 

Bengough. The Premier went down there and said exactly the same thing as the hon. minister said in this 

house the other day. Now, the Premier, scared stiff regarding the possible results in Bengough, 

paper-thin, I think he said it was, denied any possibility of selling Government Insurance and his 

minister backed him up and reiterated the statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I refer this house to another statement dated December 2nd, 1965, in the Montreal Gazette, 

when the Premier was in Montreal and he said: 

 

He plans to do away with most Socialist measures introduced in the province including Provincial Car 

Insurance. He claims private companies are drawing up plans to make them competitive with the 

provincial agents who will no longer have the monopoly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, on a recent radio program when he was being asked a question on 

January 28th, 1966, in this city and someone asked him about the sale of Government Insurance, he said: 

 

The Insurance Company is one which we do not propose to sell, certainly not in the near future. 

 

In other words, not until after February 16th, that was the near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, before this house, the Premier in strong terms told of the future of 

Saskatchewan being changed because of the construction of the Saskatchewan River Dam. Under a fire 

of criticism from those who object to the irrigation of their land, he pointedly made reference to the fact 

that it was Douglas and Diefenbaker who concluded the contract to construct this dam. He is right. They 

did, and I want to say this, if the people of Saskatchewan had depended on the federal Liberals or the 

provincial Liberals or any combination of federal and provincial Liberals to build this dam, judging from 

their record through the years, there would be no irrigation problems, there would be no future industry, 

there would be no future recreational areas because, Mr. Speaker, there would never have been a dam. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should like to turn, if I may, to the problems that confront the people of the city of 

Regina. The high cost of education and the failure of the government to provide adequate grants is a 

hardship for homeowners and taxpayers. Taxes have risen as a result of construction programs to meet 

the growing school population. A shortage of teachers is developing and in order to keep the teachers we 

have, it may be necessary to provide them with substantial increases. To do this will mean a sharp 

increase in the cost of education. Something will have to be done to relieve capital costs as well as 

provide an adequate supply of teachers. 

 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

218 

Mr. Speaker, a few years ago a university education was not essential in order to earn a reasonable 

salary. With automation and the great change in the application of skill and knowledge, and the accent 

on knowledge, a university education has become essential. Mr. Speaker, while one province, realizing 

the drastic change that is taking place, removed tuition fees, our province increases the university tuition 

fee by $50. On this issue you cannot argue in the past. You cannot re-enact what has happened. You 

must meet the changing trends and you must meet them now. To raise the tuition fees is discomforting 

to students and discouraging to their parents, who perhaps even more than the government realize the 

necessity of a university education and who, in most instances, are putting up all or part of the fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne made a reference to the nursing profession. We are told that 

there is a desperate shortage of nurses. In this field there must be recognition of the practice of medicine. 

The problem will not be solved by changing the educational techniques unless substantial payments are 

made to the nurses while they are in training, and unless they are guaranteed through some method, 

perhaps collective bargaining, a wage far in excess of a wage paid to a stenographer. Nurses must be 

paid salaries commensurate with their responsibility and in excess of the amount they now receive. New 

training techniques must be developed and the nursing field opened to people in the older age bracket. I 

realize that there is a committee studying the problem of providing nurses in our hospitals. The problem 

is urgent and an immediate program, provincial in scope, to guarantee income, working conditions and 

adequate payment while training is urgently needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the report of the Department of Welfare came down we looked at it very carefully 

for a section on foster homes and hoped that there would be some program for increased payment to 

foster mothers but there is nothing there. When mothers open up their homes to look after foster children 

they are doing society a real service. Although I have read headlines in the paper and stories about 

increased payments to foster mothers, I am not sure what the actual payment is to a foster mother in the 

city of Regina. The details are not clear. There are several foster mothers living in my constituency. I 

know they are unhappy about the payments they are receiving. Mr. Speaker, the whole field of foster 

homes has to be reviewed, updated and reassessed. People who are good enough to open their homes to 

these children must be properly compensated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most neglected aspects of highway development in Saskatchewan is the 

assistance given to cities for construction of arterial roads. Pasqua Street as well as other main arteries 

and ring roads connecting no.1 and no. 11 highways in Regina, I maintain, should be part of the highway 

system and constructed completely at the cost of the provincial government. Citizens of Regina, through 

the gasoline tax are paying for their share of the provincial highway system. When one considers the 

desperate need for relief from the cost of arterial roads I think the government should instantly begin a 

program of connector roads as part of the highway system to reduce the cost to the homeowner for 

construction of these roads within the city limits. 

 

Let us look at Pasqua Street. The portion that is being constructed at provincial cost is in a municipality 

with a very low per capita debt. Regina, with the highest per capita debt in the province, is expected to 

put up half of the cost on its 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

219 

portion of this street. With parking on both sides of Pasqua Street the situation is extremely hazardous at 

present. This has taken the life of at least one person in recent months. Mr. speaker, asking the city to 

put up even a percentage of the cost of the roads that are being used as connectors, like Pasqua Street is, 

I think, unfair to Regina citizens. 

 

A now removal program for rural highways is a good thing, although I think the amount that has been 

set out is inadequate and trivial. I fully believe that in the urban areas like Regina snow removal in the 

last few months has become a tremendous problem because of lack of finances, and the streets have 

been in deplorable state. Part of the gasoline tax paid by vehicle owners, perhaps as much as $350,000 

should be returned to the citizens of Regina to clear more streets of snow and ice during the winter 

months. This is a problem that cannot be ignored and has resulted in hundreds of collisions. Many hours 

lost from work because of these accidents. As a matter of fact, one of the alderman fell and broke his 

leg. There have been thousands of dollars spent on vehicle repairs. It has been hazardous to drive on 

Regina streets for months. Funds from the provincial government must be made available . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — If Henry was alive this would never happen. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . to assist in the snow removal in urban municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in summary, I would ask the government for some evidence and assurance that they are not 

giving away the natural resources of the people as well as our crown corporations; that government 

spokesmen will not go abroad making inaccurate statements about their own country; that everything 

possible will be done in our province to strengthen the bonds of Confederation; that representation 

should be made to expand through the RCMP, their facilities and personnel, to combat organized crime; 

that contracts covering the field of natural resources or crown corporations be produced for scrutiny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would urge on behalf of Regina citizens and all the people of the province the following 

province programs: 

 

1. Drugs and optical care to be provided to all citizens under the medicare plan. 
 

2. Reduction of university tuition fees. 
 

3. The removal of the bulk of school taxes from property. 
 

4. A planned program to provide nurses and to compensate them properly. 
 

5. A schedule regarding payment to foster mothers that would compensate them for the home care of 
wards of the crown. 

 

6. Development of arterial roads and connector roads that will remove the high capital costs from 
urban centres. 

 

7. Pledged respect for the rights of civil servants. 
 

8. $350,000 grant for snow removal for Regina. 
 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

220 

9. A provincial payment to ensure $100 per month for every pensioner if the federal government 
continues to shirk its responsibilities. 

 

10. A grant to assist our cities with the study and of planning of urban transportation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are other items, such as a program for senior citizens, for young people, for 

development of housing, that will be dealt with by my colleagues and about which I am greatly 

concerned. Because of the failure of leadership at all levels and because of the needs of Regina citizens I 

find that Speech from the Throne woefully lacking. 

 

The administration is so bad you can hardly blame people for leaving. People have left Saskatchewan 

before, Mr. Speaker, but never during our administration have we had a whole city trying to leave the 

province as was the case at Lloydminster. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The treatment of civil servants, and the failure to relieve the tax burden, and the lack of 

responsible leadership by the government, and finally, the refusal to provide information to the 

opposition, are good and sufficient reasons for voting against this motion. 

 

The Premier said, Mr. Speaker, that he was developing a sheep pasture, a community pasture for sheep. 

There will be need for it and it might be put to good use. Mr. Speaker, I am sure that if the people of this 

province are given an opportunity they will turn all the innocent little lambs opposite out to pasture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I will not support the motion. I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I think I should welcome the newest 

member to the house, Mr. Gardner, member for Moosomin. In about a week or ten days time, when the 

final results are over, we will have another one in this house by the name of Mr. Mitchell. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I would like first to congratulate the mover and the seconder for a job well done. I 

should probably congratulate the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) who was very ineffectual. There, 

of course, comes a time when I should probably do a bit of apple polishing. To the Premier I can say that 

his address was really forward-looking and dynamic, a forthright speech. It is no wonder that the hon. 

Premier was chosen by a very well recognized organization as the Salesman of the Year . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

221 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . in trying to sell Saskatchewan to the people of Canada and to encourage the 

industries in our province. It is quite obvious this has been done. The Liberal government since its first 

day in office has devoted all the talent and energies at its command to create a favorable climate for the 

industrial expansion of Saskatchewan. They have done this for only one reason, that is, to make 

Saskatchewan a more prosperous place for all the people of Saskatchewan and not for just a select few 

Socialists. More jobs, higher wages, lower taxes, better roads and increased services for all. 

 

The member for Regina North (Mr. Whelan) started expounding his platform but I don‘t know what it 

was. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, brother Ed hasn‘t seen the light yet. He seems not to know anything 

about insurance, which he should as he is in that type of business. No one can say that any insurance 

company can maintain rates at all times in perpetuity. Rates are arrived at on an actuarial basis, based on 

the incidences of losses, and so on. Of course, I would like to say at this time that people will buy their 

insurance where they can get the most for their money. This is a standard means or way that people can 

arrive at what they buy. I am rather disappointed to see the hon. member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) not 

being in his seat at this time. In dealing with civil rights the other day he went to great lengths to 

illustrate how wicked the government was towards the Public Service. But, it is common knowledge in 

the Public Service and around the city of Regina, and elsewhere for that matter that members of the CCF 

party were approaching the Public Service asking them to buy CCF memberships or else. Many 

members of the Public Service have been intimidated by your hacks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I can safely say that this is not happening now by this administration. You cannot 

mention one person where this has been done now and it will not be done. The Public Service has a right 

and this right will be preserved. I wonder who was imposing what upon the Public Service forcing them 

to buy memberships? 

 

You know, the former Attorney General, the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) went to great lengths in 

civil rights. What did the CCF-NDP cry about? What are they crying about? What is basically their 

policies? I would like to quote from a book they are quite aware of, Agrarian Socialism by S.M. Lipsett. 

At almost every CCF convention and council meeting the problem of relationship of government and 

civil service has been raised by the party across the way. Some of the resolutions that were passed at 

these conventions are: I will read some of them – 

 

Therefore be it resolved that members of the CCF government in engaging civil servants make 

appointments where possible from CCF supporters. 

 

Another resolution: 

 

Therefore be it resolved that we request the Saskatchewan CCF province government to be very 

careful in appointments in the future and suggest that socialist-minded persons be appointed where 

possible. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Now you‘re getting it. 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

222 

Mr. Coderre: — Would you like to have another one? 

 

Be it resolved that the government exercise extreme caution in the selection of members of various 

boards and appointees holding responsible positions because the proposed appointees lack sufficient 

grounding in fundamentals and principles of the CCF. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Another one. 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that the government remove reactionary department heads and put in their 

places people who are sympathetic to the CCF. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — You know they fired over 140 the first month they were in office. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — You‘re kidding. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — That‘s right. Without notice. Another interesting paragraph. We hear our friends 

across the way mention witch-hunts. Boy, they were experts at –witch-hunts. 

 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — They are the only witches. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Here‘s one. This is what their convention asks – this is what they promoted: 

 

Therefore we recommend that special investigations be made in these different departments with 

exceptional authority to deal with matters and clear them up. 

 

I ask you, who was guilty of witch-hunts? I think that they should bow their heads in shame. And all 

these referenced, Mr. Speaker, to the Public Service. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They are not saying anything now. Old Brock has got his head pretty low. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I would be remiss in my duties as Minister of Labour not to clearly illustrate to this 

house what a conciliation board is. I have not intention to go into the long legal hassle that the member 

for Hanley (Mr. Walker) attempted to do the other day in trying to confuse the issue. I would like to first 

pose this question to each and everyone. What is the conciliation board? 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

223 

A conciliation board is established when a dispute arises between union and management and is not 

resolved through the regular bargaining process. The party in the dispute may ask the Minister of Labour 

to appoint a board of conciliation. When a board is granted the union appoints one member and 

management appoints another member. Both parties so appointed will appoint or choose a third party 

who will be the chairman. In the event that they are unable to choose a mutually acceptable person, the 

minister is then asked to appoint a chairman. That is the Minister of Labour in this case. The board is 

then empowered to look into the process for which they are required upon making the request to the 

minister for the appointment of the said board. The findings of this board when concluded are then 

conveyed to the management and the union through the minister. The results of the board are then left to 

the determination for action, if need be, by the two parties concerned. That is labor and management, 

and that is as it should be in the bargaining process which I fully respect. I do presume, of course, that 

from time to time labor or management may resist the findings of results of these boards as indicated, 

but it is entirely up to them. This much for the boards. 

 

I noted, when the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) was speaking in the legislature the other day, the 

despicable attitude of the hon. member towards the chairman of the board which was appointed to look 

into the affairs of the OCAW in the Power Corporation. When I appointed the chairman of the board to 

look into this dispute between the OCAW and the Power Corporation, I had and have the most profound 

respect for the gentleman‘s integrity and ability to handle this in a just and equitable manner. Now, if the 

hon. member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) has any guts I would challenge him to repeat verbatim the 

statement that he made in this house, outside this legislature. I know well his statement would be subject 

to legal action. I would challenge the hon. member to repeat those very same words that he used in this 

legislature. If that isn‘t defamation of character and everything else, I don‘t know what is. He should be 

ashamed of himself. I had and have the most profound respect in the chairman‘s integrity, ability and 

sense of justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — However, at this point, Mr. Speaker, that‘s all I intend to say on these matters. I hope 

to deal with the Department of Co-operation in general. 

 

I should like to make this statement. It is essential for human prosperity and progress, for people to 

co-operate, to work together for the good of their own neighbors, their own community and their 

province. Humans, Mr. Speaker, need one another; none is sufficient unto himself. One of the most 

critical problems of human progress, therefore, is to maintain and improve co-operation while 

individuals exercise and develop their power of self-control and invention. To my CCF friends across 

the way, I must say to guard yourselves against increasing antagonism and the conflicts that you create 

in our society by the irresponsible methods that you have used in all the areas of endeavor in this 

province. We cannot get co-operation by force or threat of force because humans are self-controlling and 

will exert peculiar human powers only in pursuit of self-selected purposes. In perfect freedom an 

individual will try to get the help of his fellow-men only by offering in return an inducement, something 

which other 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

224 

persons want and which they do not have in sufficient abundance. But since men do not live by gratitude 

or prayers alone, inducements in free societies include offers of relatively scarce and desired services, 

commodities and so on. This is a golden rule that applies in business and in the making of a living. To 

my Socialist friends across the way I say keep your cottonpicking fingers out of affairs that do not 

concern you as a political party. Stop using the Marxist principles of infiltration into many good 

organizations and trying to destroy them. True to Socialist principles in making a statement the other 

day on T.V. – I presume addressed to the Bengough Constituency – the junior member for Regina West 

(Mr. Blakeney) on T.V. Saturday evening said something like this: ―We must stop these Liberals. They 

are doing away with . . . ‖, and then he named the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Health Plan, Insurance, 

Crown Corporations. Is this not a mean vicious trick to try to inject into a statement. It is already false 

about the Wheat Pool, an organization such as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, operated by the people 

themselves as free enterprisers; they themselves are the master of their destiny. This government will, in 

no way interfere into their affairs. Socialists seem to try to imply these things. This government believes 

in free-enterprise principles, unlike Socialists. We have no intention of interfering in the affairs of 

anyone be they co-operatives, corporate, or private. These are enterprises at work in a free enterprise 

economy. Again, I say to the Socialists, keep your fingers out of the affairs that do not concern you. 

Insinuations such as this telecast are intended to divide and destroy good enterprises that are doing a 

good job for the farmers of Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has and will continue to serve 

its membership and I‘ll not stand idly by to see any attempts by anyone, either from within or without, to 

subvert the wonderful work that that organization has done for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The co-operative movement in Saskatchewan had one of the most successful 

operations in its history during the preceding fiscal year and the crop year ended July 31st last. Nearly 

all sectors of the co-operative movement increased their services to members. Co-operatives are of 

particular importance to our agricultural industry. As an example, they market 64 per cent of all the 

grain, 62 per cent of cattle and calves, 77 per cent of dairy products, while they do about 10 per cent of 

the retail business in this province. This is, to a considerable extent, in the field of farm supplies such as 

petroleum products for farm use, lumber and so on. 

 

The commencement of fertilizer production by the new western co-operative fertilizer plant is another 

reminder of the fact that the role of co-operatives in the distribution of farm supplies will tend to 

increase. 

 

Co-operatives are, in one way, a way in which farmers can increase their income and also lower their 

production costs. The Credit Union Movement, for example, made spectacular progress during 1965. By 

December 31, 1965, assets of the 298 credit unions in the province reached a high of $256,000,000 or an 

increase of 23 per cent over 1964. New loans made by the credit unions last year were $128,000,000 or 

an increase of roughly 24 per cent. Membership in the credit union increased by 10 per cent to a total 

membership today of 236,000 and five new credit unions were organized in 1965. I am informed that the 

savings per member in 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

225 

our credit unions are the highest on this continent and in proportion to population, the Saskatchewan 

Credit Union Movement is the fastest growing one in North America. 

 

Credit unions are becoming more and more important in the agricultural credit field, including to some 

extent farm mortgage lending. The organizations which are supported by the Credit Union Movement, 

the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit Society and the Co-operative Trust Company also made excellent 

progress. The Society provides an essential service as a central credit union for credit unions and many 

of the other co-operatives. The Co-operative Trust Company continues to administer the Family Farm 

Credit Act and is increasing its lending services in the mortgage field out of its own funds. This included 

mortgage loans to farmers. 

 

The information which I have been giving about the progress of the Co-operative Movement in some of 

its forms I‘m sure is impressive to members of this house. It demonstrates once again the importance of 

the co-operative to the agriculture of this province and the increasing services being provided to more 

and more urban residents such as credit unions. 

 

But impressive as these figures may be, we must remember that the co-operatives are basically attempts 

by local people at the grass roots to co-operate together to provide certain economic and other services 

for themselves. This applies whether the service is a local community one or many large local groups 

consolidating on a provincial basis to provide more services for their people. A few examples of this I 

would like to illustrate. 

 

The pioneer retail co-operatives such as Lloydminster and Melfort, which were stared in 1914, not 

during the Socialist regime as Socialist have been claiming, were started by local people to handle farm 

supplies needed by the early settlers. They formed a federation in 1927 to pool their purchases. This 

became the Saskatchewan Co-operative Wholesale Society. Pioneer farm supply co-operatives on the 

Regina Plains such as the Milestone and Wilcox formed the Co-operative Refinery in 1934 in order to 

reduce their farm costs during the depression of the 30‘s. The wholesale and refinery merged later on to 

form the still larger federation known as Federated Co-operatives, again to strengthen the services 

originally established by the people at the grass roots level. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a key organization in marketing of grain and livestock, and one of the 

mainstays of agriculture of this province, owes its support and continued prosperity to the activities of 

the individual farmers functioning through local committees, expressing their wishes from the grass 

roots level to district delegates. 

 

Now, regardless of the size of these organizations, whether they are local in their operations or 

province=wide, they owe their origin and support to local voluntary initiative by farmers and consumers 

where people are prepared to co-operate for certain economic purposes. In much the same way people 

from every walk of life, regardless of their political views, of all class of views, co-operate or work 

together for the general welfare of the communities in which they live. 

 

Might I illustrate this a little bit further. From my own experience, in my local town I had a small 

business. There were no banks – no possibilities of getting one. The people of the 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

226 

town and the community, the local businessmen, the farmers and the professional people of that area 

such as teachers and wage-earners, we banded together to form a Credit Union which provides not only 

a much needed savings and credit service, but is also able to service the community. It is co-operation or 

working together for a specific economic purpose, just as the people in that community generally for the 

general community welfare, such as our skating rinks, curling rinks and sporting activities. 

 

Credit unions like the one in my community helped to form the Saskatchewan Co-operative Credit 

Society, the Co-operative Trust Company, and carry on their own educational activities through the 

Credit Union League and make recommendations to the government regarding changes in credit union 

legislation. It is in this spirit of voluntary enterprises starting from the bottom, that has enabled our 

people to form not only large grain marketing organizations, federations of local organization of various 

kinds, but also to organize hundreds of community halls, co-op pastures, fee, fodder co-operatives, and 

co-operatives designed to enable the people of the north to help themselves to improve their economic 

position. This form of voluntary co-operative action has given more stability and bargaining power to 

agriculture and helped to strengthen our economy in both rural and urban areas. 

 

Co-operatives and credit unions are part of our free enterprise system. Our people are free to choose 

whether to organize to provide services which they own and to control themselves, or to use other forms 

of enterprises. It is the policy of the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development to 

provide information and advice to people who by themselves decide to organize a co-operative or credit 

union. 

 

Now, I wish to turn to some new developments which either occurred during the past year or may be 

expected in the near future. For years I‘ve realized that many farms were over capitalized and I‘ve 

always urged, for at least the last twelve years, I‘ve urged the farmers to pool their resources and to buy 

their machinery together. A new form of machinery co-operative has been devised. This involves joint 

operation of larger farm machinery unions by members and the pooling of grain grown on the land 

owned and operated by the members of the local co-operative. This pooling of machinery costs and 

returns from grain is in proportion to the acreage framed by each member. This method overcomes the 

problem and timing as to the use of the particular machines since the acreage of all members is treated 

as if it was his own farm. This method presents very real possibilities for the smaller and medium-sized 

farm operators to continue to maintain their farm units. We have information already that some farmers 

have been able to increase their revenue from zero to $1.17 or more per acre. He continues his own farm 

and operates his own livestock enterprise on an individual basis but simply pools with his neighbors the 

ownership and operation of farm machinery and the marketing of grain production from the land on 

which this machinery is used. This reduced. This reduces his investment in farm machinery per acre, 

reduces his operating costs, and enables him to continue to own and operate his own farm as an 

individual. A machinery co-operative of this kind is a limited corporation like any other type of 

co-operative. 

 

Hon. members are aware that machinery syndicates can also be organized under the federal legislation 

with unlimited liability. 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

227 

My department has published a bulletin on machinery co-operatives and is ready to assist interested 

groups to organize where they so wish. I urge hon. members on both sides of the house to avail 

themselves of this pamphlet because it‘s a wonderful bit of work. The name of the pamphlet is 

―Machinery Co-operatives‖. 

 

We have had many requests for advice on feeding co-operatives and I expect more activities in livestock 

feeding co-operatives during the coming year especially in the parkland area of Saskatchewan. 

Co-operatives of this kind have been successful in helping the farmer to diversify his operation by the 

feeding and finishing of livestock. There are much greater opportunities in this field. As far as my 

department is concerned this is a joint project with the Department of Agriculture and the livestock 

division of the Saskatchewan wheat Pool Which buys the feeder cattle for most of the feeing 

co-operatives and markets the finished cattle for them. 

 

Machinery co-operatives and feeding co-operatives are but two examples whereby co-operative methods 

at the grass roots level can be used to help agriculture. There are opportunities for us of local 

co-operative methods in other areas of agriculture production including irrigation when that develops. 

 

Now, I wish to say something about co-operatives in northern Saskatchewan of which there are about 

fifty. In 1948 and 1949, the socialist government built and operated fish-filleting plants and trading 

stores in northern Saskatchewan. Due to criticism from the opposition of the time because they were 

operating business that they didn‘t know now, you find that in 1040 on an investment of $40,000 they 

had a return, not a net return, of four percent. The following year an investment of $67,000 and they 

showed a return of 16. In 1950 and 1951 they showed a return of 12 per cent. In 1951 and 1952 for some 

reason or other, this happened to be just before an election year, they only showed a return of .09 per 

cent. I‘m just wondering why. I think they adjusted their prices to make it more encouraging for the 

local people. However, year after year, when the actual figures are taken into consideration, they lost 

money. Therefore, it was decided to transfer these businesses to the people themselves so that an 

arrangement was made where they were organized on a co-operative basis. My department continues to 

assist the people with information and advice and to enable them to become owners of these former 

government-owned enterprises as quickly as possible. I am happy to report that by the end of next 

month, Co-operative Fisheries will have discharged its indebtedness to the government and Northern 

Co-operative Trading will have reduced its indebtedness down to about $88,000. 

 

They, the people themselves, these Indian and Metis are looking after enterprises that the government 

had for six or seven years consistently lost money with the. Socialist bungling if you wish to call it that 

way. These Indian and Metis, own it themselves. This is a glaring example of Socialist bungling, prior to 

co-operatives taking over the operation. 

 

Mr. I C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — One year of . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — And they have cleared it themselves and made a good job. What I am saying is that 

people themselves whether co-operative, corporate or private, will do a better job than Socialists can do 

nay time. The time is rapidly approaching when 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

228 

People will be able to operate these enterprises completely themselves and for their own benefit and that 

of the communities which they live in. All this have been done by the native people themselves. They 

have done better than Socialists have done at any time. Remember that Socialists. 

 

I wish to thank the board members of the Co-operative Fisheries, Northern Co-operative Trading for the 

work they are doing in guiding the people, who are mostly of Indian descent, to prepare for ownership 

and the responsibility of the operation of these enterprises. 

 

Good progress was made during the past year by other co-operatives in the north which are organized 

from the ground by the people of Indian descent. These operations are improving. They are making 

progress in repaying the government loans assisted by a policy of incentive grants. Wherever people of 

Indian descent in the north show an interest in organizing co-operative, my department will give 

assistance by information and advice. 

 

Special attention is being given to training of native people as manager and administrators of the 

enterprise which they organize. This is done in co-operation with Western Co-operatives College. This 

kind of training not only helps to qualify the native people for positions in the administration of their 

own co-operative enterprises but also helps them to qualify for jobs elsewhere. I am happy to report that 

with the support of the Federal Indian Affairs Branch and at the request of a banc council in the James 

Smith Indian Reserve, north of Kinistino, one of the first, if not the first, co-operative stores on an Indian 

Reserve in Canada was organized last year. The store was necessary due to the distance from the nearest 

town. In addition to that, a cattle production co-operative was organized on the same Reserve with the 

assistance of the Federal Indian Affairs Branch. 

 

This breakthrough presents great possibilities in the field of agricultural production and also in other 

services for which there may be an economic need. It depends particularly on the interest of Bank 

Councils and the co-operation with the Indian Affairs Branch. 

 

We have been requested to undertake preliminary studies regarding the feasibility of co-operative 

enterprises in other areas where the Indian population predominates including the eastern Athabasca 

region. Anything that can be done to encourage our Indian people to help themselves through any 

methods whatever they may be, co-operative or otherwise, we shall do so to improve the living 

conditions on the Reserves. 

 

Co-operation also enable Indian people to acquire experience which will assist them to take their place 

in our society outside of the Reserves where they so wish. 

 

I am quite hopeful about the progress of this program. It will take time, patience, support and 

understanding by the rest of the people. I am happy to see the work of our Indian and Metis Affairs 

Branch in all areas of the province, and my department will continue to co-operate in every way to help 

people of Indian and Metis ancestry to provide themselves with better conditions. 

 

Big winds, big headlines by our Socialist friends, after many years of talk they have had nothing. As the 

Premier said 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

229 

the other day, ―Socialists talk, Liberals act‖. 

 

We will now have a pulp mill in northern Saskatchewan which will provide thousands of jobs. It will 

stimulate other business activities and will permit development of great natural resources on a sustaining 

basis. What is the use of talking about our natural resources unless they are developed for the use of the 

people. This will be accomplished by the new mill. While the new mill will by itself provide 

opportunities for direct employment of Indian and Metis people located in the area, my department is 

making a study now of the possibilities of local pulp co-operatives so that native people who live in the 

woods, can provide employment for themselves and improve their living standards in the operations of 

these small organizations. The results of this study will be discussed with the people so that they may 

organize if they wish in good time before the pulp mill commences. 

 

This is being done in many areas of Ontario and Manitoba where these people are providing pulp for the 

mills. During the past year the co-operative housing project was organized in the emerging industrial 

town of Lanigan. This co-operative is for employees of the potash mine in the area and also other 

residents of the community who may be in need of housing. Negotiations have been concluded with 

Central Housing and Mortgage Corporation with regard to long-term financing while interim financing 

is being provided by Alwinsal Potash of Canada as a community service. A total of 98 housing units will 

be built at an estimated cost of $1,500,000, designed for the people in the moderate income range. 

Construction will be of good quality. Landscaping, and maintenance and repayments of monies 

borrowed will be undertaken by the co-operative. Each member will make a small investment which can 

be resold if he leaves. As an owner-tenant his monthly rental will take care of interest, payments on 

principal, maintenance costs, and so on. The point I wish to emphasize here is that substantial savings in 

original housing cost and in monthly rental payments of owner-tenants, would be possible through this 

kind of activity. It is the first of its kind in the province. The same type could be used in other emerging 

industrial areas where housing is needed and it is the first small urban-co-operative of its kind in 

Canada, and these things are possible if people show the necessary interest. 

 

This kind of housing supplements services available from private housing developments where the 

people in need of houses are not prepared to build on the individual basis. It is similar in principle to the 

co-operative housing movement which has become important in Europe and is also becoming important 

in eastern Canada and the United States. The late President Kennedy‘s lady is a member of such a 

co-operative housing project. 

 

The use of this kind of housing depends again on the wishes of the people interested. Wherever people 

show an interest, my department will be happy to provide them with the information and advice or other 

appropriate assistance. 

 

I wish to take this opportunity in thanking the officials of CMHC for their co-operation in laying the 

foundation for the housing of the co-operative at Lanigan which can become a significant example to 

other areas of the province. I also wish to thank Alwinsal Potash for their real assistance in this 

connection in providing the department and all those concerned with the assistance required in putting 

this project on the road. 

 

During the past year we have made some economies in the 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

230 

department by streamlining certain procedures such as in the inspection field. While certain 

departmental economies have been achieved, the progress of the co-operative and credit union self-help 

movement has continued as an important part of the economy of the province. This will continue as long 

as the people want to make use of these voluntary co-operative self-help purposes. 

 

I would be remiss in my duty as a minister in charge of this department if I did not pay a tribute to the 

staff of the department, especially my deputy minister, Dr. Arnason. He has been a public servant to this 

province for 37 years, having joined the staff of the Co-operation and Market Branch of the 

Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture in 1929. Amongst his many pioneering accomplishments 

throughout the years, he organized the first credit union in this province. He organized and was secretary 

of the annual conference of Co-operation Trading Association from 1934 to 1941. When this was 

reorganized as the provincial section of the Co-operative Union of Canada, he served as secretary from 

1941 to 1944. He was the first executive secretary of the Credit Union League of Saskatchewan from 

1938 to 1945 and was one of the organizers and first secretary of the Canadian Co-operative Implements 

from 1940 to 1942. When the department was formed in 1944, he became the first deputy minister, a 

position he still holds today. In 1944 and 1945 he was a member of the Commission on Co-operatives 

appointed by the Canadian government to investigate and report on taxation of co-operatives. His name 

is known and respected throughout Canada in co-operative circles and indeed throughout many parts of 

the world. He was granted an honorary doctorate of law by St. Francis Xavier, University Antigonish, 

Nova Scotia in 1953, in view of his work in the co-operative field. As a further testimonial of the esteem 

in which he is held, he was requested to act as a technical adviser in co-operative matters to the federal 

Minister of Labour at the International Conference in Geneva last summer. I think, for such a noble and 

wonderful public servant, I think we all owe a deep debt of gratitude as being a good servant to the 

people of Saskatchewan 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Of course, I would like to mention a few others in the department as well, Colonel 

G.L. Woods, director of Co-operative Association who is largely responsible for participation by Central 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation in the co-operative housing project in Lanigan. This has been the 

first time the federal financing has been approved for such a project in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Snell, director of our Credit Union Branch, who has for some time worked closely with 

organizations such as the Credit Union League and has been responsible for the encouraging and 

supervising of a rapidly growing credit union movement in this province. 

 

J.T. Phalen, Terry Phalen, is Director of Extension Services, a very dedicated person and he has been on 

several committees concerned with the continuing education in this province, whose concerned with the 

continuing education in this province, whose branch has given leadership in the program of agriculture. 

 

Mr. Heidt is our Director of Research and Services who is well known in the co-operative movement, 

serving on the national research committees. 

 

And to Commander Bill Haggett who is the administrative 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

231 

Officer in the department on whose shoulders the job of administering and tying in all the works of the 

department lies. To these members and to the members of the field staff, I would like to thank them 

publicly for the conscientious work they are doing at all times. 

 

It has been a great privilege of mine, Mr. Speaker, to meet large numbers of members and delegates, 

directors and officers of the co-operative movement and the credit union movement during this past 

year. I regret it is impossible for me to accept all the invitation to attend all the meetings which I would 

like to do. I wish, however, to thank co-operatives and credit unions for the co-operation they have 

shown to the department staff in discharging their duties. 

 

With this report of the department, Mr. Speaker, and the few words that I have given to you prior to the 

report of the department, it is quite obvious that I am very, very much in favor of the dynamic program 

and the tremendous progress this government has made throughout Saskatchewan. It has shown the 

people throughout America that it wants to provide not only the amenities of life, but progress for all. It 

is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will support the motion and I cannot support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. L.M. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, may I at this time, rise to take part in this debate. Along with 

other members, I would like to congratulate Your Honour as Speaker of this assembly, and the Deputy 

Speaker as well. May you enjoy good health throughout your stay. 

 

I would like to congratulate the member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) on his squeak-in victory in the 

by-election of that constituency. I sincerely hope your stay in this assembly will be a pleasant one. We 

recognize that you are filling shoes that were very ably filled in this assembly by your predecessor. I 

wish him every success in his new venture. I would further like to congratulate the member from Wilkie 

(Mr. McIsaac) in his appointment to the cabinet. Again, may your stay and your job be a pleasant and 

very fruitful one. 

 

I would like to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Throne Speech. You did rather well although 

I though the presentation lacked sincerity and conviction. Could it be that you don‘t believe too much in 

some of the things your were saying? 

 

Now, the member from Canora (Mr. Romuld) continues to be a source of considerable amusement to me 

and to other members on this side of the house. I can‘t help but notice how red his face gets whenever 

his name is mentioned. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think my face, and yes, probably more than my face would 

be red if I were sitting in the kind of hot seat that he is sitting in. The member for Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) commented on his amusing tactics and his oratory. Well, may I say, that his oratorical 

pranks and antics are only surpassed by his extremely nimble and comical political footwork back home 

in his riding. I can only ask, Mr. Speaker, he is scared to face a by-election? On the other hand, maybe 

he is being goaded into all these humiliating maneuvers by the hierarchy of the Liberal party who are 

equally desperate and anxious to hang on. 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

232 

I have along with other members from this side of the house listened rather intently to the barrage of free 

enterprise propaganda that has emanated from the government benches. This barrage would be hard to 

match anywhere in the world. This free enterprise eulogy was kicked off by the member from Milestone. 

In his usual arrogant, extravagant, caustic and sometimes even nauseating manner, he sang a song that 

except for its insincerity and its glaring errors, sounded almost acceptable at times. 

 

Yet in spite of the eloquence and the gusto of the presentations, all that is necessary is to chip into the 

gloss and the fantastic sugar-coating of the clever propaganda to find that it is still the same old dose of 

Liberal philosophy that this province suffered from, and yes, almost perished from, prior to the election 

of the CCF back in 1944. 

 

This peculiar type of Liberal dog-eat-dog society has been rejected by the people of this country many 

times during the last decade. This unto those who have shall be given and from those who have not shall 

be taken away philosophy is being turned down by all civilized people in the whole world. Even in the 

great United States where this free enterprise rule has run rampant the governments have learned and 

sometimes the hard way, that checks and stops must be implemented to prevent the complete breakdown 

of the nation‘s moral and economic fibre. 

 

In this great and wealthy nation the end product of free enterprise has been almost astonishing, a 

dehumanized society, a society where you find a few of the world‘s materially richest people, while at 

the same time you find vast pockets of poverty, disease, and unprecedented squalor. In this great and 

wealthy nation it is being plagued with a moral decay that is shocking. Crime of almost unknown 

magnitude flourishes. 

 

This is the society of the home of the Mafia; dope rings and smuggling, organized gang robbery, rape, 

divorce, gambling, prostitution and murder are all commonplace. This is a society where a man will be 

jailed for stealing a crumb of food to stay alive, while at the same time large corporations have 

protective laws that allow them unlimited profits as well as trade practices that will eliminate all and any 

competitors. This is the great society where vital decisions affecting the lives and the future of the 

American citizens, old or young, are made in smoke-filled board rooms by hard-nosed business 

executives who know only one motive, and that is more and more profits. This, Mr. Speaker, is the 

society that the members opposite are shouting so loud and so long about. It is small wonder, with this 

kind of solution to offer the people of the province, that they must resort to such loud and vociferous 

tactics. 

 

Their performance in this debate has reminded me of the young minister speaking to a new 

congregation. Desiring to make a good impression he had very carefully prepared his notes. During his 

sermon one of the sheets of paper accidentally slid to the floor. One of the congregation, anxious to help 

him out, retrieved the wayward sheet. On glancing down at it he was surprised to see that the minister 

had very carefully penciled this little not in the margin. ―Sermon very weak here. Shout very loud‖. 

Well, with the very weak sermon this Throne Speech contains I am not surprised that members on the 

other side of the house are not shouting so very loud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to criticize or condemn 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

233 

the kind of society any other country wants. However, it does become my concern when a government 

imports it to Saskatchewan. I had a man come up to me the other day in my constituency and say to me, 

―My God, can‘t the government members see that this free enterprise system is going against what is 

happening in the world today? Can‘t they see that every country is gradually breaking away from it? 

Can‘t you do something to stop them from giving everything away?‖ Well, I tried to assure my friend 

that we were doing all we, on this side of the house, could do to point out to the government the folly 

and the errors of their ways. 

 

I want now to spend a few minutes in dealing with some of the various headings of this paste and 

newspaper heading Throne Speech. I say past and newspaper because there is nothing in it that has not 

been newspaper headlines before it was read in this house. It, therefore, becomes very obvious that the 

contents have been gleaned from the Premier‘s exuberant moods and announcements, and simply pasted 

together to form this document. 

 

Under the heading of ‗tax reductions‘ I find some reference made to tax cuts of last session as well as 

reference to the heavy tax load in Saskatchewan. I am having a little bit of difficulty, Mr. Speaker, to 

make too much sense of this statement. Perhaps the member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) could 

show me the formula that he used to arrive at the figures he was quoting. If he could, I might be able to 

find some of the tax reductions referred to. I hold in my hand two tax notices from the RM of Cote 

number 271. One is for the calendar year 1964 and the other is for the calendar year 1965. Both give the 

taxes levied on the same section of land in the two respective years. Both carry the same section of land 

in the two respective years. Both carry the same assessed value, as the assessment did not change. Both 

notices quote the mill rates for the respective years. In looking at the mill rate figures it is possible to see 

where the difference in the two notices appear. 

 

For the calendar year 1964, the municipal mill rate for the schools is set at 29, the telephone tax is 

$30.58, and the municipal mill rate is set at 26. There is also added $10. for the SFU dues, a total tax of 

$83.33, plus the $10 for the Farmers Union, a total tax of $813.33. For the calendar year 1965, the year 

my friends are shouting about tax reductions, I find the following figures. The municipal mill rate is up 

from 26 to 29, the school rate is up to 32 from 29, the telephone tax is the same at $30.58. This makes a 

total tax bill for this section of land, including the SFU dues at $10, $897.63, or an increase, Mr. 

Speaker, of $84.30. To this must be added the $20 medicare and hospital tax increase of $104.30 on 

property tax. 

 

This is no isolated increase in this RM number 271, as the mill rates were increased for every taxpayer 

in the municipality. Now I know that my friends across the way will be shouting purple gas. Well, this 

farmer was unfortunate enough to have a truck with a tag axle and did not quality for purple gas. Oh, but 

they shout one per cent sales tax. Again, I ask my friend from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), and he better 

bring the Provincial Treasurer in on this calculation, to figure out how many dollars of taxable goods 

this farmer has to buy to effect a tax savings of $104.30. It is, of course, obvious that he must purchase 

$10,000 worth of taxable good to break even. This, Mr. Speaker, is the tax picture, and the tax saving in 

the RM Cote number 271. 

 

Now, I am sure that this farmer doesn‘t object to paying his 

 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

234 

taxes. He is like most farmers, he likes better roads, he is aware of the very dire need for education of 

the young people. And because of these facts he doesn‘t complain about the taxes, even if they are 

increased. What this farmer does object to is having the Liberal politicians continually trying to ram 

down his throat through every TV appearance, every radio broadcast, and every newspaper he picks up, 

headlines of tax-cut reductions and a continuous barrage of talk about taxed that have gone down. This 

farmer may not be too smart, Mr. Speaker, but he can read figures, and he knows when he is paying 

more or less. Like my minister friend with the weak sermon, my Liberal friends with the very weak tax 

cut sermon must shout very loud and very long. 

 

There is one point that I want to make with regard to taxes for education. A quick glance at the tax 

notices of the RM number 271 shows that the cost to the landowner in school taxes exceeds the 

municipal tax. It exceeds it by three mills, and this, Mr. Speaker, is in a municipality where a very 

effective road construction program is underway. Yet the cost for education exceeds the municipal levy. 

It is well recognized that costs for school operations have gone up and are indeed continuing to go up. 

This raises the soundness of property taxes to finance education. This particular method ought to be 

looked at very carefully as it is very obvious that property tax is not the most equitable way to finance 

education. The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, makes no reference, give no consideration to this very 

important point. 

 

While speaking on tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, it seems more than a little ironical that the government should 

talk about tax cuts on property. Only last year a bill was passed by this assembly giving major tax 

concessions to the Canada Cement Company. Certainly, we expect that this is a precedent and is liable 

to continue. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that, with an increased tax picture for the property owners, 

particularly landowners, and with tax concessions to Canada Cement Company and corporations, this 

amounts socialism and spoon-feeding for the corporations, while the rest of the citizens have to be 

satisfied with peanuts. It is too bad, Mr. Speaker, that the Socialist tendencies, that the Premier still 

seems to have in his heart, are not used to help the people of Saskatchewan instead of providing 

Socialism for the corporations that he loves so dearly. 

 

I want now to turn my attention for a few moments to the field of agriculture. Here I don‘t find any 

particular quarrel with the programs being proposed. They are for the most part a continuation of the 

already established programs of the former government. Most of the extensions proposed are good and 

necessary. I want, however, to draw to the attention of the government some of the real danger signals 

that appear on the horizon. 

 

I was very pleased that the Premier was able to say the other day that the selling price of wheat by the 

Canadian Wheat Board had reached the two dollar per bushel mark. I think he felt that this took the 

Liberal party off a very embarrassing election promise. What the Premier didn‘t say, however, is the 

small immediate effects this will have on farmers. What he didn‘t say is that this year‘s final payment 

will be some fifteen or more cents less than last years. What he didn‘t tell the people of Saskatchewan 

and particularly the farmers, is that most of this years crop has already been sold at a figure that is below 

the two dollar mark. This means that the farmers have to grow another crop, market it, and wait for the 

final payments before any of the advantages of two dollar wheat will reach the. This 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

235 

fact was very ably pointed out the other day by the President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 

The Premier became very excited when he talked about all the exciting things that were happening. 

Well, I would like to take him to some of the farmers in my riding where things are not so exciting. The 

other day I spoke to a farmer who was delivering some of the wheat that the Premier was talking about. 

This farmer had not been able to seed his crop as early as he should because of wet weather last spring. 

Last fall‘s harvesting conditions were equally unsatisfactory. When this farmer had finally finished his 

harvest he found that wet weather and frost deteriorated his crop to where it was bringing him very little 

money. The grade he was receiving for this wheat was number six tough. The weight per measured 

bushel was 50 pounds and the price he was receiving was 78 cents a bushel. This man pointed out to me, 

Mr. Speaker, that last year a truck load of his number three wheat averaged around 220 bushels a load, 

and brought him $1.25 a bushel at the elevator. This year‘s wheat averaged about 180 bushels a load and 

brought him 78 cents a bushel. Instead of getting around $250 for a load of wheat, he was averaging 

around $150 to $160. This is a loss of around $100 on every load of wheat this man delivers to his 

elevator. I asked him how he would survive and carry on his farming operations. He said, I don‘t know. 

I suggested to him that probably he should go look for a job. To this he replied, ―I do not want to look 

for a job. I want to farm, but will not be able to carry on much longer.‖ 

 

Another indicator that the farming industry is not sharing in this rosy prosperity is the number of cattle 

that were marketed last fall, with disastrous prices to the farmer. In the Yorkton yard alone the run 

during the prolonged wet weather was the highest in the history of the yard. In times of stress the 

farmers must have money. Cattle are often their only ready source of disposable income. This is very 

undesirable and, Mr. Speaker, usually hits the smaller farmer the hardest. 

 

There are many side effects of this kind of depressed condition on the farm, conditions that are caused 

by no fault of the farmer. Last fall‘s weather, rain and snow, was certainly no fault of the farmers. Yet 

they were victims of it. What are some of these side effects? In the first place it raises havoc with the 

farming population. Many are operating on very narrow margins and require good crops and favorable 

conditions to get along. This means that in times of adversity many are forced to quit and seek 

employment elsewhere. 

 

The other side effect of all this is what it does to small trading centres. Last year again I was called on to 

make representation to CNR officials as well as to members of the Board of Transport Commissioners 

on behalf of two communities where the railroad wanted to close the stations, the last service of the 

railroad being suspended. There are now only a few of the larger towns that have and can retain this 

service. Small businesses are going out of business. In the village of Pelly, the home of my predecessor, 

last fall the John Deere dealer went out of business; in the same village the Co-op store is on the verge 

of closing up. These are all side effects of the instability of agriculture. These small towns and villages 

cannot survive without farmers and their business and, Mr. Speaker, the farmers cannot survive without 

some stability of income in this competitive business world. 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

236 

There is still another side-effect that is worrying many farmers. This is the appearance of the imported 

corporate style of farmers. These are showing up, probably not as yet on too serious a basis. However, 

with so many farmers on a shoe-string the stage is being set for the takeover by the corporate structure. 

In my constituency there have been several inquiries by American land buyers to purchase up to a total 

of a township of land. While I am not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that his assembly and the Throne Speech 

are able to cope with all the complex and dangerous aspects of agriculture, I do suggest that it is highly 

unfair, and the government stands for bitter criticism, in not mentioning or even having any proposals to 

cope with this kind of situation. It is not enough to look through rose-colored glasses at these serious 

problems. It is equally unfair to install blinkers on rose-colored glasses in order to shut the vision out – it 

is there and it cries for solution. I certainly will have more to say on this subject of agriculture before 

this session is over. 

 

May I now turn my attention for a few moments to the Leader of the Conservative party (Mr. Pederson). 

I was enjoying his remarks the other day. I thought that he hit on a few very pertinent and important 

points in his address. Even though many of his points had been covered very eloquently by the leader of 

this group, his remarks added to the debate. It was when he came to the conclusion of his remarks that I 

thought he blew up. He seemed at a loss for words as to how he was going to justify his concluding 

remarks. I soon discovered why. Here he was, trying to ride two horses at the same time. After having 

chastised this government in the same tone as we in this group had, he all at once discovered that he was 

going to vote with the government on the main motion, while at the same time against the amendment. I 

am now quite convinced that his is a mugwump politician. In case anyone doesn‘t know what this is, it 

is a politician with his mug on one side of the fence, and his rump on the other. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, may I say it is rather obvious from my remarks that I will not be supporting 

the motion . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I don‘t think the hon. member added much to the stature and the dignity of this house 

by making an allusion of that kind to a member who is not in his seat. 

 

Mr. Larson — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I abide by your comments. In conclusion, it is rather obvious 

that I am not going to support the motion but will be wholeheartedly supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to express my thanks to those members 

who publicly and privately welcomed me to this assembly. I look forward to an extension of the 

friendships and the associations already formed, and I hope that in some small way I can perform a 

useful part in this assembly. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Throne Speech for their very fine 

presentations. I must say, Mr. Speaker, I come here rather humbly because of the fame of some of my 

predecessors from the constituency of Moosomin. These include the late Dr. Munroe, who was Minister 

of Health from 1929 to 1934, and was, I understand, considered one of the 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

237 

―good guys‖ in the rather infamous Conservative regime in those years. The late A.T. Proctor 

represented the constituency after this time from 1934 to 1948 and was a cabinet minister much of that 

time. The Hon. A.H. McDonald represented Moosomin constituency from 1948 to 1964 and, of course, 

is well know to everyone here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — I would like to welcome him here today. 

 

On behalf of the people of the constituency, I would like to pay tribute to their services. You will note 

that this area has never been Socialist. The people of Moosomin constituency . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — . . . The people of the constituency feel that they have perhaps suffered even more 

than the rest of the province under the 20 years of Socialism. Roads were neglected in our entire 

southeast corner of the province. Services were reduced and the town of Moosomin, for example, lost its 

lands title office, lost its court house, lost its provincial jail, all within a very few short years under the 

centralization policy of the previous government. 

 

I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to the time when more of our industries and services will be located in 

some of these progressive towns around the province to the better benefit of our rural areas. 

 

There have been a number of subjects referred to in the Throne Speech debate on which, as a newcomer 

here, I do not feel qualified to speak at this time. However, a couple of items have concerned me in 

particular. The Leader of the Opposition spoke at some length the other day on some of our railroad 

problems and as a member very directly concerned, I would like to make a few brief comments. At the 

outset, of course, I would like to make it quite clear that I hold no brief for CPR and as a farmer I am as 

concerned as anyone about boxcar shortages and the slow movement of grain. However, I have lived all 

my life in the village of Kennedy which is situated about midway on the former Reston-Wolseley branch 

line of the CPR. This line was 122 miles long and ran through one of the oldest and most prosperous and 

most densely populated areas in this province. In 1940 the CPR applied for permission to abandon this 

line. With the help of the Liberal government in Saskatchewan and the Liberal government in Ottawa, 

we vigorously protested and the abandonment was not permitted. However, again in 1960, the CPR 

applied for permission to abandon this line and again it was vigorously protested by residents along the 

line. We raised funds. We attended hearings and we sent delegations. However, we did have a feeling 

that in the end our interests would probably be protected. After all we had a CCF government in 

Saskatchewan who professed to be concerned with the problems of rural people. In addition to this 

Alvin Hamilton was not only a member of the Conservative government in Ottawa, but about one-half 

of the total mileage of this branch line was with in his federal seat. But what did Alvin‘s attitude appear 

to be at this time? ―I‘m sorry fellows but this is progress. These branch lines are obsolete. They will 

have to go‖. He could have saved our railroad but he chose not to do so. 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

238 

Who at that time the, Mr. Speaker, appeared to be the friend of the CPR? And what about the NDP? The 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) asked last week for the province government to give some 

leadership in this respect. Where, Mr. Speaker, was this provincial leadership in 1960 and 1961 when 

the CPR was tearing up our railroad and selling it for scrap? I would like to point out again, Mr. 

Speaker, that all branch line abandonment occurred in this province with the CCF in Regina and the 

Conservatives in Ottawa. It is very strange indeed, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Hamilton and the Leader of the 

Opposition (Lloyd) are now attempting to emerge as the champions of the rural people in this regard. 

 

I would also like to comment, Mr. Speaker, on another matter of special interest to my constituency. The 

four Indian reserves north of Broadview represent one of the largest concentrations of native people, I 

understand in this country. There are around 2,500 people and I am naturally concerned about their 

welfare. Their interests were neglected for many years. Their position deteriorated under the previous 

government. I am somewhat encouraged by the progress made in the past year and a half. However, 

much is yet to be done. I look forward to the day when more vocational, technical training is available to 

these people and at locations near their homes so that it is practical for them to attend. I look forward to 

the day when they can have better roads into and o their reserves, so they can travel to and from work 

more readily. These people need agriculture instruction. They need job counseling. They need better 

deals with adjacent municipalities and above all, they need friendship. 

 

I also deplore the fact, Mr. Speaker, that certain groups of professional agitators have been pestering our 

Indian and Metis people – and this was mentioned yesterday also – for various purposes without any 

concern for the welfare of these people. I hope that the native people themselves will reject these 

individuals so that there will be no interference with our program of assistance and reform and 

improvement for the next few years. 

 

There has been some talk in this debate about university fees at the universities in the province. Having 

been associated with the university in Saskatoon for some thirteen years, and not all of this, I hasten to 

add, as a student, I hope I may be permitted to comment on this. The student who goes to university is 

investing in education as an asset to help him to make his living in later years, just as a young farmer 

invests in land, a mechanic or plumber would invest in tools or equipment or a young man would 

perhaps buy a gravel truck, all for the same purpose. The student, at the moment is heavily subsidized 

and his university fees are less than one-quarter of the cost of acquiring this asset. The balance is paid 

from public funds. The other groups mentioned above must pay their full 100 per cent. Anyone who 

suggests an abolition of university fees is saying, in effect, that we should tax the farmer, the mechanic, 

or the trucker more to completely pay the cost of this valuable asset for the student. I do believe, of 

course, Mr. Speaker, that anyone with the necessary qualifications and desire should be able to attend 

university. I am quite sure with the loans and the scholarships available today that this is entirely 

possible. I know of no deserving student who has been turned away because of lack of funds. 

 

I have also been disturbed, Mr. Speaker, since election by suggestions that the present government is 

anti-labor. I have talked to many individuals in m own constituency and in other 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

239 

areas in various occupation and they tell me that what they in labor desire most is an opportunity to 

select a good job at a decent wage. As these jobs are being provided, I think that the present government 

would have to be considered the most pro-labor we have ever had in the province, perhaps the most 

pro-labor in Canada today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to dwell on the by-election in Moosomin, as almost 

everything has already been said. However, the result seemed to have been subjected to a good deal of 

manipulation by the opposition and I would like to briefly set the record straight. 

 

In the general election of 1964 the Socialists received 40.5 per cent of the total vote. In the by-election 

about one year later, 1965, the Socialists received 34.1 per cent of the total vote . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Going down 

 

Mr. Gardner: — . . . which means that they lost some 15.7 per cent of their share in one year. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, as a concession to those members who are taking these figures down in order to check my 

arithmetic, I will repeat the above results. 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — . . . for the Liberals. 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The Socialists vote in 1964 was 40.5 per cent. In 1965 the Socialist vote 34.1 per cent, 

a loss of 15.7 per cent of their share in one year. Mr. Speaker, if this rate of decline persists we might 

expect that in some seven years there won‘t be any Socialists left at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — I might suggest that the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) must also subscribe to 

this theory as he spent almost his entire speech the other day attacking the Liberals. Apparently he feels 

that the NDP are no longer a threat in this province and he is prudently spending his time working 

against his only possible future opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of an intensive and very expensive campaign by the NDP and their various 

associates, in spite of the personal and persistent intervention of Alvin Hamilton and his attempts to 

interject federal issues into the campaign, in spite of personal attacks on me by a couple of the members 

opposite, in spite of the fact that the Liberals had only been the government for about a year and only a 

part of the reform program had actually been implemented, we still ended up with a majority greater 

than that enjoyed by some eight of the members opposite or almost one-third of their total members 

have a smaller majority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, the previous speaker suggested that I had a squeak-in majority. I would 

suggest that it was some 600 

 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

240 

per cent greater than that received by the member from Pelly. Mr. Speaker, I should perhaps apologize 

to the assembly for not giving more detailed description at this time of my constituency, in my first 

speech here. However, most of the members opposite had an opportunity last summer to very careful 

examine my constituency, therefore any further description at this time seems unnecessary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. F.K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure I rise to speak on the motion of the 

Throne Debate. I do want to congratulate the mover of this debate, the member from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) and the seconder of this motion the member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan). They 

did a tremendous job in this regard and I certainly want to congratulate them on their remarks. 

 

I do want to welcome to this legislature the member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) as a colleague and 

as a friend. I certainly think he did a fine job in his maiden speech and he is going to add a great deal to 

the work in this legislature. 

 

For the last several days I have listened to a number of speeches from the members on the opposite side 

of the house and while I know I am not the intelligent and shred politician they are, I have generally 

been able to follow a man when he is speaking. But for the last number of days I have failed to 

recognize the points that they are trying to make and I am certainly rather confused about what their 

objectives are. 

 

Today I must congratulate and compliment the Premier of this province, Premier Ross Thatcher, the 

leader of this government and the Finance Minister of this province. He has laid before the legislature a 

tremendous program and I think that the people of Saskatchewan will have a great deal more to look 

forward to in the next year. I am sure that the Premier will go down in history as one of Saskatchewan‘s 

outstanding Premiers and I am indeed . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — . . . and I am indeed honored to be associated with a man, who is able with daring and 

resourceful leadership to find the means to reduce taxed and yet to continue to expand services and 

construction programs. 

 

Now, the Throne Speech has outlined proposed tax cuts and Home-owner grants and many other 

programs and new policies which will be welcomed by the people of Nipawin constituency, the 

constituency which I represent. I want to assure this legislature that the Nipawin constituency is blessed 

with a number of rich natural resources, of iron ore, oil shale, timber, rich delta land, not yet being 

utilized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the past CCF government with their control, regulations, high taxed, have prevented 

industrial people from developing the great potential of my constituency. Mr. Speaker, the legislative 

program presented at this 1966 session of the Saskatchewan legislature is going to do a great deal to 

encourage 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

241 

industry to take a new look at the Nipawin constituency and its resources. Tremendous enthusiasm 

pervades northern Saskatchewan and for that matter all western Canada regarding the exciting venture of 

mining high quality iron ore in the Choiceland district of the Nipawin constituency. Drilling tests 

indicate iron reserves sufficient to supply Western Canada needs for over 100 years plus heavy demands 

that could be met for other steel interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, core tests of this preliminary shaft show up to 70 per cent pure magnetite with an average 

of something around 30 per cent. Drills have entered the ore body at some 2,000 foot depth and have 

drilled to 3,200 foot level and were still drilling iron ore. Engineers have told me that if the ore is not 

easily available on the surface the dept makes little difference in the mining costs. Mr. Speaker, the 

demand for steel, especially for high grade steel, is increasing at a favorable rate. Steel is one of the 

commodities related to virtually all aspects of economic activity and industrial growth. 

 

Business consultants insist that for a country to have a constant stable industrial growth the country must 

be independent of outside steel supplies. Mr. Speaker, it is now necessary for Saskatchewan to consider 

this fact. Interprovincial Pipe and Steel Company is preparing to double or triple production. Other 

companies are considering expansion into the steel fabrication field. Interprovincial Steel and Pipe 

Company could use half of the proposed production with their expansion program. If there companies 

are going to produce high quality products at competitive prices they must have always available 

continuous supplies of high grade steel. 

 

Scrap iron will no longer produce the quality steel needed. To enable Saskatchewan firms to develop 

high quality farm and construction equipment in their manufacturing complexes, we must enable their 

demands to be met locally. Production of steel from low grade ore requires expensive processing and 

involves generally high transportation costs. All countries, including the United States are desperately 

searching for supplies of high grade ore. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increasing demands for such ore provide real incentives for the prompt development of the 

Choiceland iron ore reserves. The central strategic location of this mine in relation to your United States, 

European and Canadian markets provides tremendous marketing possibilities. 

 

Japanese steel interests also indicate a desire to secure quantities of this high grade ore. Mr. Speaker, 

market analysis indicates that Saskatchewan can assume an important role as a producer, consumer, 

exporter of iron, iron ore and steel. This position is enhanced by the inaccessibility of nearly all other 

iron deposits. Market analysis indicates a growing shortage of quality iron ore in supply and 

Saskatchewan is obviously in a favorable position to complete and supply a deficient market. 

 

All surveys made by a highly qualified consultant indicate that large capital outlays are warranted and 

justified and that the Choiceland iron ore mines should be brought into production as soon as possible. 

With this mine in operation all of western Canada will be reaping the benefit of lower steel costs. Farm 

implements, steel piping, steel construction materials and a host of other items, too numerous to 

mention, will become more competitive. Opening of the mine will make the Choiceland area the 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

242 

Pittsburgh of western Canada and of northeaster United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a fantastic fact that there is prospect of an iron ore mine in Saskatchewan in a location 

that has all the advantages any mining man ever asked for. The mine site is three miles from the 

Saskatchewan River providing a plentiful supply of water for processing. The mine site is located in an 

area of gently rolling hills, of jack pine, poplar trees and light sandy soil, making an ideal building site. 

The location is about 15 miles from an asphalt highway and a CPR railway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, towns in the locality, such as Nipawin, Choiceland and White Fox have all the modern 

facilities asked for and needed by our present day labor force. The shaft in this mine will also make 

available a 300 foot zone of high quality limestone which can be used for the processing of the iron ore. 

This limestone will also be available to supply lime for building trade products, cement, wallboard, and 

so on. The iron ore is of the purest type known. The main impurity, silica, is easily removed and it is 

possible that a large secondary glass industry could be possible. 

 

Other advantages that I should mention briefly at this time are: It is the largest known reserve of 

magnetite west of Quebec and south of the Arctic Circle. Saskatchewan lignite, power, gas, and oil will 

be used in quantities in this project. Another advantage, underground operation will permit continuous 

mining. Choiceland Iron Ore Mines will employ over 500 people and over 3,000 will be employed in 

service employment. The royalties will provide the government with added funds to assist in further tax 

reductions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost $2,000,000 has already been spent on this project. This has been used to finance 

test drilling, a pilot hole for the shaft, market surveys, engineering advice and plant design. All reports 

indicate a most profitable and sound business venture. All reports relate reliable business management 

and adequate financial arrangement. Choiceland Iron Mines Company has received approval from the 

Ontario Securities Commission. The president and directors are well known reliable people. 

Underwriters for the mine project are considered top people in their field. There are no bonds, no 

debentures outstanding and no shares are held in escrow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all brochures and information that I have received and I have read are adamant that it tales 

local iron and steel production to provide a solid base for a successful, long time industrial development 

program. Mr. Speaker, it is no some ten years past since the discovery of this iron ore body was located. 

I did have the opportunity to study the feasibility report of Irex Mines at that time. The report was as 

favorable to this mining project as all new reports are. It is unfortunate that the previous government of 

this province did not assist in this most worthwhile venture at that time. 

 

We the people of Saskatchewan have lost ten years of benefits. Last year the area where the iron ore is 

located was included in a depressed area program of the federal government. With all the additional 

benefits now possible the proposed mining and processing of iron ore should be doubly beneficial to all 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under these condition, I would expect immediate efforts to complete all plans in 

construction. If this 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

243 

does not happen in the near future, other companies will proceed with their development and 

Saskatchewan could lose all the advantages that could be ours at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must express the appreciation of the people of Nipawin to my government in 

Saskatchewan for their consideration of financial assistance by the way of a long-term loan in the 

amount of some million dollars for the initial shaft construction, a proposed shaft which could already 

be too small when related to all aspects of possible market growth. Mr. Speaker, all information 

available indicates that it takes local iron and steel production to provide a solid base for permanent, 

successful, long-term industrial development. We in Saskatchewan have the opportunity to give western 

Canada this foundation for an integrated steel industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one other resource I should mention at this time and the people of Nipawin are 

looking forward to, the development of the immense oil shale deposits east of Carrot river encompassing 

many miles of the Pasquia Hills. Last summer I discussed this oil shale deposit with a leading oil 

company executive and he informed me that the Carrot River deposit is one of the richest and largest 

deposits in the world. He informed me that the deposit was as rich as, r could be better than, tar sands of 

northern Alberta, and that his company was considering a mining and refinery operation for the region 

in the amount of $200,000,000. 

 

A year ago the region was test drilled and indications are that the shale could produce some 25 gallons 

of oil per ton compared to other large deposits yielding some 15 gallons per ton. Mr. Speaker, it is one 

of nature‘s most fabulous treasure chests. The extraction of oil from the shale is an industry of powerful 

potential and will change the petroleum industry of Saskatchewan and of Canada. The oil shale has little 

or no overburden and the test drilling to several hundred feet indicate tremendous proven reserves. The 

shale covers an area from Arborfield north of Carrot River and east to the Manitoba boundary. For some 

years people of the district thought this sedimentary rock was coal and used it in their stoves. To date a 

number of carloads of shale have shipped to Denver, Colorado and to Dallas, Texas for testing. 

Production of some 50,000 gallons of oil per day is a minimum production needed and must be extracted 

by a process called retort. This process requires large amounts of water and by a quirk of nature this 

matchless treasure is located in a region that abounds with springs, flowing wells, and many large rivers 

and lakes. This location has many advantages over other deposits of similar nature. The oil shale 

deposits are located close to good roads, railroads and progressive modern communities. The deposit is 

easily accessible with little or no overburden. There is a future for a seemingly inexhaustible store of oil. 

This is not a boom or bust industry. The oil that is produced from shale will have special markets and 

will be a welcome adjunct to present resources. Development of the oil shale extraction industry will be 

an important strategic and economic asset to our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I should mention also several other developments. The people of Nipawin are 

eagerly awaiting the construction of a third hydro dam near the town. The dam will provide needed 

water storage for the efficient operation of the Squaw Rapids Hydro Plant. This dam will also provide 

additional supplies of low-cost hydro power to encourage further industrial development. The dam will 

also provide a more adequate traffic 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

244 

crossing of the Saskatchewan River to accommodate the ever-increasing heavy traffic flow now using 

the old, narrow, railroad bridge. 

 

I should also mention at this time that the people of Nipawin and the people of the entire north-east 

Saskatchewan are also looking forward to the speedy development of the immense agricultural area 

known as the Cumberland delta, east and north of the town of Carrot River, a development that will 

provide unlimited opportunities for young farmers, promoters of the tourist industry and new 

opportunities for the Indian and Metis of this area. There is no doubt in the minds of people of the north 

that by the policies of the new Saskatchewan Liberal government with its energetic, driving leadership 

of our outstanding Premier, Ross Thatcher, the four projects that I have mentioned will become 

successful realities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the defeated NDP government failed to provide leadership that Saskatchewan needed 

in the past, and so in no way could I support the amendment to the Throne Speech. Saskatchewan is 

speedily moving ahead, guided by the policies of my government and I can assure this legislature that I 

will wholeheartedly support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise for the first time to speak in this 

debate, I would like first to welcome Mr. Bradshaw, the new Clerk of the legislature. I do hope that he 

will enjoy his stay with us and that he will not find the proceedings here in Saskatchewan too dull. I am 

certain that all of us who have met Mr. Bradshaw are convinced that here is a fine English gentleman. 

 

I also want to offer my congratulations to the hon. member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). I feel certain 

that with his sincerity he will represent the people of Moosomin constituency well and for many years to 

come. 

 

I also want to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Address in Reply. I thin that both did 

themselves and the people they represent proud. I am very pleased to be associated with them. 

 

I have listened with interest and amusement at the quoting of figures and statistics by various members. I 

paid some special attention to the performance and the figures quoted by the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). The figures he quoted are only a part of the story. It is the inferences which he 

tried to make that are most amazing. 

 

I want to turn to school grants because the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) mentioned them a 

number of times. Mr. Speaker, I want this house to know the facts of this matter. For the year 1959-60, 

operating school grants increased from $3,700,000; 1960-61, they increased $2,880,000; 1961-62, they 

increased $2,000,000; 1962-63, they increased $4,200,000; 1963-643 the increased $3,600,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will have noted that the hon. Leader of the Opposition has kept reminding us that in 

―our last year‖ we gave – He forgot to mention that that was an election year. This 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

245 

Was not a regular trend of grants increases. Once could hardly claim that one year set a trend. It is for 

this reason I tried to be fair. I took the average of their last four years in office, and I‘ll be willing to take 

our last four years when that day comes. 

 

This should give us a more realistic picture, this should give us a trend in grant increases by the former 

government. It was an average increase of $3,300,000 per year compared to our $3,600,000 in our first 

year. I am afraid the Leader of the Opposition uses statistics as a drunken man uses lampposts, for 

support rather than illumination. 

 

While I am on statistics and figures, I want to reveal to this house some figures used by the hon. Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) last summer in the Moosomin by-election. He is quoted in the Moosomin 

World Spectator on Wednesday, Jun 9th, 1965: 

 

The former Saskatchewan Premier said that, according to the latest information he had been able to 

get, province grants for the Moosomin School Unit for 1965 amounted to $409,000 while in 1964 

they had been $425,000 and $407,000 in 1963. 

 

Well, what are the facts? The operating grants to the Moosomin School Unit in 1963 were $407,594. In 

1964, they were $425,377 and in 1965, $414,057. Now, in this last figure he is only $5,000 out. I‘ll 

forgive him for this. But what I shall reveal next is most damning. There were 22 teachers less; an area 

had been transferred to other units. Grants per teach: 1963, $3,739; 1964 (an election year), $3,902; 

1965, $4,759, an increase of $857 per teacher. I sincerely hope that 10 or 20 years in politics won‘t do 

this to me. I think the people of Saskatchewan deserve better than this from the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

On February 7th the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) in speaking to NDP youth called for a 

crash program in education. Is this not an admission of failure on their part? I‘ll agree that to rectify 

what was not done over the past 20 years calls for something of a crash program. Speaker in the 

legislature on February 10th the hon. Leader of the Opposition said: 

 

Last year the government of Canada moved into the field of school student loans and the government 

of Saskatchewan virtually moved out. 

 

Does the hon. Leader of the Opposition want us to stack loans? Let me give you the loan picture: 

1963-64, $537,000; 1964-65, $1,880,000; 1965-66, $3,000,000. Over 4,000 students received loans. I 

am going to tell this house that this year no fulltime student (four classes) who qualified for university 

entrance and needed a loan was turned down in 1965-66. I am please to take advantage of the money 

made available by the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris—Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I am a little surprised the opposition 

members aren‘t jumping up and down in their seats this session so 

 



 

February 16, 1966 

 

 

246 

far. They are keeping mighty quiet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to welcome our confrere, the member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) who sits on this 

side of the house and who, indeed, follows an illustrious name into the house and into the public life of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I noted the member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder), the other day had his own ―crousy‖ little remarks 

about the name of Gardner, but if he lives as long and does as much for the province of Saskatchewan, 

maybe someday we can be proud of him too. 

 

At this time, I should like to compliment the member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) on the excellent 

presentation which he made here in his maiden speech this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, as this house is 

governed to a large extent by radio time, and since I have prepared a speech for radio tomorrow, at this 

time I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 5:30 p.m. o‘clock. 

 


