



















































Hansard: April 07, 1966


1797 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

44th Day 

 

Thursday, April 7, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 9 o’clock a.m. 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTION RE SESSIONAL PAPER NO. 269 
 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, Before orders of the Day, I want to bring to the 

attention of the government and the house a complaint I have to make in regard to sessional paper no. 

269 which was return no. 118, and it reads: 

 

On motion of Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey) an order of the legislative assembly was issued on March 

22, 1966 for a return showing: 

 

copies of (a) Any resignation submitted by Mrs. C. E. Schwartz, former secretary to the Minister 

of Mineral Resources; (b) The Order-in-Council terminating her employment as secretary to the 

minister, and (c) The Order-in-Council appointing her successor. 

 

As I noted that was passed by the legislature on March 22, and it comes back with this on it: 

 

Secretarial or clerical assistants for each member of the Executive Council are specifically placed 

in the unclassified division of the public service under the provision of section 9c of the Public 

Service Act. 

 

I didn’t ask that at all. That is just padding put in for some reason, but then the next statement is: 

 

It is not in the public interest to make public correspondence relating to employment between a 

minister and an employee in the unclassified service except where there is statutory provisions for 

doing so. 

 

If shelter was to be taken behind the question of public interest, this should have been raised on March 

22nd when the question was in the house, Sir. Because when this was passed by the house, it was 

beyond the power of the minister or anybody else to take shelter under this provision for it was then an 

order of the house. Consequently we did not get that. Then it goes on and the answer to (b) is: 

 

The Order in Council terminating her employment as secretary, cancelling the appointment of Mrs. 

Schwartz . . . 

 

Then there is supposed to be an Order-in-Council appointing her successor and there is no copy of an 

Order-in-Council appointing her successor here with this return. I think it is deficient in two ways: (1) 

— the letter of resignation is not with it, and (2) — the Order in Council appointing her successor is not 

here. 



 

April 7, 1966 

 

1798 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, the minister in charge of this department and in 

charge for preparing the return is not here, all I can tell the hon. member is that as soon as he comes I 

will take it up with him. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — He hasn’t got a resignation that is why he didn’t give one. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I don’t know, but all I can do is take it up with him. 

 

QUESTION RE INCENTIVE GRANTS — EDUCATION 
 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, during the 

discussion on education estimates, the minister undertook to provide us with a copy of an explanation as 

to the basis of the distribution of the so-called incentive grants. The minister has not yet seen fit to do so. 

Does this mean that we are not going to receive this explanation? 

 

Hon. G. J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — It doesn’t mean that at all, Mr. Speaker, I must say this 

though. You know there are over 200 school systems. We had the budgets in, looked them over and 

made assessment of these. We find there are two or three boards who have errors in their budgets. Now 

they did not intend to; they were honest mistakes. We have checked with them and there will be some 

changes. I didn’t want to put out a report that somebody would hold up to me in a year and say “Here is 

what you said last year in print and now this is changed.” The changes are legitimate because of errors in 

accounting, shall I say, in reporting. But you will get them as soon as we have the final figure. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, with deference the minister has not answered my question. My question as 

to the basis of determining the grants, of course, has nothing whatsoever to do with examining the 

budgets. They must have had a basis to determine them before they examined the last two budgets. That 

is the explanation as to the basis on which these grants were determined that the minister undertook to 

give during estimates. 

 

QUESTION RE SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 
 

Mr. W. A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I 

wonder if the Provincial Treasurer would care to give a report on the final results in relation to the 6th 

series of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds. I believe the last time he reported he said they had $12,247,000 

in, but he anticipated there would be a bit more. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — I speak from memory but I think the final figure was 

$12,370,000. 



 

April 7, 1966 

 

1799 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher, (Premier), moved third reading of Bill No. 82, An Act Respecting 

Home-owner Grants. 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the position of this group with respect to 

this particular bill was made clear at the time of second reading, by the member from Swift Current (Mr. 

Wood) and by myself during the Throne Speech debate. At that time we did indicate our opinion that the 

bill would be of value, the plan would be of value to a considerable number of people. We had some 

suggestions which, in our opinion, would improve the bill. Before the bill gets its third reading, I want to 

express the regrets of those of us in this area of the house that the government rejected every amendment 

which we proposed and suggested to them. Had they not so rejected them, Mr. Speaker, the plan would 

have provided more benefits, and distributed them with more fairness. 

 

Had they not so rejected them, then a number of the discriminatory features of the bill would have been 

removed. Had they accepted our suggestions, the government would not have had the extraordinary and 

unwarranted power which the bill proposes to give them. The power provides them with the quality to 

make decisions of considerable importance to individuals, to make those decisions without any 

possibility of appeal. These powers enable the government without cause, and without need, to explain 

or to justify and without any recourse by the homeowner concerned to deny the people benefits which 

this Act proposes to confer. 

 

Some of the suggestions which were rejected by the government I want to state briefly. One of these 

would have prevented the exclusion of renters. Renters are people who indirectly pay taxes. They make 

up about one-quarter of Saskatchewan families. They are being excluded by the means test which the 

government has included in the bill. These suggestions, if accepted, would have directed the payment of 

the grants through municipalities, rather than by the cheques signed by the Premier, to the successful 

applicant homeowner. This procedure would have made the grant administratively more simple, would 

have made the plan less of a political mechanism. It would have removed from each homeowner the 

necessity of personal application for his rights. 

 

Some of these suggestions, Mr. Speaker, would have prevented the odious procedure now allowed of 

excluding the homeowners of Lloydminster and district by a stroke of the cabinet’s pen. The use of the 

government authority to punish a group in this way is at least one of the more odious features. 

 

Undoubtedly the most serious inclusion in the act is that of section 12, and I want to read specifically 

what that section says: 

 

The determination of the minister that the applicant for the Home-owner grant is not entitled to 

such a grant is final. 

 

This section cannot be condemned too strongly. This is an authority, one without any appeal, an 

authority to be exercised without conditions or cause being spelled out for which no government should 

ask. 

 

The government refused to remove it. And they refused, Mr. 



 

April 7, 1966 

 

1800 

Speaker, suggestions which would have improved the act in its administration, in its substance, in its 

fairness. They lost an opportunity to improve their legislation and in so doing, I want to emphatically 

express our regrets that they did not move in some of the ways suggested. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, at this late date, I am not going to prolong the 

debate, but one of the features of the current session has been that time after time the Socialists have got 

up and complained about legislation. Then after talking against the bill for hour after hour, they 

invariably get up and vote for it. 

 

Now, they have told us this is an iniquitous piece of legislation; it doesn’t help the right people, it has 

got too much compulsion in it, and a lot of other things. Nevertheless, they lack the courage, as usual, 

Mr. Speaker, to vote against this very progressive legislation. 

 

This bill will help every property owner in the province of Saskatchewan. Just to show how honest these 

Socialists are again, Mr. Speaker, we are going to call for a recorded vote on third reading. After all the 

talk, after the speech of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) this morning, just watch him get up 

and vote for this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 47 
 

Thatcher MacDonald Blakeney 

Howes Gallagher Davies 

McFarlane Breker Thibault 

Cameron Leith Willis 

Steuart Radloff Whelan 

Heald Romuld Nicholson 

Gardiner (Melville) Weatherald Kramer 

Guy MacLennan Berezowsky 

Merchant (Mrs.) Hooker Smishek 

Loken Coupland Broten 

MacDougall Gardner (Moosomin) Larson 

Grant Mitchell Robbins 

Coderre Lloyd Pepper 

Bjarnason Wood Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Trapp Walker Pederson 

Cuelenaere Brockelbank (Kelsey)  

 

NAYS — 1 

 Nollet  

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. C. G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome to 

the assembly a group of students from Pleasantdale, from Dalville High School. Their teacher, Mrs. 

Neufeldt, is accompanying them. they have spent the morning touring the RCMP buildings, the IPSCO 

plant, and this building. I am sure by the time they have 



 

April 7, 1966 

 

1801 

completed the day and the other tours which have been arranged for them, they will have found that this 

has been both an educational and informative occasion for them. I want to welcome them on your 

behalf, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of the assembly. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, before we begin this afternoon, I would also like to 

introduce a group of 78 students in the east gallery from another pleasant valley near Regina, namely the 

friendly city of Moose Jaw, and in this case, King George School. The students are in grade eight and 

are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Murray and the Social Studies teacher, Mr. Reid. They too, I 

understand, are on a tour of the city besides the Legislative Building. 

 

I should inform them that we are informal this afternoon in committee and are in the declining part of 

the legislative session. This is supposed to be the last day, hopefully, and I know everyone here in the 

legislature would want us to wish them a pleasant stay here and an instructive and very enjoyable 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — moved second reading of Bill No. 104, An Act to amend the 

Land Titles Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of this bill and I think I should say a word in 

explanation. I have discussed this matter with hon. members and I must say that I am indebted to them 

for agreeing to give me leave to bring the bill in at this late time. 

 

The Premier mentioned earlier the reasons why it was necessary to introduce the bill into the house. The 

effect of the bill briefly, is to provide for the issuance in the province of Saskatchewan of leasehold 

titles; that is to say for anybody who is the holder of a lease for a term of 10 years or more, there will not 

be provision in the Land Titles Act for issuance of title, of leasehold title. Before there has only been a 

fee simple title issued. This provision in the Land Titles Act that we are proposing is similar to 

provisions in the Land Titles Acts of Manitoba and Alberta and other provinces. It is made necessary by 

virtue of the fact there are a number of large developments in the province, shopping centre 

developments, where it is not possible for the holders of these long-term leases to get a fee simple title. 

Their financing is done by way of leasehold titles and that is why it is necessary to have these 

amendments. 

 

With that short explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of 

this bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO MR. K. A. BRADSHAW, CLERK 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, as this house draws to a close, I wonder if I could 

just take a minute to say a word officially about our 



 

April 7, 1966 

 

1802 

clerk, Mr. Bradshaw. Members have already commented on work he has done. We have all been most 

happy to have had him with us. He has done an excellent job, indeed such a good one that I want to tell 

Mr. Bradshaw if he ever decides to leave the British Civil Service and wants to join the provincial one 

here in Saskatchewan, we could certainly find a top job for him. It has been a pleasure . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . and it has been a pleasure working with him. I hope he will tell many of his 

friends in Westminster that we in Saskatchewan wish the British House, the British people, all the best 

in the future. I am not talking politically at the moment. Mr. Speaker, I say again on behalf of the 

government and my colleagues that it has been a great pleasure to work with Mr. Bradshaw this session. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I very heartily concur with the 

remarks which the Premier has made with regard to the services of Mr. Bradshaw. I am particularly 

pleased, of course, that he returns to a happier country than he left. I have to admit that when I heard we 

were going to have a new Clerk this session, great as is my respect for Westminster and all its traditions, 

I was just a little bit apprehensive. I had met the Clerk for only a very short time when all of those 

apprehensions were removed. I don’t see how we could possibly have been more fortunate in getting 

one who moved in, who recognized our situation and who has guided and served us so well as has been 

the case this year. 

 

I do want to add my thanks and the thanks of all of us over here and our best wishes as the Clerk returns 

to Westminster. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I crave the indulgence of the house to add a few words of my own to those 

already spoken in regard to our Acting Clerk, and support what has been said in every degree, and also 

to express my very sincere thanks for the great assistance that he rendered to Member during this session 

of the house. 

 

We now await the arrival of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 
 

At 9:45 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor having entered the chamber, took his seat 

upon the throne and gave royal assent to the bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you for, and 



 

April 7, 1966 

 

1803 

congratulate you upon the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence that the approval 

of the programs and plans presented to you will continue to provide the services necessary to the growth 

and development of our province. 

 

The legislation you have passed in this Second Session of the Fifteenth Legislature has been designed to 

both speed the development of those resources providence has bestowed on us, and to ensure an 

equitable distribution of the fruits of that development. 

 

Chief among the measures you have enacted are a series designed to reduce the level of property 

taxation throughout the province. This has been effected through vastly increased assistance to our 

municipalities. 

 

You have also given approval to an act to provide home-owner grants of up to fifty dollars to property 

owners resident in Saskatchewan. 

 

You have also approved a reduction in the level of personal income tax paid by Saskatchewan workers. 

 

You agreed to measures to provide free textbooks to all Saskatchewan students in Grade nine. 

 

You have given approval to legislation that will make possible the construction of the province’s first 

pulp mill near the city of Prince Albert. 

 

You have approved measures to make possible the construction of multi-purpose water supply schemes 

in the province. 

 

A law was also passed to accelerate the development of housing and urban renewal. 

 

You have made possible uniform legislation in respect of time throughout the province. 

 

Finally, you have given approval to many other measures designed to improve the lot of individuals in 

our province and make possible the fullest development of our resources. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the public service and 

assure you the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the session and wish you the full blessing of providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Heald, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant governor that this Legislative assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


