



















































Hansard: February 14, 1966


121 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session – Fifteenth Legislature 

5th day 

 

Monday, February 14, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

STATEMENT RE CFQC RADIO REPORT 
 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — I would like to draw attention to a report that emanated over the radio 

station CFQC, last Friday evening. On Friday evening Mr. Les Edwards of CFQC stated on that station 

as follows: 

 

Reports state that Mr. Walker in a verbal exchange was not as civil as he might have been to the 

Speaker, and commented to the effect that the Saskatchewan Legislature is not yet the Reichstag. 

 

Mr. Edwards went on to say: 

 

The Speaker of the Legislature must be shown respect due to his office. 

 

An attempt was made in this was to create the impression amongst CFQC listeners that I had made this 

statement in response to a ruling made by Your Honour. I examined the transcript, I have it here before 

me. I find that the Premier had been quoting from what he said was an agreement, and I got up and I said 

―Mr. Speaker, the hon. member said the agreement provided for so and so, and the rules are elementary, 

all members have the same rights‖. Mr. Speaker, I recall quite clearly that there was a stir and some 

shouts from the other side, ―Sit Down‖ but I went on and I said ―Some hon. members over there may 

think that this is the Reichstag but it is not yet‖. Your Honour, that is taken directly from the transcript 

of this house. 

 

Your Honour‘s first interjection into the proceedings was after I had made this statement, and not before. 

It is, therefore, impossible that the statement could have been directed to Your Honour, as Your Honour 

had at that point said nothing in these proceedings. It is pretty clear to anyone who was here that the 

comment was directed to an outburst from several members of the government side directing me to sit 

down. I have had an opportunity of looking at the report made by the pressmen in the gallery to CFQC, 

and there is nothing in the report to justify the statement made by Mr. Edwards. 

 

I, therefore, draw this to your attention, Mr. Speaker, from my place on the floor in the house, and 

protest most strongly against this scurrilous kind of unjustified abuse from Mr. Edwards. I want to say 

just one further thing, Mr. Speaker, I hope that when I make a criticism of other people that I do it with a 

sense of justice and fair play. I don‘t mind being criticized for 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

122 

things that I do that are wrong, but I resent very much an attempt to stir up hostility against me for things 

that have no justification in fact whatsoever. 

 

I want to say further, Mr. Speaker, that I have endeavored, as I think Your Honour knows, at all times, to 

abide by Your Honour‘s rulings, and to accept them graciously. The comment that was made that time 

was clearly not directed to Your Honour, nor had I any intention of making it to Your Honour. I want to 

say one further thing, that if anybody knows anything about the history of Nazism they know that it was 

the Leader of the Government who subverted the Reichstag and not the Speaker. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — He should apologize and get it over with. 

 

WELCOME TO LEBRET SCHOLASTICATE 
 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day are called 

I would like to welcome to the legislature a group who are sitting in the gallery to your left, 20 students 

and their leaders from the Oblate Scholasticate at Lebret, who are visiting with us this afternoon. These 

20 are from various parts of our province of Saskatchewan, and also from other provinces of Canada. I 

would like to take this opportunity of welcoming them to our midst and hoping that they spend a very 

worthwhile day in Regina, and that they enjoy the proceedings. They are in the charge of Father 

Tetrault, the bursar at the Scholasticate and Brother Aubrey. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

INQUIRY RE QUESTION ASKED ON FRIDAY EVENING BY MR. LLOYD 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with, I wonder if the Premier can now give the answer to the question which I asked on 

Friday evening. He wasn‘t certain of the answer as to whether the broadcast sponsored by the 

government — daily news broadcast from the legislature — was to continue during the period between 

now and February 16th. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — I have no further information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A follow-up question, Mr. Speaker. Then I submit that this is rather important, there are 

certain rules that have pertained to legislature broadcasts generally. I would have thought that the 

Premier would have had some information by this time in regard to it. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the government, when can 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

123 

we expect to get a copy of the Manpower Survey Report, or the analysis of it – apparently the 

government conducted it last year – and whether a copy of that survey will be tabled with this assembly? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I‘ll look into that and try and get the hon. member an answer tomorrow. Meantime, 

might I say to the Leader of the Opposition that I have been informed that those broadcasts will have 

been discontinued until Thursday. 

 

CONDOLENCES TO INDIA ON DEATH OF PRIME MINISTER 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Recently, the Commonwealth, indeed, the whole world, learned with shock and 

sorrow of the sudden tragic death of the Prime Minister of India, Lal Bahadur Shastri. I thought that 

members would wish me to express the sympathy of this legislature to the commonwealth country and 

the people of India in their grievous misfortune. This, I did and received the following reply: 

 

New Delhi, February 3rd, 1966. 

 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 

 

I am extremely grateful to you for the expression of sorrow and the message of sympathy you have 

conveyed at the bereavement we have suffered by the sudden and tragic passing away of our late 

Prime Minister, Lal Bahadur Shastri. 

 

Your message has given us solace that there are so many others to share our grief at this great loss. 

 

With best regards, 

 

Yours sincerely, 

Hukam Singh 

Speaker, Lok Sabha. 

 

DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES OF THRONE SPEECH 
 

On Friday last, the hon. member from Hanley, voiced the complaint that copies of the Throne Speech 

had not been distributed to members as soon as it had been delivered by His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

As it is the duty of the Legislative Assembly office to distribute the speech after receiving it from the 

Premier‘s office, I made inquiries in regard thereto. I find that immediately after the speech was 

delivered, copies were put in the two members‘ lounges on either side of the chamber, and other copies 

were delivered to the offices of the Leader of the Opposition and the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. 

Pederson). I understand this was done because of the difficulty of distributing papers to members at their 

desks on opening day. 

 

I have given a directive that in future, in addition to the present method of distribution, copies are also to 

be placed 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

124 

upon members‘ desks immediately after the adjournment on opening day. 

 

QUESTION RE TRANSCRIPTS 
 

On Friday last, the Leader of the Opposition drew attention to the fact that he had received from the 

Legislative Assembly office a transcript of assembly proceedings with a note signed by a former 

employee of his office. On inquiry into this matter I find that an out-of-date pro forma was inadvertently 

pinned on to the transcripts before they were sent out. The clerk asked me to express his apologies for 

this oversight and for any inconvenience it may have caused. Steps have been taken to see that it will not 

recur. 

 

COMPOSITION OF SELECT STANDING COMMITTEES 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — moved: 

 

That the report of the Select Special committee appointed to prepare lists of the members to 

compose the Select Standing Committees of this assembly be now concurred in. 

 

Seconded by the Minister of Public Health (Mr. D.G. Steuart) 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words in regard to this motion, 

because I object to the report made by this committee. The proportions recommended for the committees 

are all out of order according to the proportion of the different parties in the legislature. It has been 

recognized in the past that the proportions on committees somewhat resemble the proportions in the 

house, and I know that some of the hon. members opposite may point out to committees that were 

composed in previous years, and their composition. But I would like to say that in those years when we 

had the honor to be the government party, I cannot remember any case when the opposition asked for 

another member, or more members on the committee, when they didn‘t get it. They couldn‘t, of course, 

have a majority on a committee, but certainly there was no request for more members than were on 

those committees. 

 

Now, I just don‘t want to take too much time, but I do want to point out what kind of situation exists. 

For example, in regard to the three committees, Agriculture, Education, and Municipal Law, each of 

which is composed of 24 members, the constitution insisted upon by the government members on the 

committee was 14-9 and 1, 14 government members, 9 official opposition, and one Conservative. 

Calculated on the basis of the membership in the house would be 12.6 to 10.5, not 14 to 9, and of course, 

the proportion for the Conservative party comes out at approximately .5. It is recognized that in this case 

we won‘t split the man, but we will have the whole man on the job, but the difference I want to point out 

is between a 12.6 and 10.5 ratio to a 14 – 9 ratio. 

 

Now, the fair thing, of course would be to knock off the 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

125 

fraction for the opposition, and I recognize that the government is entitled to have a majority on these 

committees. All members are entitled to have a voice too. The fair thing would be to knock off the 

fraction of the opposition, which would make it 10 for the opposition and to add a fraction for the 

government, which would make it 13 – 10 – 1, which would give the government a clear majority of 2 

on that committee over both parties on these committees. 

 

Now, on the committee, we tried to get the government members to adopt this procedure. They laughed 

at it, they wouldn‘t have anything to do with it at all . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I wasn‘t laughing. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Well, I thought the Minister was laughing, maybe that is just his normal 

appearance, but I thought he was laughing about it anyway, and I am pretty sure that the Minister of 

Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) was laughing about it, because he does laugh rather easily. Well, when we 

couldn‘t get the government members to agree to a ration of 13 – 10 – 1, we tried to make a compromise 

and get them to agree to 14 – 10 – 1, but they would not agree to that. Nothing else in regard to these 

committees with 24 members but 14 – 9 – 1, giving them a majority of 4 in the committee. That is the 

majority they have in the house now if you don‘t count Mr. Speaker, and that is counting Canora that is 

being generous. 

 

It is a fact that members of the house have a right to sit on these committees and by their majority the 

government is apparently going to steam-roller through a report of this committee which will take away 

from members their right to sit and speak on these committees. 

 

Now, two other committees on Law Amendments and on Private Bills are committees consisting of 26 

members. The proportional representation should be 13.6 to 11.4 and, of course, one Conservative. If we 

follow the same procedure of dropping the fraction for the opposition and adding a fraction for the 

government party, it becomes 14 – 11 – 1. They insisted on 15 – 10 – 1, which is rather unreasonable. 

 

Now, again we tried every way we could to get some change and some compromise, some fairer 

approach to this question, but the government members wouldn‘t move at all. 

 

The two other committees about which I wish to speak are the two largest ones, on Public Accounts and 

Crown Corporations. Last year they had 31 members on each of these committees, and they were 

composed of 18 government members, 12 official opposition, and one Conservative. 18 – 12 – 1. The 

proper proportion is 16.8 – 13.6 – 1. But anyway the government proposed that these committees be 

reduced in size from 31 to 28. We opposed the reduction of the size of these committees, but this isn‘t 

the major issue, I don‘t think. They are reduced by the report of the committee to 28. The proper 

proportion on a 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

126 

committee of 28, is 14.7 - government members, 12.3 — official opposition, and 1 Conservative. But 

they insisted on 16 – 11 – 1. Now to drop the fraction in the one case, add it in the other, would have 

made it 15 – 12 – 1. They insisted on 16 – 11 – 1, maintaining a majority of 4 on this committee. I 

wasn‘t to say this, that isn‘t quite as bad as it was last year, but if we can‘t make any more progress than 

this each year, it is going to take a long time to get justice in the appointment of these committees. 

 

So, I would suggest that the house vote against the report of this committee and let the committee go to 

work and do it over again, and do a better job. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Kelsey, (Mr. Brockelbank), talks about the number 

of members of the opposition he wanted on these committees, but he was very quick to accept when we 

cut the two largest and most important committees down. In fact, I think his exact words were, ―Well, I 

think this is better‖. We suggested one be cut off the CCF, two off the government; he said ―This is 

better‖. Which proves the point he really wasn‘t trying to get more numbers. He is quite happy to cut 

one member off if he gets two off the government . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I must correct the hon. member, I 

said, ―This is better in regard to proportion.‖ This is what I said. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, you were quite prepared to accept it on that basis, so you really weren‘t fighting 

for members. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is putting words in my mouth. There 

used to be people over here who didn‘t like that too, and I want to say that I didn‘t accept it, except that 

we had to accept it because the Minister was in control of the majority of the committee. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What a perishing thought to think that I ever used my majority. I recall, Mr. Speaker, 

we gave in on one committee, mind you, it hasn‘t met for 20 years, but we did give in, very democratic. 

But the truth is that what the members of the Opposition were after was to try and cut down our 

majority. We have ministers on these committees, these ministers are busy. It might not be like it was in 

the old days, Mr. Speaker, when they didn‘t have so much to do, but we are very busy, we have a great 

deal to do, and we can‘t have too many ministers tied up in these committees. We have only 12 

ministers, not 15, so they are really earning their pay, and we try to be very democratic. In fact, it is 

better than it was last year, they never objected at all last year. I think the truth is they went to sleep, and 

kind of missed the boat, but anyway I just 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

127 

assure the house that we did give them every consideration. I think that in view of the fact that we do 

have the responsibility of moving the business of the government along, and moving the business of the 

committee along, we must have a majority on those committees at all times as is our right. No one has 

suggested it is not our right, a reasonable working majority. I think the other hon. members who are on 

committee with myself will point out that in spite of the sanctimonious protestations of the hon. member 

from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank), we can go back into the records and show that they weren‘t always 

quite as democratic as he might like to point out now that he is in the Opposition. 

 

But I will assure him that as the years go by, and as we sit on this side of the house, we may get more 

mellow, and we will have lots of years to get mellow . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — That isn‘t the word, it is odorous. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Speak for yourself. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I am only gong to add a few words to what the Minister of Public Health (Mr. 

Steuart) has just said. I would just like to say first to my friend the member for Kelsey (Mr. 

Brockelbank) that I don‘t intend to change the expression on my face, or go into committees with a long 

face on. I intend to conduct business in a fair and forthright manner. If I can‘t do it in one of good 

feeling towards the Opposition across the way, well then I wouldn‘t want to be in this particular position 

that I am in. 

 

But I would like to say, in adding to what the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) has stated this 

afternoon, that in looking back over the record, as I pointed out last year, in the times that we found the 

numbers in this house approximate to what they are today, there was always roughly a three to four per 

cent difference in the amount that the government had and the membership that they held in the 

government side of the house. Both in 1964 and in the period from 1948 to 1952 there was a slightly 

larger percentage proportion commanded by the government in all committees of the house. So I think, 

when he read the figures out today which indicate in most cases that in the important committees there 

would be some difference of about 1.6 per cent in the amount the government would have over and 

above that they would be entitled to by percentages, he indicated the committee was very fair in its 

proportional representation this year. I would just like to indicate that, in spite of the fact that this house 

approved the membership allocated last year, the government agreed, as the Minister of Public Health 

pointed out, the government members on the committee agreed to a further fair split on the two major 

committees that meet during the session. 

 

I thin that, when the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) indicates that there has been unfairness in 

the decisions of the committee that you are now being asked to approve, I would say 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

128 

that he is being unfair to the members of that committee. I think that they did a very good job. I think 

that they were fair in the changes that they made from last year. As I remember the procedure in the 

past, it was very seldom, if every, that numbers on committees were changed from the time one election 

was held until the next one, unless there was a change in representation in the house. 

 

I just want to indicate that this year the government did allow a change on the two important committees 

and did decrease their percentage in the representation. I think that the house should accept this as a 

spirit of fairness on behalf of the government in giving proper representation as we see it. I think Mr. 

Steuart pointed out why any government must have possibly a little higher percentage of representation 

on committees than they would be entitled to by the membership in the house. So I say I think members 

in the house should vote to support the report f the committee which sets up the standing committees of 

the house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The assembly resumed that adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. C.P. MacDonald 

(Milestone) for an Address in Reply. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, last day when I addressed Your Honour in this matte, I pointed out that 

the record of this government is not the success which the Premier and Liberal spokesmen would try to 

make us believe. I pointed out that this government staked its all on its claim that if would induce a 

higher rate of economic activity, that it would induce a more rapid rate of economic activity, that it 

would induce a more rapid inflow of capital into the province, that it would correct the population drain. 

The fact is that the D.B.S. report that the government has failed in every one of those endeavors. 

 

We on this side of the house will continue to bring these facts to the attention of the public. We believe 

that at this time, when the North American economy is booming at an unprecedented rate, Saskatchewan 

should continue to lead the rest of Canada if we are to catch up with the loses, with the stagnation that 

occurred in this province during the 1930‘s, if we are to regain the lag which occurred in this province 

prior to the war in 1940 and 45. They have stopped citing the figures, Mr. Speaker, with very good 

reason, because the figures no longer support their cause. 

 

I had some comment about some motions for return that had not been honored, that had been delayed, 

and I said something about these returns involving the personal affairs and the political affairs of the 

members of the government. I think I said something about expense accounts by Ministers of the Crown. 

In case I didn‘t make it perfectly clear on Friday when I was speaking, I want to make it abundantly 

clear that I am not in 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

129 

any way criticizing the size of those expense accounts. All I am saying is that the legislature is entitled 

to have full particulars of the rate at which they are paid and the amounts. I am not criticizing the 

Premier for having a larger expense account than previous Premiers have had in this province. I think if 

people are to be compensated for their qualification, I am the first to concede that whatever category, or 

whatever genus, or species we have now in these offices, that they are undoubtedly in their offices long 

enough for the glow, the pleasure of anticipation, to have sort of dampened into the mundane realization, 

and for them to have come to some realization, some appreciation of the financial sacrifices which one 

must make to serve in the cabinet of Saskatchewan. 

 

Insofar as I am personally concerned, Mr. Speaker, I feel free not to say that I, for one, would have no 

objection, and would make no complaint, if the members of the cabinet were to see fit to adjust their 

salaries more into line with present day realities. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I did say lat year, in 

your absence, we were in committee and I don‘t suppose you heard about it, but I did say that I thought 

a start should be made by increasing the stipend of Mr. Speaker, and I recall that the Premier undertook 

to take it under advisement, but didn‘t do it. I think that this matter should still be reviewed, and if the 

government has this whole matter under review, that something should be done about it, because 

everyday on this side of the house, I am quite sure, recognizes that the salaries which are presently paid 

have fallen a long way behind current salaries for current relative responsibility in the private and the 

business world. So I make it perfectly clear that I do not cavil in any way at the amount of the expense 

accounts. All I say is that the government ought to come clean with the legislature and the people of 

Saskatchewan, and tell us what those expense accounts are based upon. They shouldn‘t‘ have had to 

wait a whole year to do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier — I am sorry he is not in the chamber — quoted yesterday, of the day he 

participated in this debate, from a magazine called ―Canadian Cattlemen:, and he quoted a passage form 

an editorial in that magazine, the issue of October 1965, which criticized the west coast trace unions in 

their salary negotiations with their employers. The statement which he quoted was one which was very 

critical of these working men, these sweepers and grain handlers. I though it might have been a good 

thing if the Premier had read a little more of this editorial as that the house could have judged from what 

position this editorial speaks. This editorial went on to say something which I think would interest the 

Premier, and perhaps the members of his government. It says: 

 

Which Road to Socialism? 

 

and then it goes on to say: 

 

So, at each election, and frequently now between them, the game is to invent government give-aways, 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

130 

possibly the most startling in recent months was the announcement that Premier Thatcher‘s Liberal 

government, which turned out a left-wing Socialist power, but kept Medicare, is now going for 

Home-owner grants, like they have in Social Credit B.C. If you pay municipal taxes the government 

gives you a rebate. Fifty dollars is a nice even figure. This scheme has made Premier Bennett‘s B.C. 

government smell like roses among small property holders. So why shouldn‘t it work in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here is an editor who thinks that the present Premier is rabid progressive, an ultra 

progressive left-winger who ought to be discouraged and this editorial says so. So, Mr. Speaker, I am 

surprised that the Premier would quote that editorial as authority for anything, unless of course, he 

quotes it with approval. He also acknowledges that the $50 Home-owner grant is just a bribe to the 

people of Saskatchewan, as alleged in the editorial. If he believes that then perhaps we know a little 

more about what goes on inside the Premier. As a matter of fact, the Premier said something in his 

speech that other day – I can‘t quote exactly what it was – but he said something which he attributed to 

Sir Winston Churchill. This statement attributed Socialists some kind of corrupt, or venal moral outlook, 

and accused them of envy and so on. I suggest that that statement was made at about the time the 

Premier of this province was a Socialist, or at least was claiming to be one. 

 

I suggest that the Premier is in a better position to judge whether or not the statement of Winston 

Churchill may apply to some Socialists because he know just how he felt about it when he was claiming 

to be a Socialist. Apparently he thinks that those words adequately describe the Socialist that he was, but 

for his information I tell him that it does not describe the Socialists who sit on this side of your Honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne — and I would like to turn my attention to it now — makes 

reference to a proposal by the government to introduce legislation to permit full realization of the 

irrigating benefits of the South Saskatchewan River Development Project, to permit full realization of 

the irrigating benefits of the project. Now that, of course, has a nice generous sound. Se people free to 

enjoy the benefits of something. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, we look forward with some anxiety to the 

legislation. There is some suggestion by the Premier and by the other government spokesmen that the 

legislation contemplates taking away certain rights, which farmers have in the province now, and the 

setting up of irrigation districts. I know that the government, and Liberal spokesmen generally, have 

made much of the fact that there was an agreement between the province of Saskatchewan, entered into 

back in 1958 with the government of Canada, to provide certain works sufficient to permit the irrigation 

of some 50,000 acres of land in the various areas that are capable of being irrigated. But, Mr. Speaker, 

you will recall that every one knew then and 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

131 

I think it is still acknowledged that there were from 250 to 500,000 acres capable of being irrigated in 

Saskatchewan by that project. To suggest that the government in entering into that agreement had 

singled out the farmers of the Broderick area for compulsory irrigation is to put a construction on that 

agreement that is not justified. The government contemplated, of course, that it would have policies 

which would encourage irrigation to the extent of some 50,000 acres. The government that day 

contemplated that it could have works in existence to carry the water for irrigation of that number of 

acres. But there was nowhere implicit, or explicit, in the agreement, or in the government policy of that 

day, that this particular 50,000 acres was going to be selected by the government for irrigation. 

 

Indeed, the previous government was carrying on public relations activities in a number of areas 

adjacent to Outlook, areas comprising several times the area of the Broderick district. It was the hope of 

the government that if sufficiently generous and humane policies could be advanced to those people, that 

in that general area it would be possible to find a block of some 50,000 acres where the people were 

prepared and willing to undertake to irrigate their land and to pay the costs of water rights. 

 

Now this government, apparently, has singled out a particular area which is mostly in the constituency 

of Hanley, and has said that this is where the irrigation is going to be whether you like it or not. The 

government has made suggestions that it is going to pass legislation to deprive the farmers of that area of 

any say in the matter! 

 

The Premier says they are buying up land in the area, and that they have bought up, I think he said, some 

12,500 or 12,700 acres, and that I guess is true. Although it may be an exaggeration, it is at least in part 

true. The fact is that nobody in that area is able to sell land to anyone because nobody in the free market 

will purchase land in that area. I haven‘t heard of a single land sale to a private individual in that 

designated area since two years ago. I am told by people who live there that there is no market for land 

in that area, there is no sale of land in that area, except to the government. I say this, the government has 

created conditions in that area which gives them a monopoly on the purchase of land. To say that that is 

making government funds available on a voluntary basis for the purchase of land on a voluntary basis, I 

suggest, is to qualify the truth. 

 

The fact is that if the land is not being taken by the harsh processes of expropriation, it is being taken by 

something which is equally repulsive, that is the deprivation of any alternative market for that land. The 

government is paying something like $50 an acre, according to the last prices I have seen, with an extra 

allowance of $10, $15, or $20 if the land is in Class A, B, or C, irrigable shape. Then, of course, they are 

paying something in addition for buildings, I understand. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have occasion in my law practice to 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

132 

see land being bought and sold around the Saskatoon area. I want to say quite frankly that those prices 

are at least one-third, or more, short of the average market price of land. I want to say that in the 

Saskatoon area, and I mean in the 50 mile radius around Saskatoon, fair average land is selling for well 

over $100 an acre. For the government to be taking this land at $70 or $65 an acres is, I say, unfair to 

those people there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the complaint I have goes back much further than this. I say that the government 

oughtn‘t to have to buy this land, oughtn‘t to have to evict these farmers or push them out. If the 

government would come forward with some kind of irrigation policy that was acceptable to the rural and 

financial responsibility for the burdens of irrigation, if the government would under-write the costs and 

under-write the markets for the products of irrigation farming, I am sure that there people in that area 

and around Saskatoon in general, who would be more than willing to give it a try if it could be tried on a 

fair basis, if it could be tried on the basis of a fair prospect for return for investment for their labor. The 

fact that there has not been a single person come to that area to my knowledge offering to purchase land, 

so that they can get in on the proposed new irrigation project, convinces me that the present terms with 

the government offers are inadequate and sadly deficient. 

 

Mr. D. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — What did you offer? 

 

Mr. Walker: — And so, Mr. Speaker . . . what did we offer? Well, what did you offer before that again? 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the time for making an offer had not arrived prior to 1964. Now this 

government has been in office for two years and it has not enunciated a policy yet which is acceptable to 

the farmers of that area. The time is drawing short, the time is getting close, and the government ought 

to come forward with some policy to those people which they will find acceptable. I know those people, 

Mr. Speaker. They are reasonable people, they are educated people in the ways of farming and in the 

ways of business, and they know when a thing is sour. The look at it, and they know that this 

government‘s offer is just a bad tomato. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there aren‘t enough members of this legislature, or people in the province who 

know what the government‘s policy is. The Ministers themselves don‘t know, don‘t seem to know. The 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) went up to Broderick and assured the farmers there that it was 

the policy or the intention of the government to relocate people who couldn‘t get relocated, to remove 

them if they wanted to be moved, and place them on other equivalent holdings somewhere else. He no 

sooner got back to Regina than the Premier speaking at a Liberal meeting here in Regina, denied that the 

government had any such plans. So I say that the government hasn‘t done a good job on making its 

policy known, if it has a policy. 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

133 

So, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we have in this legislature a committee, I think it is the Select 

Committee on Agriculture, composed of member of this house, whose job it is to consider farm 

problems and the agricultural policies of the government. I would suggest that that committee be 

convened, that it be convened at as early a date as possible, that the farmers of that area be invited to 

come in and make their complaints and their position know to this committee, so that the people of 

Saskatchewan will have some knowledge of what is the root cause of their dissatisfaction, and this 

government submit to the committee its legislation for public hearings and for public comment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — I would say that the government may be able to make out a case for riding roughshod 

over the rights of these farmers, for depriving them of their right to vote before being forced into an 

irrigation district. But if they can make such a case they ought to be able to make one before a 

committee of this legislature, particularly when they overload them with Liberal members as they 

sometimes seem to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I had the utmost difficulty in reading the Speech from the Throne, to really get down 

to the hard facts which the government proposes to put forth. You read such things as this; for instance 

company registrations in 1965 increased by about 20 per cent over 1964. Now that may very well be 

true, and if it is true, it is simply a repetition of facts, of a fact which has existed for many years in this 

province, that company registrations have been going up and up and up. However, Mr. Speaker, to any 

person who simply looks at the bare facts, company registrations in 1965 increased about 20 per cent 

over 1964. Well, I recall a client who had a business in Saskatoon in partnership. He certainly started 

wondering whether the stability of this province was a great as it had been prior to 1964. It passed 

through his mind that we might have another depression as we had before under Liberal government and 

that he might lose his home if his business went broke, so he got busy and he formed a company so that 

he would be, so that his home would be safe in case his business went broke. It may be that he is one of 

this 20 per cent increase in company registrations over 1964. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, merely 

stating the bald fact doesn‘t really prove anything. It really doesn‘t prove anything. I don‘t know what it 

is intended to prove. It‘s just sort of thrown out by . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It is a better field out here . . . fellow paying taxes . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member brings that up. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind 

of thing which the hon. member and his colleagues used in the Hanley by-election and they got their 

snouts kicked for it. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

134 

since he brings this up and I haven‘t bothered to answer this anywhere else in Saskatchewan, but since 

the hon. member brings it up, the record is plain and simple. The fact is there was not just one city 

worker who had a home in that municipality who paid taxes on his land and not on his houses. There 

were several others, one of whom is an official of the Liberal party, a high official of the provincial 

executive of the Liberal party. He paid no taxes on his home either. His home is just up here six miles 

north, a well –known doctor who raises a few horses and pays taxes on his land but not on his buildings, 

and the family resided in those buildings and attended the local school. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who is it? 

 

Mr. Walker: — So, Mr. Speaker, there were no less than a dozen or more people in that municipality 

who, by reason of small agricultural holdings, paid not taxes on their buildings because they owned land 

which was agricultural and which was used for that purpose. As a matter of fact an attempt was made by 

a Liberal friend of the Minister over there to raise this matter at a municipal convention. It was discussed 

at a municipal convention, but it has not been discussed since the government changed. I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that I paid the exact taxes that I am required by law to pay, just as everyone else did in the 

municipality there. But this is an example of the kind of dirty, cheap, little politics that seems to find 

itself right at home in the garbage can between the ears of the Minister of Public Health and some of the 

people he had working for him in Hanley constituency in 1964. They finally gave him his answer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I want to say one of two other things about the Speech from the Throne. I think those of us in 

Hanley who see this item, ―You will be asked to approve legislation that will enable construction of a 

multipurpose water supply scheme to meet the needs of municipalities and industries in areas south and 

east of Saskatoon.‖ We will welcome this but we will have some misgivings about what the government 

has in mind, because we will recall that the Premier announced at a potash meeting in Saskatoon that 

there would be a publicly owned water transmission service there for the industries of that area, and for 

the municipalities of that area. You will recall that the potash company at Allen had asked for 

permission to build a private line. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the premier flatly ruled out that 

request, and then you will recall that one Herb C. Pinder made a statement at the same meeting, 

regretting that the Premier had committed himself to this kind of Socialistic nonsense. He even went so 

far as to say that he had had strong words with the Premier before the Premier made his announcement. 

Well, I would say that, if he had strong words with the Premier, the Premier had strong words with him 

too, because I think every member on that side of the house knows how strong they can be. I, for one, 

found myself applauding the Socialistic instincts of the Premier that he was going to do the right thing 

about this. But then as time went on, I noticed that he did agree to allow a temporary line to be erected 

by the potash company. His first instinct was right, that if there is going to be money spent on 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

135 

water lines, then this should be available as a public carrier to all people, and not as a private line, 

because the potash company can obviously build all the lines they want. The municipalities can‘t afford 

to have a duplication of line for the cost per 1000 cubic feet goes up. Of course, this doesn‘t bother the 

potash company but it bothers people living in little villages and towns who have no water supply. So he 

was right when he said that this should be a public carrier owned by the public. But I hope that his 

relenting will not se back or delay or interfere with the efficiency of the proposal which he lays down 

here. I hope that although he doesn‘t say so in the Speech from the Throne, he intends that this will be a 

public body carrying water for the public, as a public carrier, and that this will not be a scheme owned 

by Mr. Pinder, or any of his friends. The Speech from the Throne doesn‘t say this. I hope it is a public 

body, a public organization answerable to the government, so that we will in our area welcome the 

construction of any kind of provision for the regular supply of water to the people and the industries 

there. 

 

He speaks of housing. Every member of this house, I think, will concede that something needs to be 

done, not only about the deficiency of housing in our urban areas, but about the sad state and the 

dilapidated state of many of the homes in our rural areas. The previous government did a great deal to 

improve this situation by introducing its Farm Sewer and Water Program. I notice this is one kind of 

Socialism that the Premier didn‘t turn off. He is boasting about what it did last year. 

 

The present government now that this problem is being taken care of ought to do something constructive 

about assisting in re-housing not only in urban areas but in rural areas. Yet the suggestion of the creation 

of a ―housing entity‖ seems to refer to or be dependent upon industrialization. I would hope that the 

entity, whatever that is, will be available to give assistance also in rural areas. 

 

The Speech from the Throne also takes a brief bow in the direction of consumer-protection legislation. I 

congratulate the government for taking this faltering, hesitant, small step in this direction, but when I 

think about it it looks to me as though this legislation is really introduced more at the behest of the used 

car dealers than of the public. I hope that I provides real and genuine protection to the public and is not 

aimed principally at restricting competition among used car dealer, because there are used car dealers 

who may be put out of business by some arbitrary standards that might be set up, who really have a 

place in the business, who really do have an effect in terms of keeping prices down, in terms of keeping 

costs down. I hope that there will be no legislation here which will put out of business anyone who is 

presently in this business, who is rendering a real service to the public, simply on the grounds that they 

don‘t have so many square feet of show room, floor space or anything like that. I hope that the 

legislation is genuinely aimed at helping the public and not the established used car dealers. But we‘ll 

have to wait to see it. I note the Attorney General nods his head apparently in agreement with what 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

136 

I am saying and I take some reassurance from that fact. 

 

I think that this is an area which the government might go much further in, Mr. Speaker, this business of 

consumer protection. The previous government went some considerable distance. Indeed the consumer 

protection legislation of the previous government did cause some political embarrassment to the 

government because we introduced it too abruptly and sometimes a little ahead of public demand. I 

think now that the government ought to take advantage of the public demand to extend itself in that 

direction. 

 

I said something the other day about this government‘s record so far as civil rights is concerned, so far 

as the rights of the public is concerned. I was sorry to hear the Premier make his usual anti-labor jibes as 

he did his usual attempt to implicate the CCF and the trade union movement in some kind of behind the 

barn deal. I can‘t help but feel that this stems from a lack of respect which the Premier has for the 

democratic rights of anybody who has less money or less power than he has. I think that the Premier 

ought to remember that there are many people in this country who don‘t have the social position or the 

financial resources or the influence which he has. They don‘t have the same access to the courts that he 

might have because of their lack of financial resources. The Premier ought to remember that to the 

working people of this country some kind of co-operative or group action is the only way by which they 

can protect and secure and establish their rights both economic and political. I notice that the Premier 

did not make any complaint when the president of Rio-Algoma or Rio-Tinto or whatever it is, came to 

my constituency and intervened in a by-election campaign there. He didn‘t raise any complaint about 

people in industry having no place involving themselves in politics but for workers, he thinks the rule 

should be different. Workers ought to be excluded from using their democratic privileges to gain 

economic and political advantages for themselves. 

 

The Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) is another who does his best to disparage and deprecate 

the rights of working people to engage in any way the should see fit, freely and without any compulsion 

or interference from the government in exercising their political rights. So he spoke down in Moose Jaw 

the other day and tried to create the impression that the Trade Union Movement was somehow injuring 

its own members when it engaged in political activity. I wish he would go to the Chamber of Commerce 

and tell them that. It would have more effect there and more cogency and it would be more justified if he 

would tell them that. But to go to Moose Jaw and try to leave the impression, the insinuation that just 

because two members of this legislation happen, in their off-duty hours in this legislature, to be 

employed by the trade union movement, and because they happen to engage in their political capacity in 

some political activity in a by-election, the hon. member, the Minister of Public Works thinks that 

somehow this is reprehensible, that they shouldn‘t be permitted to do this because they are also trade 

unionists, because in their other capacity 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

137 

they are trade union officials. It may please him if trade unionists wouldn‘t and evidently it does please 

him that co-operative people so far haven‘t directly engaged in political affairs. It would please him too 

if nobody would engage in political affairs except Liberals. This would please him obviously. This I 

suggest is a totalitarian frame of mind, a concept which ought to be hidden and ought not to be displayed 

publicly. If he really thinks this, the less he says about it the better because thinking people would look 

at it and will judge his attitude towards the rights of his fellow man by this kind of thing. So I suggest 

that the Premier in attacking trace unionists because they engage in the free enterprise practices of this 

system ought to remember that we can read more out of what he is saying than he apparently thinks in 

this connection. 

 

Now, the Premier made the suggestion that the members of the CCF-NDP – he complained about the 

difficulties that farmers were having in obtaining the delivery and export of their 1965 wheat crop – 

ought to direct our political friends in the trade union movement to abandon, to give up their right to 

bargain collectively for their wages and for their working conditions, and that they ought to devote 

themselves singlemindedly in handling the wheat on whatever terms their employer might choose to 

impose. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier often likes to mouth phrases, give utterance to the thought that 

free enterprise is his goal, free enterprise is his faith, his credo, but this I suggest is really a sham. If he 

doesn‘t really believe that workers themselves also have the right to bargain for the sale of their labor 

just the same as farmers and others, professional people, have the right to bargain for the sale of their 

labor then he doesn‘t really believe in the private enterprise system. 

 

But when the Premier is currying favor with the voters of this province, he seems to completely 

disregard the rights of a minority, particularly a minority who have no vote in Saskatchewan or in his 

constituency. I suggest that this is just political expediency on his part. To suggest that the grain 

handlers ought to be deprived of their right to bargain freely for their services, this is a totalitarian 

concept directed against a small minority because they don‘t have any votes in Saskatchewan. It is in 

keeping, it is in line with the crude attack which this Liberal government made against one C.E. Basken, 

former Power Corporation employee. This I say is the harshest, the most unjustified assault against 

political freedom in this province in a quarter century. I hold no brief for Mr. Basken. I don‘t even know 

him. I‘m not personally acquainted with him. I‘ve never heard of him until he was singled out for assault 

by this government. He was an employee apparently of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The 

legislation under which the Power Corporation is established gives him just as much right as an 

employee to engage in political activity as any other employee in any other business or industry in 

Saskatchewan. There is no right, either in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation Act or in his contract of 

employment, or in his union agreement for his employer to interfere with or dictate or restrict or curtail 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

138 

his political rights. 

 

What were the facts with regard to Mr. Basken‘s political activity? Well, it‘s all recorded in the report of 

the committee that the government appointed, the fact-finding committee that the government appointed 

to look into it. Early in 1964 Mr. Basken undertook to apply for leave of absence from his job with the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation so that he would be free to devote himself to political activity and the 

leave of absence was granted without pay for six weeks prior to the election, commencing on March 9, 

1964. On that date he commenced work as an employee of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor on 

behalf of the CCF in that election. There is no law against that anywhere. He went back to work a few 

days after the election and from April 27 to September 9 no complaint was made to him by an official of 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation or by anyone else about his activities on his own time during that 

election campaign. After he went back to work on April 27 he was given two or three days leave of 

absence which was part of his annual holidays, and he still had two weeks of his annual holidays that he 

had not used, to attend a CCF convention which I believe was in Regina. Apparently he also attended 

another CCF meeting one evening after work during his off-duty hours. Now these facts are clearly on 

the record of the hearing of the Board of Conciliation that was appointed by the government to gather 

the facts in connection with this matter. There is no evidence to disagree with those facts. Those facts 

are undisputed. On September 9, so the evidence shows, he was called in by his supervisor and, it is 

clear from the hearing of the Board of Conciliation which was later set up, he was told that he should not 

be speaking against the government. Later, on September 24, he was called in by the acting general 

manager, Mr. Clipsham at that time, who said according to the evidence which uncontradicted by any 

other evidence appearing before this fact-finding board and I quote: 

 

We have received word from higher authorities, 

Mr. Clipsham said, 

that you are to be moved out of Swift Current and we are offering you the position of roving district 

operator in Saskatoon. 

 

Well, there was no such position at Saskatoon as roving district operator. This would have meant that 

had Mr. Basken gone to Saskatoon he would be surplus staff there, subject to usual exigencies that apply 

to surplus staff. 

 

The acting general manager was asked what would happen if Basken refused a transfer. According to 

the sworn testimony contained in the transcript the general manager said – this is not contradicted by 

any evidence called by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation or anyone else – ―It‘s either Basken or . . . 

‖and then he made a gesture of drawing his finger across his own throat. That evidence is not 

contradicted by any testimony which the Power Corporation put in or that anyone else put in. This is 

undoubtedly the fact. 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

139 

It‘s pretty clear to anyone who knows the facts that the action which was taken against Mr. Basken was 

purely and simply disciplinary action aimed at persecuting him on behalf of the Liberal party. I would 

like to read from paragraph 29 of the Minority Report of the Conciliation Board as follows: 

 

A meeting of the executive council of the union was convened later on the same date. 

 

That is on October 1st, 1964, in Moose Jaw with Mr. Basken present. 

 

The Canadian director of the union, Mr. R. Duncan was in attendance and the meeting agreed that Mr. 

Duncan should try to meet with the Hon. H. C. Pinder, Minister in charge of the corporation. A further 

meeting of the central executive took place on October 2 at which Mr. Duncan reported a telephone 

meeting with the Minister in which the Minister informed Mr. Duncan that he was calling from the 

Premier‘s office, that they had discussed the matter of Mr. Basken and could find no reason to change 

their attitude and that they were following through in accordance with the actions which they had 

already started. 

 

That‘s Mr. Duncan‘s sworn testimony in the transcript, not contradicted anywhere and indeed, 

corroborated by Mr. Brown of the Power Corporation, the only witness produced by the Power 

Corporation in the hearing. 

 

The result was, Mr. Speaker, that when Mr. Basken refused to accept this transfer to Saskatoon, a 

transfer to a position which had no legal existence, he received a letter from the general manager on 

October 5th dismissing him from the corporation. When Mr. Basken applied to the Minister of Labor for 

a conciliation board, to investigate his complaint and to try to conciliate this difference of opinion, Mr. 

G.J.D. Taylor, Q.C. of Saskatoon was nominated by the union to represent Mr. Basken on this 

conciliation board. To represent the employer, the Power Corporation, Mr. Robert H. McKercher who I 

believe at last report is the secretary of the Saskatoon Liberal Association, or president, I‘m sorry, of the 

Saskatoon Liberal Association, was appointed to represent the corporation. I make no quarrel with this 

because the employer and the employee representative are normally nominees of the interests of those 

two groups. I don‘t quarrel with it, I simply say that Mr. McKercher is avowedly an apologist for the 

Liberal party and a Liberal party official. 

 

Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — How about . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — I‘ve already said, I don‘t quarrel with the fact that these people are nominees of their 

respective interests and do represent them but just so that the record will be clear, I want to make it 

understood that Mr. McKercher represents the, is an official of the Liberal party. When these two people 

. . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Can you tell me where Mr. Taylor is from? 

 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

140 

Mr. Walker: — Yes, he is an alderman in Saskatoon and the president of the Saskatoon CCF 

Association. I thought that was known to my hon. friend. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I thought maybe you wanted to go back and . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — I want to make it clear that I don‘t disagree with these people having a right to have a 

political or partisan affiliation. But when these two people were unable to agree on a chairman what 

happened, Mr. Speaker? The Minister of Labour appointed one Allistair M. Nicol of this city, another 

defeated Liberal Candidate, to act as the impartial arbiter of this board, to act as the chairman of this 

board. Well, I think we know who Mr. Al Nichol is. He has been a Liberal functionary for as long as I 

have known him and I‘ve known him for more than 20 years. He comes up to my constituency 

periodically. He holds meetings in Hanley, the town of Hanley, and I haven‘t lost the town of Hanley 

since the last time he was up there. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — How about old man . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — This chairman, Mr. Speaker, is an aspirant Liberal politician who tried for a nomination 

and wasn‘t even able to get it. Now when you look at the kind of people who got Liberal nominations 

this speaks volumes in itself, Mr. Speaker, without intending any disrespect to yourself. Sir. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You better be careful. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Now, no one will question or cavil at the fact that the dismissal of Mr. Basken was a 

political act. This fact that it was a political act is confirmed, in the case there are any doubting 

Thomases here who don‘t believe it, by a staff news-letter put out at the direction of Mr. Herb Pinder on 

October 2, 1964. This is dated just about three weeks after Mr. Basken had been fired. This is what Mr. 

Pinder is quoted as saying in this company organ, as follows: 

 

Before the change of government the Liberals in opposition promised no witch-hunt in the civil 

service or crown corporations 

 

I might say that it‘s a bit of an innovation for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation official newsletter to 

start talking about Liberals and Conservatives but apparently things have changed since last April. Now 

they talk about what Liberals said and what the CCFers and Conservatives said. Apparently politics is 

now unabashedly forward and the employees . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — More Penny Powers . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — . . . the employees are no 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

141 

longer able to disregard their employer‘s political affiliation. They are told, this is what it says: 

 

All employees performing their function honestly and impartially were assured of continued 

productive employment in the interest of the province. 

 

I point out, Mr. Speaker, that there was no suggestion anywhere in this conciliation report that Mr. 

Basken did not perform his functions honestly and impartially. No suggestion whatever. But going 

on . . . 

 

At the same time . . . 

 

This is Mr. Pinder speaking 

 

At the same time, and without equivocation, it was stated that those who chose to take or continue a 

political position while employed directly or indirectly by the government on behalf of the public, 

would be placing their employment in jeopardy. 

 

You see the inconsistency between those statements between those statements. The first statement says 

as long as they were performing their function honestly and impartially they were assured of continued 

productive employment in the interests of the province. This is the statement, Mr. Speaker, which the 

Premier made to the civil servants the day that he took office and I applaud the statement. It is a good 

statement. Unfortunately it wasn‘t a true statement like many of his statements. But the second statement 

went on and added a qualification which contradicted the original statement by saying that if they took a 

political position, not in their place of employment or during their hours of work, but if they took a 

position, period, they would be placing their employment in jeopardy. 

 

Then it goes on: 

 

Almost all public employees have maintained a neutral political attitude as a wise sensible course 

and their continued loyalty to Saskatchewan through its government is a quality to be admired. 

 

Some, however, chose to involve themselves in party politics during the election and some have 

continued to align themselves against the government. 

 

Do you get the significance, Mr. Speaker, ―Some, however, chose to . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We get it all right. 

 

Mr. Walker: — ―Some, however, chose to involve themselves in party politics during the election‖. 

Revenge, retaliation, Mr. Speaker, is cloaked by those words. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Irish math. 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

142 

Mr. Walker: — ―. . . and some have continued to align themselves against the government.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is then pretty plain that the Power Corporation has decided to make support of the 

opposition the price of the job of the employee. It goes on to say: 

 

One such case is now under management consideration. He chose to act as a campaign manager in 

the last election and as such become involved in serious political controversy despite clear waning of 

possible consequences. 

 

He says that ―one such case is now under management consideration‖. This newsletter is dated October 

23. Mr. Basken was dismissed on October 5th. That‘s a downright lie, Mr. Speaker, that this was still 

under consideration. It was not true. It‘s not truce and it‘s not the only thing in this statement that is not 

true. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Might be another one. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . make another speech next year. 

 

Mr. Walker: — And the statement goes on. And so, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of . . . there‘s nothing 

to substantiate that Basken engaged in any kind of political activity during his employment with the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. If there was any evidence of that, why didn‘t the Crown put it in? 

Why didn‘t the Crown it before the commission? Before the board of conciliation? No, as a matter of 

fact, the other misstatement is that he wasn‘t the campaign manager. But that‘s incidental. You can 

expect to find at least two factual errors in a statement that length and in this one there are four. 

 

The statement also said, of course, that Mr. Basken persisted or engaged in this activity despite clear 

warnings of probable consequences. Well, Mr. Speaker, the statement itself doesn‘t hang together. It 

says that his sin was in acting as campaign manager for one of the candidates before the election. Then it 

says, however, we had to fire him because he didn‘t heed our warnings. The fact is that the warnings, if 

any, could not have been given before the alleged offence had been committed because Mr. Pinder 

wasn‘t the Minister until after Mr. Basken was back at work. So the statement is untrue in at least three 

or four respects. 

 

The first question, the first issue to come before the board of conciliation when it was set up, was the 

question of whether the hearings should be in public or in private. I should think that the Liberal party 

has nothing to fear from the press of the province but they apparently feel they have. They weren‘t 

willing that the hearings ought to be in public. There is a long tradition, Mr. Speaker, in Canadian and 

British law 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

143 

that inquiry proceedings such as this should not only observe the rules of natural justice but they should 

be held in such a manner that every citizen can manifestly see, that it is manifestly clear to every citizen 

that the rules of natural justice are being observed. 

 

By a two to one decision, the commission decided that it would not hold public hearings. Mr. 

McKercher said he was opposed to them and the chairman decided that the hearings should be 

confidential. I think that the editorial in the Leader Post of January 20, 1965, put the issue very well. I 

said: 

 

Inevitably when decisions are reached to hold hearings behind closed doors, suspicions are aroused 

that there is something to hide and that there are apprehensions the disclosures may be unpalatable. 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

The only difference between the closed and open hearings is that the evidence is presented behind 

closed doors, or in public, with interested persons being permitted to attend to listen to the testimony 

and the news media being free to keep the public informed. 

 

With sittings in camera, public knowledge of what went on will be restricted to contents of the report 

prepared by the board and what is garnered by hearsay. The people are entitled to a full disclosure of the 

facts in the Basken affair. This they can only obtain if the hearings are conducted in the open. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, fortunately, one of the members of this board, who was an eminent lawyer of this 

province, who dissented from the findings of the majority and who had the legal training and the 

conspicuous integrity which enabled him not only to understand the minority point of view, but to 

express it very well. He has done so in the report of the Board of Conciliation. Indeed, I recommend that 

the report to the reading of every member of this house if they want to see what the Liberal government 

is doing in this regard. It may be said by some Liberal spokesmen that Mr. Taylor‘s point of view 

merely represents the union point of view. Of course, it was found out to be true that his point of view 

does represent their attitude; but if it is suggested that any of the conclusions which he enunciated in the 

report are not borne out by the evidence given by the hearing, then I invite the Minister of Labour to lay 

the whole transcript of the report on the table of this house, so that members of this house can read the 

whole transcript of the hearing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — And I invite him furthermore, to select and read to this house any passages in the 

transcript which do not substantiate, which contradict the conclusion reached by Mr. Taylor in his 

report. Unless some member of the other side is prepared to do that then I think people of this house and 

the people 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

144 

of the province have a right to assume that his conclusions are unanswerable. 

 

It appears from the minority report, Mr. Speaker, that the public was not to have the opportunity of 

hearing what was disclosed before the committee, but it appears there was an even more serious 

limitation, the committee itself decided not to get the whole story. If we refer to paragraph 49 of the 

minority report, we find that each side had furnished to the other side a copy of what purported to be a 

statement setting out all the documents in the possession of that side relating to the matter in issue. It 

soon appeared, however, that the Power Corporation had refrained from disclosing three letters which it 

had. It refrained from disclosing the existence of these three letters until they were asked for by the 

board. First there was a letter from the Power Corporation dated July 6th, 1964, from Mr. Pinder to Mr. 

David Beggs, who was at that time the General Manager. There was a letter dated July 8th, 1964 from 

Mr. Cass Beggs back to the Minister to the Acting General Manager, who by this time was Mr. 

Clipsham. The Power Corporation took the position that these documents were privileged and that they 

could not be produced, even though the committee was meeting in private. 

 

The Corporation‘s position was bolstered by an affidavit made by one David Gordon Steuart, that as 

Minister in charge, he had, he said, examined the communications and he said: 

 

that I have come to my independent decision, after considering the material submitted in full, that 

the communications belong to a class of documents which, on the grounds of public interest, must be 

withheld from production. 

 

That was the position taken by the Minister. ―His independent conclusion‖. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Independent . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — It should be noted that this Board of Inquiry, Mr. Speaker, was prepared to accept that 

independent conclusion of the Hon. David Gordon Steuart. Well, there are many people who wouldn‘t. 

It should be noted that it was nowhere argued, anywhere before this commission, no place in the 

evidence was it argued that the documents were irrelevant to the issue before the board. It was only 

argued that the Crown simply didn‘t want to produce them. Fortunately, Mr. Taylor in his minority 

opinion quoted from the evidence and the argument before the board. I think that this brief extract from 

the record, taken from the transcript for January 25th, 26th, and 27th, page 139, is most illuminating. 

Mr. McLeod who was the counsel for the employee, Mr. Basken, said: 

 

I would respectfully submit, that if this inquiry 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

145 

is to be a useful one that the board should exercise its power and examine, not some of the facts 

involved in this case, but all of them. In that connection, it may be of some interest to consider what 

the duty of the board is. The board was appointed by the Crown to investigate matters in which the 

Crown is involved. Now can the Crown having given the board that duty and function, how can the 

Crown turn around and have its cake and eat it too: can they approbate, and reprobate: can they blow 

hot and cold; can the Crown, having placed upon this board the duty to investigate and inquire, then 

turn around and say ‗well, I am sorry but you can‘t investigate and inquire into certain areas of this 

matter‘? 

 

The Chairman — You are assuming in that statement that these documents might be relevant, which 

is another matter. 

 

Mr. McLeod: — I am not, if I may say so, making that assumption, Mr. Chairman, because I have 

seen the documents. I am quite prepared to say that they are relevant and that they appear on their 

face to be relevant and I don‘t have to make any assumptions as far as I am concerned. 

 

The Chairman: — Well, I do. 

 

Mr. McLeod: — Well, you have my . . . 

 

and he was interrupted. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — It is not disputed between counsel, is it as far as counsel is concerned? 

 

The Chairman: — I don‘t thing it is admitted at all. You endeavored to get that admission from Mr. 

McIntyre yesterday, as I understand, Mr. Taylor, and you didn‘t make it, to my knowledge. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Are we to be left in a position, if I might direct a question now, is it the position of 

counsel for the corporation, and is it the position of counsel for the Crown, that this board must, 

because of the position taken here by the Crown, be left in any doubt that, if admitted, these 

documents would be material to the issue? Are we to be left in doubt? Is a veil of secrecy to be 

thrown over that position? 

 

Mr. McIntyre: — Is this question directly from the board or one member of the board? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — My question. 

 

Mr. McIntyre: — If the board wants to inquire then I will put it to the board very simply. You asked 

me yesterday and I told you the name of 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

146 

C. E. Basken appeared in every one. 

 

It is not denied, Mr. Speaker, that these documents were relevant, it is admitted that Mr. Basken‘s name 

appears in every one of them. Yet the government takes the position that having constituted a committee 

to find the facts and report to the government what it should do, that the government should deny that 

committee access to the very facts on which it should base its report. How much credence or confidence 

can be placed in any report submitted to the government, where the government itself has denied the 

committee access to the information which the government asked the committee to report on? 

 

You have the situation where the government-appointed chairman, and the government-appointed 

member of the board, threw a veil of secrecy around the proceedings of the board, and in that very next 

breath drew a veil of secrecy around these three most relevant letters by not even allowing the board to 

have access to them. 

 

Well, the matter was referred by the board to the Court of appeal, and the Court of Appeal, I say with 

deference, I agree with them, ruled that the board had the legal right to refuse to see the documents, or 

refuse to compel the documents to be produced if it wished. This doesn‘t relieve the board of the 

responsibility of having made that decision. According to the Court of Appeal it had the right to refuse 

to see the documents, but nowhere did the Court of Appeal say that it was its duty to refuse to see them. 

 

The next issue that appeared to arise was: who had the responsibility for the burden of proof? Who had 

to carry the onus of establishing his case before the board? Was it really necessary for the employee to 

show that he had been employed and that he had been unjustly dismissed without notice? Well, the rule 

is that if an employee shows that he has been employed, and if he shows that he has been dismissed 

without notice, the onus falls then on the employer to show that he was dismissed justifiably. This is a 

well-known rule of the Common Law in this province enunciated by the Court of appeal case of Butler 

vs. the CNR, a 1939 decision. For the benefit of the Attorney General, reported in volume 3, 

W.W.R.625. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — 1939 . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Yes, and there Mr. Justice Gordon, ruled and I quote: 

 

It is only necessary for the plaintiff to establish that he was employed for an indefinite time and that 

he was dismissed without notice. The onus then shifted to the defendant to prove that such a 

dismissal was justified. 

 

That is the Common Law rule, but this board chose to reverse that rule, and to put the onus on the 

employee. This principle 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

147 

is well known, Mr. Speaker, it was followed in the case of Loren vs. Super Drug Markets Limited. (That 

wasn‘t Loren that had trouble with the Premier, although his name is the same.) 1965, 53 W.W.R. Page 

25. There, Mr. Justice Tucker quoted the words used by Mr. Justice Gordon in the Butler case with 

approval, and Mr. Justice Tucker said: 

 

In my opinion the defendant company has failed to establish any cause for complaint which would 

justify the dismissal. It is clear that the onus then is on the defendant company to justify the 

dismissal, and so the plaintiff was entitled to reasonable notice. 

 

So, notwithstanding this very reasonable rule, well established in the Common Law, this board, this 

Liberal-dominated board, overruled these well-established legal rights of Mr. Basken. They reversed the 

rule. They required that Mr. Basken should bear the onus and that he should lead his evidence first. 

 

Well, the minority report of the board, page 72, says this: 

 

The corporation, never at any time, during the course of the entire proceedings, produced any 

evidence to justify its conduct. Had the corporation been called upon to do so, in the first instance, as 

it should have been, the board‘s inquiry would have been soon completed. 

 

Because the plain fact, Mr. Speaker, is that the corporation produced no justification before that 

committee for that dismissal. None whatever, and I invite the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre), or 

anybody else who has access to that report to find justification in that report put forward by the 

corporation justifying that dismissal. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — You‘ll have your answers. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, you have this Liberal politician at the head of the board, denying the 

public access to the proceedings before the board, the right to hear the proceedings, and denying the 

board access to the three most relevant documents in connection with this whole matter, and the board 

slavishly going along with the government‘s position in that regard. 

 

I intend to make some other reference to proceedings before this board that showed that the Premier 

himself is either exceedingly careless about the statements of fact which he makes concerning this 

matter, or he is ignorant of the most fundamental and basic facts involving the dismissal of Mr. Basken. 

 

If we refer, Mr. Speaker, to page 47 of the minority report, we find a lengthy direct quotation from the 

evidence and I would just like to read it. Well, there may be some members 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

148 

of this house who have the same cavalier attitude toward justice and people‘s rights, but I suggest that 

this doesn‘t apply to all members of the house. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Social Welfare): — Take it as read. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Like your little gimmick on telephones. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Here is the answer given by Mr. Basken. Sworn before the tribunal. 

 

We went into the matter of the dismissal . . . No, this is the evidence . . . 

 

Mr. Guy: — Why don‘t you come prepared? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Time out . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — This is the evidence of Mr. Gilbey, which I want to read, who was actually present, and 

the member for Athabasca wasn‘t present, even if he had been there he wouldn‘t have been present. The 

member for Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, is loquacious in direct proportion to his ignorance. The less he 

knows the more he says. This is the evidence, Mr. Speaker, of the man who was there, who went on the 

stand and testified under oath, and was not contradicted by anyone. This is what he said: 

 

We went into the matter of Mr. Basken, 

 

And he pointed out that he is referring to a meeting that was held in the Premier‘s office, he says Mr. 

Pinder was also there. 

 

it was in violation of our collective agreement; we pointed to the difficulty we were already 

experiencing in tying to process the matter of the grievance, and informed the Premier that he had 

leave of absence and was entitled to do as he was doing, and we told the Premier, as the newspapers 

reported him, (that is the Premier) as believing him politically active on the job, that if this was his 

information, then he had been misinformed. We went into quite a few facts of the case, and indicated 

we were having extreme difficulty, in the fact we were totally unsuccessful in getting management to 

properly discuss the matter altogether with us, and that management had told us the action was the 

action of management. At this point he said (that is the Premier) ‗Let me set the record straight, the 

actions and the instructions came form this desk – from my desk‘. He was tapping his desk and he 

said, ‗it came from my des, let me put the record straight‘. Then he went on to say there was another 

half dozen and again named a few of them. We got into quite a long discussion about the matter. 

Throughout this 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

149 

Mr. Pinder took properly the position that ‗we will leave this to the grievance hearing‘, sort of thing, 

with Mr. Thatcher being more willing to discuss it at least and give his view on it. During the 

discussion again, he repeated to me what he had said the day before, that another five or six were 

going to be fired, and then later on said, ‗Perhaps we could discuss transfer for them‘, then one of our 

people, Mr. King, said, ―You are willing to discuss all of the people you consider involved in these 

complaints, including Mr. Basken‘. The Premier said ‗No, Mr. Basken is out I will discuss the rest‘. It 

was at this point that Mr. King informed the Premier that we could not accept that proposition. We had 

a right and freedom and we felt that we could properly arrange and we could not toss one name out 

even before starting any discussion. 

 

Now, that is testimony from a man who was in the presence of the Premier and heard him say this. That 

testimony was not contradicted. That testimony was not contradicted . . . 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — Was he smoking a cigar at the time . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Yes, and I must say it sounds in character. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Is that what you call it practicing law? 

 

Mr. Walker: — Now, I point out again, Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, it may be tiresome to my hon. 

friends, but I repeat again that that version of what took place in the Premier‘s office was neither 

criticized, nor questioned by any witness on the other side. In law this means, of course, that it is 

acknowledged. It is an admission. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the only corporation witness who did appear was Mr. Brown, who had 

been an assistant personnel manager, personnel relations man, and who is now no longer employed with 

the Power Corporation, who is now I believe, employed with the federal civil service. Mr. Brown 

questioned by Mr. McLeod, and I will sum up what, no, I had better read it: 

 

Mr. McLeod: I think that answers my question. Did management have any other information, or 

evidence, before it in reading its conclusion that the dismissal was justified, other than complaints 

from the Minister about political activities. 

 

Mr. Brown: Not to my knowledge. 

 

Mr. McLeod: Just tell us, if you will, 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

150 

Mr. Brown, what that complaint was precisely. 

 

Mr. Brown: I don‘t know what the complaint was, you see this is what I tried to explain yesterday, 

because all I know is what Mr. Clipsham had told me about complaints being received from the 

Minister. (That would be Mr. Pinder.) What the complaints were, other than Mr. Basken had been 

active politically in this area – this is the only knowledge I have. I can‘t enlighten you any further on 

that. 

 

Mr. McLeod: Had the management been given any ultimatum with regard to dealing with Mr. 

Basken? 

 

Mr. McIntyre interrupted this line of questioning and said: 

I don‘t know from whom this is supposed to come but I would put my position very simply that this 

is an attempt to get into the area as to what was said or done by the Minister. I would object and I 

would think it would be proper objection on the grounds that we had the first go-around, as I 

remember correctly, on certain documents and other things that were privileged, and my recollection 

is that with respecct to privilege, this was absolute. 

 

Mr. McLeod: Well, I think he can answer my question, simply had the corporation, had management 

been given any ultimatum? 

 

Mr. Brown: I don‘t know of any ultimatum, I am not familiar with any ultimatum at all, in my 

understanding of the term. 

 

Mr. McLeod: Had management been given instructions? 

 

Mr. Brown: I believe so. 

 

Mr. McLeod: Can you tell me where those instructions came from? 

 

Mr. Brown: Well, from the Minister, to my knowledge, from Mr. Pinder. 

 

Mr. McLeod: What were these instructions? 

 

Then Mr. McIntyre objected again. 

 

Mr. Chairman: Do you have anything to say to that, Mr. Sandstrom? 

 

Mr. Sandstrom objected and that ended the questions. 

 

So, Mr. Brown acknowledged that there was political direction given to management to dismiss this 

man. Then after a long 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

151 

legal wrangle, the questioning continued: 

 

Mr. McLeod: You see we had arrived at the point where I had asked you what the instructions of the 

Minister were, and objection was taken to that question. So that now I am simply asking you not 

what the instructions from the Minister were, but asking whether there were something other than 

mere complaints which motivated the actions of management with regard to Mr. Basken? 

 

Mr. Brown: I believe there were instructions. 

 

Mr. McLeod: I am not asking you what they were. 

 

Mr. Brown: No, I believe there were instructions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that makes it perfectly clear from the admission of the witness of the Power 

Corporation themselves, that this was not a decision made by management, but this was based on 

instructions from the political level – from the Minister. There is no evidence anywhere in the 

proceedings before the board that Mr. Basken was alleged to have engaged in political activity during 

working hours. None whatever. The political activity complained of, as I pointed out, took place during 

the period when he was on leave of absence. 

 

Now, what do we find the Premier saying about this case. Well, I happen to have here a transcript of 

what the Premier said when he was questioned by an announcer of CHAB in Moose Jaw. I am sorry he 

is not here. The Premier was asked this question by the interviewing announcer whether he accepted the 

responsibility of the action taken against SPC employee, Mr. Basken, which ultimately resulted in his 

dismissal from the corporation. 

 

The following is the text of the Premier‘s reply: 

 

As a matter of fact it was management that handled the Basken case. 

 

What a short memory. Quoting from memory, indeed. He told us yesterday he was quoting from 

memory, a man with a memory like that shouldn‘t be quoting from memory. 

 

I would like to comment on it. Mr. Basken was working for the Power Corporation, and was a very, 

very, strong CCF organizer and worker. When the election was over, management suggested to him 

that, at least, in office, on company time, he should discontinue his political activities. 

 

This is not true, there was not one shred of evidence before the commission that management asked him 

to discontinue his 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

152 

political activities. They fired him. That was the first intimation he had from management as to his 

conduct. Then it goes on: 

 

For one reason or another, apparently he choose not to do so. 

 

Pure fabrication, Mr. Speaker, pure invention. 

 

and management decided that in the interests of the Power Corporation, they should transfer him, not 

fire him. Transfer him, and this they did to Saskatoon. Mr. Basken refused the transfer at that time, 

management dispensed with his services. 

 

Now, as far as I can, I have read what he said. Oh, I just want to read one more, I will read the whole 

thing. 

 

Now as far as the Liberal government is concerned, we think that the man‘s politics on his own time is 

his own business. 

 

Sure sound like it after the way Mr. Pinder scolded the employees of the Power Corporation. 

 

We would like an individual to be discreet, we wish our Civil Service was just like the on in Ottawa, 

where the Civil Service doesn‘t interfere in politics. 

 

Get that? Where the Civil Service doesn‘t interfere in politics. I hold up a clipping from the Saskatoon 

Star Phoenix: 

 

Fresh Breeze Sweeps the Province, Thatcher Aide tells Young Liberals. 

 

The past five months have been the most important period in the history of Saskatchewan, a senior 

provincial government official told a Saskatoon Young Liberal rally here Thursday night, Edward 

Odishaw, Executive Assistant to the Premier. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we wish our Civil Service was just like the one in Ottawa, where the Civil Service 

doesn‘t interfere in politics! 

 

We don‘t want people out organizing fro the Liberal party on company time, or on government time, 

any more than the CCF. We wish the Civil Service in a general way would remain neutral. We will 

insist that they remain neutral on company time. What they do on their own time is their own business. 

 

This wasn‘t the case with Mr. Basken. What he did on his own time apparently wasn‘t his own business, 

so the announcer, who apparently wasn‘t born yesterday, said: 

 

There is o Liberal Political activity going on at 

 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

153 

the present time, then I take it? 

 

And the Premier‘s reply 

 

Well, certainly, we haven‘t asked for it, and as I say, what we desire as a government is to have 

neutrality from the Civil Service, and from members of the Power Corporation, and in no way would 

we deny them any rights of any other individual. 

 

Pure unadulterated falsehood, Mr. Speaker. He is wrong when he says it was handled by management. It 

was not handled by management, he knows it was not handled by management. He knows who did 

handle it. He can‘t possibly be mistaken when he says he had nothing to do with it and that it was 

handled by management. He is wrong when he says that Mr. Basken was engaging in political activity 

during working time and he is wrong when he says he chose not to discontinue his political activity 

when he was so instructed by management. 

 

When he says, ―What these employees do on their own time is their own business‖, the staff newsletter 

sent out under Mr. Pinder‘s signature gives that statement the lie. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t propose to go into the merits of the Basken case, I‘m merely using the 

evidence that appeared there to go into the merits of the Premier, to go into the whole question of the 

integrity of government, the integrity of this government. 

 

There are some passages there, which suggest the point of view of the Liberal party, the attitude which 

the Liberal party takes to the ‗spoils‘ system, to the whole question of political rewards and political 

punishments. I just want to quote this passage from the evidence. This is spoken by the Chairman of the 

Commission, the Chairman of the Board of Inquiry when he is questioning Mr. Duncan: 

 

I am trying to understand your point of view, Mr. Duncan, to me it has always seemed peculiar that 

labor would tie themselves to any particular party and risk the situation that arises when that party is 

not in power. 

 

In other words, labor takes the partisan point of view, that is fine when their party is in power, but when 

their party is out of power they may get the axe. He is right at home in association and hobnobbing with 

the Premier of this province. 

 

Mr. Duncan‘s reply was: 

Yes, we are not fortunate enough to be perhaps in the same boat as industry, where they apply the 

finances and this sort of thing to both parties of their choice, so they have got an ‗in‘ either way. We 

feel it is a little more clear cut than that, but there are some principles and philosophies involved that 

just can‘t be shunted around from 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

154 

party to party – aren‘t and can‘t because of the present structure and ideas of each of the parties. 

 

So the Chairman then said: 

 

Would it be correct to say this then, Mr. Duncan, that in the field of labor relations there is much more 

involvement than were collective bargaining? 

 

Mr. Nicol said: 

 

And would you not also say in the dispute which we are dealing with here it appears to have gone far 

beyond the realms of collective bargaining. 

 

Mr. Duncan said: 

 

Well, I would think it has and it hasn‘t. There are certain aspects of it that have hinged themselves 

directly upon collective bargaining, ad this, of course, are the terms that have been broken. There are 

other things that go beyond what would normally be classed as subject matter for the collective 

bargaining table, and this, of course, is the laws of the province that have been ignored. Then the 

question that goes even further and broader than this is the laws of the country that have been ignored 

in the civil liberties respect. 

 

Mr. Nicol replied: 

 

What I am trying to suggest to you, Mr. Duncan, is that when labor chooses to go outside the field of 

collective bargaining and engage in partisan political activity why should labor not expect to take the 

consequences of that activity? 

 

The whole philosophy of political reprisals and punishment is part of the Liberal stock-in-trade. They 

accept it is a natural and inevitable result of being opposed to the Liberal party, and that view is 

endorsed by the person who was appointed Chairman of this board. 

 

Mr. Nicol said: 

 

Let‘s take the case of a corporation that does spend money actively supporting one political party, and 

it loses the election – this party is not elected, but it has been out actively campaigning to elect the 

losing party. Should that company be surprised if it suffers the political consequences of its actions? 

 

I was astonished, Mr. Speaker, in the last half of the 20th century that there is still a province in Canada 

where that kind of view prevails apparently among high circles of the Liberal party, the party in office. 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

155 

Mr. Duncan says: 

 

Would an individual in that company be fired because of that? 

 

Mr. Nicol replies: 

 

I am not talking about individuals within the company, I am talking about the company itself. Suppose 

it loses its licenses, or fails to get something that it comes to government to ask for at a later date – 

should it be surprised that it doesn‘t get these things? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I grew up in this province and for the last twenty or twenty five years, I would say that I 

would be surprised if any business that came to the government for a license was denied a license, just 

because it didn‘t actively support the party in power. I would be astonished and surprised that that 

situation exists in Saskatchewan, but I am beginning to think that it does, under the Liberal regime in 

this province. These works, these connotations are not my words, Mr. Speaker. These are the words of a 

highly placed official of the Liberal party, who apparently has the confidence of the hon. gentlemen 

opposite, because he was placed in control of a fact-finding board to sit in adjudication upon the civil 

rights of a citizen of this province who lost his livelihood through the illegal acts of that government. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, nonsense, poor Basken was a victim of your . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — He certainly was a victim of you people. If you have any evidence . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What is your evidence? 

 

Mr. Walker: — Does the hon. member want it to be sworn, and testify now. If the hon. member wants 

to testify, I would like to ask him a few questions, Mr. Speaker, but I suggest he probably wouldn‘t 

answer any questions here, any more than he would if he had gone down before that board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pretty vicious at that when somebody is not here. 

 

Mr. Walker: — I won‘t read it all to you, but in conclusion, the Chairman of the Board attempted to 

describe the firing of Mr. Basken as not an act of management, but as an act of God. There may be a few 

people opposite who would subscribe to that point of view, but they are not to be admired or emulated, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

156 

Well, Mr. Speaker, over the years the Liberal members when sitting in the opposition used to delight in 

quoting from resolutions of CCF conventions, pointing out that the government of that day should have 

been more careful to fire or dismiss civil servants who engaged in political activity. The fact that these 

resolutions were passed each year by CCF conventions, I think is sufficient proof to any ordinary 

reasonable-minded person that the CCF government did not engage in the firing of people for political 

activity. There mere fact that our own party supporters complained about our refusal to do so, in my 

opinion, constitutes proof that the previous government was not guilty of that crime. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — How about 20 years ago? 

 

Mr. Walker: — But, Mr. Speaker, it seems to escape hon. gentlemen opposite that if we had complied 

with those resolutions, the resolutions would have ceased appearing. There would have been no 

repetition of them from year to year. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it shouldn‘t escape the attention 

of hon. members opposite that the previous government knowingly engaged people who were known to 

be Liberals, and who were engaged on the basis that they had enough integrity to do a competent and 

honorable job for the government even though they were Liberals. That is asking quite a lot. A former 

Liberal member of the legislature, was appointed, as we all remember, to a responsible civil service 

position, and even though The Public Service Act expressly prohibits engaging in political activity while 

a fulltime employee, unless you go on leave of absence, this particular civil servant was able to see out 

and solicit a Liberal party nomination and do a little campaigning for his political party without any 

leave of absence. As I understand it, civil servants of all political persuasions were allowed to do this. 

As I recall it, one even sought a Liberal nomination and ran against one of the members here in Regina. 

Even though he was a civil servant he organized and got ready and took a nomination. He chose 

voluntarily to resign his civil service position, but that of course, is his own business. 

 

Under the previous government I thought we had developed a sort of humane and democratic approach 

to the rights of citizens, to differ with the government if they wished so long as they did a conscientious, 

capable job. I don‘t think my hon. friends can point to any evidence that that is not the situation with 

regard to the previous government. 

 

Now apparently, Mr. Speaker, we have reverted to the old Gardiner days, to the old days when jobs are 

the reward for political service and firings are a punishment for political disobedience. 

 

I well remember reminding this house, the first session I was here, 20 sessions ago now, of an incident 

that occurred back in the early 1930‘s down in the constituency of Weyburn. I recall that in the election 

in 1935, in the poll that surrounded the Weyburn Mental Hospital, where only civil servants 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

157 

voted, it was discovered on election morning that seven people had voted CCF in that poll. An 

investigation was conducted which took several weeks. When it was discovered that they couldn‘t 

ascertain which of these employees had voted CCF, the word simply went out that seven of them had to 

be axed in order to show that the government meant business, and they did. They did. This is the kind of 

political reprisals which destroyed the village of Lidice, in Czechoslovakia, because of a Nazi storm 

trooper assassinated there by a citizen of the community of Lidice. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, are we now reverting to those old political pork barrel days, which 

Jimmy Gardiner fastened on this province back in the 1920‘s and continued in this province up until 

1944. Certainly the evidence points that way. I can remember even three years ago, one of my 

constituents saying that if the Liberal government ever got into power again in Saskatchewan they 

would turn the hand of the clock back. 

 

I think I got reported in one of the newspapers, and I was chided by Liberal members that I was still 

living in the dark ages and that I had too suspicious a mind. Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently my 

suspicions have been amply justified, apparently they have been confirmed. This government, 

apparently, not only has decided to ride roughshod over the rights of individual citizens, but then has 

attempted, by deceit, and by the concealing of evidence, to suppress the citizen‘s rights to recompense 

and to reinstatement. This is, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, the real character of this government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You are way off base, Bob. 

 

Mr. Walker: — My constituents, and many people in Saskatchewan, are expressing alarm and concern 

about the unreliability of the government which sits opposite. The things that have been said and done in 

the past two years have! I know some of his colleagues make the boast that they have successfully 

gagged the Premier and stopped him from saying some of these silly things, but every once in a while 

the gag slips off. I have here a collection of headlines which I took I know that the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron) is just as distressed as I am. He is a decent man who came into this legislature 

the same day I did. He is just as distressed as I am at some of the things that I am referring to. I can‘t say 

the same for the Minister of Health (Mr. Stewart) . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Speak for yourself, John. 

 

Mr. Walker: — . . . but here are some headlines, Mr. Speaker, which have appeared in the local 

newspaper, originating with a statement made by the Premier in this house about a year ago now. It has 

to do with the subject of ―heavy water‖. Have you noticed, Mr. Speaker, how the press in this province 

has just let the government off the hook completely about ―heavy water‖? 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

158 

We have been very tolerant and generous about this ourselves, on this side of the house, Mr. Speaker. 

We haven‘t done much twitting, and I am not going to do any today. I just think the facts might speak 

for themselves. I have here a list of the headlines, and these headlines made by many authors, by 

typesetters and people who don‘t really have any political interest, tell a story themselves. 

 

February 3rd. – Estevan May Get $50,000,000 Plant 

February 8th. – High Towers Plant Feature 

February 20th – Will Heavy Water Plant Go West. (Financial Post headline) 

February 17th – A.E. Decision In Two Weeks – heavy water plant. 

February 22nd – Deterium Tender Soon 

February 24th – (This is the day the Premier stood up here and made the announcement) Estevan Will 

Gain $46,000,000 Plant. (That is the day the Premier told us he had a contract it has turned out to be thin 

air, or not air or something.) 

 

and on the same day, the headline said: 

 

Premier Receives Praise. 

 

The same day another headline said: 

 

Estevan Officials Welcome News of Heavy Water Plant. 

 

The Premier says we have given Prince Albert a pulp mill, and I was up there and I haven‘t seen any 

pulp mill there. 

 

Another headline on the same day said: 

 

$46,000,000 Plant Expected to Quicken Economic Pulse. 

 

I am sure there were some political pulses quickened too. 

 

February 27th – New Heavy Water Plant Process Analyzed. (it is already there now, they are now 

analyzing it). 

 

Estevan Plan Contingent on Tests. 

March 1st. – Heavy Water Sale Guaranteed – New Plant for Estevan. 

They are quoting the Premier there. 

March 10th – Estevan Plant Deal Verbal, No Written Agreement. 

My colleague here in Regina finally extracted the fact from the Premier. 

April 15th – Heavy Water Plant Gets Green Light. 

July 21st – Estevan Plant Will Be Built – Thatcher 

August 10th – Firm Pulls Out – Water Plant. Second Company in Heavy Water Proposal 

August 11th – Firm Negotiates to Build Plant. Estevan Plant. 

August 19th – A.E.C.L. Accepts New Estevan Plant Bid, Contract Signing For Heavy Water Said Soon. 

September 4th – Heavy Water Aid Depends on A.E.C.L. Saskatchewan has no assurance yet from the 

A.E.C.L. that the project is economic. 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

159 

Mr. Thatcher Says Water Prospect Dim 

November 22nd – Heavy Water Plant Nearly Dead. 

November 23rd – Heavy Water Plant Talks Are Scheduled. 

November 24th – (this is the wait, you see, the talks) Estevan Plant Still Up In Air. 

November 26th – Estevan Plant Lost 

November 27th – Heavy Water Plant Deadline Confirmed. 

November 30th – Little Hope for Dynamic. Several other companies discussed enough financing 

claimed – Estevan plant. 

December 1st – Dynamic Loses Bid for Estevan Plant. A.E.C.L. Says Heavy Water Proposal 

Unacceptable Because of Financing. 

December 2nd – Water Plant Opens for Nova Scotia 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Don‘t give up. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you glad? 

 

Mr. Walker: — Someone, asked me, across the way, was I glad. Well, Mr. Speaker, I haven‘t quoted a 

single word of what I said about the heavy water plant, but I will. I say that a heavy water plant for 

Saskatchewan would be highly desirable. I say that a government that was on its toes and was doing its 

duty could probably bring a heavy water plant . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — How did you make out in the first place? 

 

Mr. Walker: — I would say that part of the reason why we haven‘t got a heavy water plant in 

Saskatchewan is the Premier‘s insistence upon the doctrinaire beliefs of private enterprise. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That is not correct. 

 

Mr. Walker: — It is his committed and his confirmed conviction that you can only have it if you are 

prepared to have it on private enterprise terms. That is why there is no heavy water plant in 

Saskatchewan. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the time is long past when these doctrinaire politically 

unorthodox economic notions of the Premier ought to be allowed to stand in the way of progress in this 

province. I say that what we need in this province, and what we will have again in this province at the 

first opportunity that the voters get to make a choice, is a government that is prepared to put forward 

concrete proposals for social development and economic development through government support and 

enterprise, through co-operative support, through the enterprise of the co-operative movement and of the 

private enterprise sector of the economy. 

 

What we need, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of balanced approach that the previous government brought 

forward. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that the drop in the economic development that the statistics show has 

occurred in the last two years is probably attributable to the strangling of the 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

160 

co-operative movement and the public ownership sector which the party across the way is guilty of. I 

suggest that if we had had the kind of development by public ownership and by co-operative ownership 

that the previous government encouraged, there probably wouldn‘t be a drop-off in the rate of growth of 

our economy. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, if I may just conclude by giving a word of advice to the Premier, that it is still not 

too late for him to avoid the consequences of his reckless folly in the Bengough constituency. It is still 

not too late for this government to escape the chastisement which the voters of Bengough are determined 

to inflict on their backsides on Wednesday of this week. The way for this government to avoid being 

disciplined, the way for this government to avoid being disciplined in Bengough is to issue tomorrow 

the writs for a general provincial election in Saskatchewan, and let all the people of Saskatchewan 

decide. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to congratulate the 

member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and the member for Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) for the 

contribution they gave to this debate. I also want to congratulate the Premier for outlining the Throne 

Speech debate so ably to the people in this province, so that they know what the government intends to 

do. 

 

I can‘t say this for the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker). I have never yet in the time that I have been in 

the house, saw, and seen and heard, such an ill-prepared speech. He certainly didn‘t know what he was 

talking about, he has wasted an hour and three quarters on the one issue, Mr. Basken, and he tells us that 

the Liberals are the ones that have fired people, civil servants. I want to tell him what the record was 

when they took office, only one. In 1944, all the ferry operators in the Rosthern constituency, and I 

believe I have more than anybody else, were not rehired. The ferry operators that were hired were 

Socialist friends of the former government. In 1944 they brought them in as operators and once they got 

them in they got them into the union. In 1944 I tried to fire some of them, and I wasn‘t able to do so. I 

just wasn‘t able to do so. These people here were operating the ferries with stickers on their cars, 

stickers saying vote CCF right during the campaign and on election day. These were the type of people 

that we couldn‘t fire, they should have been fired. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Couldn‘t navigate either. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Now, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) the other day, I have never seen him so 

excited, in all my life. It reminded me of a chap that was thrown overboard and was struggling for the 

post that he has with the NDP party. He either must produce, or somebody else is going to take over the 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

161 

leadership. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) the other day criticized the closing of Embury House, and the 

former Minister of Welfare asked the question regarding the boys at home at the time of the closing. The 

answer to how many boys from Embury House are at the Saskatchewan Boys‘ School, or in the 

Provincial Correctional Institution, is that there are none. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Now what is the record of Embury House under the Socialist administration? Here, when we took office, 

six boys, $110,000 to the taxpayers, and no program. About 50 per cent of the boys that came to Embury 

House were admitted to the Boys‘ School and when they turned sixteen years of age, they were 

committed to the Provincial Correctional Institution here in Regina. Many of them are, perhaps, still 

there. I haven‘t checked out. 

 

Now, what about the Boys‘ School? Before the former Minister of Welfare (Mr. Nicholson) and 

member from Saskatoon, questions me about the school, I want to inform him that the ―no smoking‖ 

rule is still in existence. The school is now performing a very useful purpose, and the inmate population 

is now three times what it was under the former government, and under the former Superintendent. The 

reason for this is that the former superintendent would rarely permit admissions from the regions. He 

was afraid of the boys. 

 

We now have a good rehabilitation program going for the boys, and the result is that runaways are at a 

minimum. Under the former NDP administration, and its former superintendent, the bad boys were 

locked up 24 hours a day awaiting their 16th birthday, then to be transferred over to the Regina jail. The 

damage done to some of these boys is irreparable, and if the truth were known to our society and to the 

parents concerned, legal action might well have been taken. Some ―Humanity First‖ program. 

 

What about the services for the aged? The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), stated that this service 

had been done away with. Well, I will excuse him because he was in the hospital last year, but he knows 

that this isn‘t true. It was stated at the time that the services for aged would be transferred and 

co-ordinated in to the Rehabilitation and Co-ordinating Branch of the Welfare Department. The services 

to the aged are being continued. 

 

What happened under the Socialists? When a personal friend of theirs wanted a job, they opened up a 

new branch, made him or her the Director with a $10,000 salary and a brand new car. This, I suggest, 

happened to Miss Lola Wilson. 

 

The NDP, including the Leader of the Opposition, has criticized the opening of additional liquor outlets. 

I have something to say about this. 

 

If the closing of liquor outlets and licensed premises would stop the consumption of liquor, I would be 

all for it; but it has been proven over and over again that this cannot be done. It is the responsibility of 

government to regulate and control the sale of liquor. As communities expand, which they now do under 

the present, these communities are entitled to the same services as in other areas. This is what my 

government 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

162 

has in mind. 

 

The sanctimonious attitude which members opposite are taking is a far cry from what the NDP 

campaigners were using against me in the Rosthern constituency in the last general election. They told 

the Indians that if the Liberals were elected, Boldt being a non-drinker and a Mennonite, we‘d surely 

take the beer away from them. And it worked on the one Arrow Reserve, I got 3 votes out of 64 and on 

the duck Lake Indian Reserve, I got 28 votes to the NDP 95. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they gave the liquor to the Indians all right, but it is wrong for us to give it even to the 

white population. Some Socialists feel that they do not need liquor outlets. They distribute it personally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Now, Mr. Speaker, 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who‘s talking. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — There was a lot of cry about S.G. & F., the sale of S.G. & F. and yet the opposition have 

failed to speak about it. I though today, the hon. member would devote most of his time to what 

happened to S.G. & F., this wonderful crown corporation that made thousands of dollars for the people 

of Saskatchewan. But he didn‘t even mention it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He‘s ashamed of it. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — And I want to prove to you that the member from Hanley (Mr. Walker), and the senior 

member or one of the senior members, the lawyer member from Regina, when they were chairman of 

the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, what business ability they had. And I want to tell the 

members of this house that I wouldn‘t have them manage a pigsty. 

 

When the Premier asked me to take over the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, one of my 

first thoughts, in view of my limited knowledge, and I will agree that I had limited knowledge, was to 

observe and make sure that the philosophy of the government was being carried out. It soon became 

evident that if I was to get things done some changes were necessary. As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, 

your government had, for instance, decided upon a policy of efficiency and economy which was 

designed to reduce the number of vehicles and to effect economy and manpower. In spite of the fact that 

these instructions had been issued to Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, no effective steps had 

been taken and neither end had been achieved. To me it became obvious that it would be extremely 

difficult to put our policies into effect unless we were to exert control, and this I set out to do. My first 

move then was to make certain that changes in the administration, in the set-up of the corporation would 

be changed. The result has been most effective. Four senior officials, appointed by the Socialists, were 

asked to resign. Incidentally we found it unnecessary to replace them. Promotions were made from 

within the corporation and the new officials, with instruction from myself, were to carry out the policies. 

The results as I have said before have been most gratifying. 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

163 

The Automobile fleet, which stood at 91 vehicles, an appalling figure when you consider that there was 

only a staff of 472, many of whom were clerks and typists, was reduced by more than 25 per cent – 

down to 67 as of December 31, 1965. Why, the Socialists gave everybody a car. People living in Regina 

who never went out on corporation business, had vehicles to drive from their residence to the office. 

They even bought a parking lot to park all their cars for their friends. Yet, Mr. Speaker, when we asked 

that these cars be reduced we were told that it was impossible to reduce the fleet without impairing 

efficiency. We were also told that to reduce staff would have dire results. What has happened? I submit 

that SGIO is more efficient now than at any time in history and when we tabled the results of the 

corporation you will see that SGIO has hit a new high in premiums written, in total assets, and most of 

all in profits. At the same time the total number of employees has been reduced. The members of the 

opposition howled about some of the changes I have made but they must find it hard to continue to 

argue in the face of the success these changes have produced. 

 

It is the goal of the government that the SGIO stand on its own feet and compete with private enterprise 

on a business-like basis. There will be no more handouts to SGIO, such as the schools, hospitals, crown 

corporations and government business. 

 

The corporation will be expected to recognize standard insurance procedures and insurance principles. 

This being the case, Mr. Speaker, there must be a minimum of political interference, with not room left 

for political heelers. We do not expect any members of the corporation to become involved in politics, 

although we recognize that they must all have their own political beliefs. 

 

Mr. Walker: — As long as they are Liberal. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This is a change from the feeling of the previous Socialist administration. We would not 

permit, for instance, soliciting of funds by senior staff for the coffers of the Liberal party as was done on 

behalf of the CCF-NDP by our Socialist friends when they were in power. 

 

Nor will there be any political payoffs through jobs to men such as George Bothwell, a former 

advertising manager of Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office whose political ties and activities 

are well known to members of both sides of the house. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell us about Les Hibbs. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Men who failed at politics such as Helmer Benson, former manager of the Saskatoon 

branch of the SGIO and a defeated candidate in provincial and federal elections, would not find a haven 

in SGIO, precedents set by men such as Benson who resigned his job in 1952 to participate in the 

election campaign and was then reinstated in an equivalent position as soon as the need for him in the 

field disappeared. It will not be allowed to be repeated under this present administration. 

 

Nor will Saskatchewan continue to be the haven of political misfits and failures from other areas. Men 

such as Leonard James, a defeated Labor candidate from Britain who came to Saskatchewan on the 

advice and recommendations of M. J. Coldwell and George 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

164 

Bothwell will no longer find this province the Socialist Utopia in which to hide their failures. Mr. James, 

who proudly proclaimed this Fabian Socialism on every possible occasion, became public relations 

officer of the SGIO for about five years from 1953 until 1958, when even the Socialists couldn‘t stand 

him any more and they fired him. 

 

The members of SGIO have our assurance that we will not interfere with their private political views. 

The hon. members opposite may wonder about the political views of the agents of SGIO and well they 

should, because they know that one of the requirements of obtaining an agency contract when they were 

in power was subservience to the Socialist doctrine. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, that statement is entirely and completely false and it 

should be . . . 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I will prove it to the hon. members from Biggar. The only way an agent 

could be appointed . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER, ORDER! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I am suggesting that the Minister is making a statement which he cannot substantiate. It 

is false and it should be withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The minister has a right to make his speech without interruption just as hon. members 

on the other side. Members for Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The only way an agent could be appointed in the day of the Socialists was with the 

consent of the minister in charge who had the applicant checked out for political stability of the Socialist 

variety. 

 

There were a number of highly qualified insurance agents in this province who couldn‘t get a 

Government Insurance contract because they would not give at least lip service to the Socialists. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland) — What about . . . 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Certainly there have been some changes since we took over and no wonder. We ha to 

right some wrongs. This appointment of agents as a political favor had to stop and it was necessary to 

make additional appointments of agents who were denied contracts in the past for no other reasons than 

being unacceptable politically. 

 

The Socialist opposition may howl that there has been a witch hunt among the agencies which may 

leave the impression that the SGIO agency force is being depleted and its efficiency and production 

impaired. But what are the facts, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When we took office there was a line-up of agents requesting Government Insurance contracts but the 

total agency force stood at 573, these being limited to the friends of the party. 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

165 

Now, there are 609 and while a few cancellations were necessary the net result is one of greater 

distribution of Agencies throughout the province. The result of course, has been a fantastic increase in 

premium income from the agents of SGIO. 

 

In 1965, the premium income from our agents increased from $7,665,000 in 1964 to $9,215,000, an 

increase over $1,500,000 for over 20 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Yes, the result has been very gratifying to SGIO and therefore to the citizens of the 

province, although we may have hurt a few Socialists along the way. 

 

As I said before, Mr. Speaker, we intend to treat SGIO as we would any private corporation rather than a 

haven for hand-outs for political lackeys. During the last session, Mr. Speaker, your government decided 

not to renew the unfair and undemocratic section 15 of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act 

despite howls of protest and indignation from the Socialists. They cried blue ruin! I remember the hon. 

member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) saying this. It would sound the death knell for SGIO. It was even 

suggested that it was done as a political promise to insurance interests in the east. Despite the fact that 

the Socialists suggested the costs would increase . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You had your speech 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I also don‘t intend to be fibbed about either by him or anybody else. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER, ORDER! 

 

Mr. Walker: — I‘m rising to a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. The hon. member purported to quote 

something that I said. It doesn‘t faintly resemble anything that I said and I deny having said what he 

attributed to me. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member would read Hansard he would find out that these were 

exactly the words that he said. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Would the hon. member please read the quotation and acknowledge the page in 

Hansard? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I did not quote him at all. I just said that he cried blue-ruin. It would force 

the rates up. It would sound the death knell for SGIO. It was even suggested that it was done as a 

political promise to insurance interests in the east. Despite the fact that the Socialists suggested the costs 

would increase to hard-pressed school and hospital boards, the opposite has been achieved. Rates were 

slashed to such a degree that the results tended to indicate something was rotten in Denmark. 

 

Here are some examples of the various rates of the province, 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

166 

throughout the province, and I will quote some of these rates. These are some of the rates that we lost: 

 

Saskatchewan Minerals, Sodium Sulphate Division, the former rate was 1.06; we quoted a rate now 

to .80, a 25 per cent reduction. 

 

But we still didn‘t get that insurance. 

 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones. We quoted .1785 down to .15; a 16 per cent reduction. 

 

But we didn‘t get it. The ones that got it quoted a 66 2/3 per cent reduction over what we quoted. 

 

Saskatoon Public School: .40 was a previous rate and we quoted it down to .21 or 50 per cent 

reduction. 

 

And we didn‘t get it. The premium accepted was $34,000. Our bit was $43,000. 

 

Wynyard hospital: from .70 to .41, a 41.5 per cent reduction. 

 

Accepted total premium under SGIO was $30. On the bid that we got we reduced our quoting price from 

157 to .42. Regina Public School from .24 to .18; the Saskatoon Collegiate Institute from $37,163 under 

the previous government to $18.685, a 50 per cent reduction saving for that school district. 

 

Kamsack Union Hospital from .44 to .30, a 32 per cent reduction. 

 

These great reductions are representative of the entire school and hospital field where rate cuts ranged 

from five per cent to 50 per cent, with most reductions being between five peer cent and 20 per cent. 

Only on risk remained at the same rate, while one increased. There are many more but I am sure I got 

my point across, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Perhaps I should be a little kind to the previous CCF administration and simply point out that they were 

away off base in their pleading for the retention of section 15. After all in the light of some of the glaring 

errors in judgment which I discovered within SGIO this mistake seems very insignificant. 

 

The question may be asked; has the insurance industry simply slashed rates to embarrass SGIO or has 

SGIO been acting on instructions from my office and deliberately cut its rates so it would be publicly 

embarrassed by its actions? This is what the Socialists would like to have you believe. The facts remain, 

however, the SGIO slashed its own rates and retained more than 90 per cent of the business it bid on 

and, Mr. Speaker, paid a commission to its local agents, income which the CCF-NDP denied their 

agents. Certainly SGIO was embarrassed on the Saskatchewan Government Telephones Account, so 

much so that the Leader of the Opposition, the hon. member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) termed their 

quotation ridiculous. 

 

Well, for the edification of the hon. member for Biggar and his colleagues, I had nothing to do with the 

setting of the so-called ridiculous rate. I had only been in the insurance business approximately eight 

months. The fact, however, is that this ridiculous rate, as it has been called, was struck by three senior 



 

February 14, 1966 

 

 

167 

underwriters of SGIO who had been employed in that capacity when the Socialists were in office. 

Maybe it can be argued that the high rates they set prior to the repeal of section 15 were just as 

ridiculous, and even more so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — As a newcomer to the insurance industry, I wondered just what was going on. The hon. 

member for Hanley (Mr. Walker), who was the last minister in charge of SGIO under the previous 

Socialist administration, said that the rates were at a break-even point and it was not the policy of the 

Socialists to make large profits on schools, hospitals and crown corporations. You know, he knows 

better. I am sure he does. I don‘t like to call a man a liar but he sure was reckless with the truth. 

 

The hon. member for Hanley also said that if this business were thrown open to competition, costs 

would have to go up because we would have to pay commission to the agents. The argument made sense 

to me. I wanted to find out what was going on because the same underwriters were employed by SGIO 

during the CCF-NDP regime as since section 15 was abolished. I was astounded to find out that the loss 

ration on schools during the past 20 years was 36.7 per cent; the hon. member says this is a break-even 

point. He hadn‘t gone to the type of school that I went to. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is again attributing words to me. Unless he can 

substantiate this, I ask him to withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, it being now 5:30 I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, my point of privilege still stands. Unless the hon. member can 

substantiate the words he attributed to me I ask him to withdraw it. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: — I wonder if the hon. member would permit a question before he resumes his 

seat. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The assembly adjourned at 5:28 o‘clock p.m. 

 

 


