



















































Hansard: April 01, 1966


1627 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

39th Day 

 

Friday, April 1, 1996 

 

The assembly met at 10:00 o‟clock a.m. 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTION RE CONGRATULATIONS TO MR. WILSON, 

BRITISH PRIME MINISTER 
 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, there were reports in the 

press and on radio, and in view of these reports this morning that Prime Minister Pearson is sending 

congratulations to Harold Wilson, I was just wondering if the Premier also intended to send 

congratulations to Mr. Wilson. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — I don‟t know if this tragedy for Great Britain should be rubbed 

in, Mr. Speaker. However, I think it does give one indication that once a government is elected, the 

second time is always easier. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

QUESTION RE RETURN NO. 118 
 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I just suggest to the Premier, don‟t be too sure about 

that. 

 

I would like to ask the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) when I might expect Return No. 118 which was 

ordered on March 22nd, 1966. It is a very simple thing, doesn‟t take a lot of work. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will look into it. I think there aren‟t too many 

returns left. There is only one department in most cases that has not filed the returns and I have 

instructed my people every day to get on their back and bug them to do this. However, I will follow this 

one up. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. J. M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 90, An Act 

to assist Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited in establishing a pulp mill in Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this bill, An Act to assist the Prince Albert Pulp company Limited 

in establishing a pulp mill in Saskatchewan, may be described as three-fold. Firstly, to authorize the 

province, upon the recommendation of the Provincial Treasurer, to unconditionally guarantee the 

payments in U.S. funds of a $46,500,000 loan and all interest and premiums, if any, thereon, to be made 

to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill Limited and to enter into an indemnity agreement whereby the mill 

company will indemnify the province against all claims which may be made against the government, 

and to provide for the acceptance by the province of collateral mortgage bonds and a floating charge on 

the assets of the company. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1628 

Secondly, to ratify and confirm all agreements which have been entered into on behalf of the province 

by the Provincial Treasurer of the Minister of Natural Resources, and in particular, those agreements 

which are set out in the schedule to the act. 

 

Thirdly, to authorize the province to purchase or acquire share capital in the company as provided in the 

Shareholders‟ Agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all, nine contracts were signed on December 2nd, 1965. Of these, five directly involve 

the government as a party, or parties to the agreement. Two of these agreements involve a Crown 

corporation, namely, Saskatchewan Forest Products, and two are agreements entered into by the pulp 

company and Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated. The five agreements involving the province are the 

Master Agreement, the Shareholders Agreement, the Management License Agreement, the Supply and 

Construction Agreement, and finally the Guarantee Agreement. I am going to very briefly refer to each 

of these five agreements. 

 

You will note that four of them are referred to in the schedule. Firstly, there is a Master Agreement. It 

provides for the execution of the eight other contracts and also provides for the sales by the Department 

of Natural Resources to the pulp mill company of the pulp mill site for $20,000. It provides for certain 

services including a gas line, roads, and a bridge to be built by the province to the mill site, and it 

provides for certain matters with respect to water pollution, licenses, support of housing, railroad and 

one or two other matters. 

 

Secondly, there is the Shareholders‟ Agreement. It provides for the incorporation of a pulp mill 

company as a private company to begin with, and an amendment to this agreement provides that it shall 

be a public company and it provides for six directors, two of whom shall be the nominees of the 

Provincial Treasurer. This agreement contains provisions relating to the Articles of Association and sets 

out under what circumstances a vote of five out of six directors shall be required as a safeguard to 

protect the interests of the province and the mill. 

 

The agreement provides for the capital structure of the company and subscription of equity capital, 

namely seventy per cent by Parsons and Whittemore for $7,000,000 cash and thirty per cent by the 

provincial government for $1,500,000 cash and $1,500,000 as compensation for the guarantee. It 

provides that neither party shall dispose of its equity shares without giving the other an option on a first 

refusal basis to purchase the shares. 

 

Thirdly, the Management License Agreement is pretty well the standard form of agreement whereby the 

Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) under the Forest Act grants an exclusive license to cut 

and remove the timber mentioned in the agreement, in this case pulpwood, from the Crown land 

described in the agreement. The agreement requires that the mill company construct a pulp mill of the 

value of not less than $50,000,000 and the granting of the license is conditional upon the completion of 

the mill. The term of the license is 30 years with right of renewal for a further 20 years. The total license 

fees or stumpage is fixed for a period of less than 20 years from the expected start-up date of the mill. 

Until December 31, 1979, the stumpage payable on pulpwood cut and removed from the licensed land is 

70 cents per cord for spruce; 60 cents per cord for jack pine and 38 cents for poplar. From January 1st, 

1980, to December 31, 1987, the rates are 90 cents for spruce, 80 cents for jackpine and 50 cents 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1629 

for poplar. Thereafter, for the remainder of the licensed period the rates shall be determined by 

agreement. The agreement makes the usual provision for good forest management policies, 

reforestation, submission of annual working plan. the agreement also contains substantial reservations 

from both the area granted by the license and to preserve existing yearly cutting operations in the area. 

These include the exclusion from the area of two provincial parks, 14 Indian reserves, two other 

management license areas. It preserves a yearly cutting operation of 4,000,000 board feet of spruce saw 

timber; 1,750,000 board feet of jack pine, 120,000 poles, 500,000 fence posts; 2,000 cords poplar veneer 

bolts; and 10,000 cords of fuel wood. 

 

Fourthly, the Supply and Construction Agreement is mainly an agreement between the mill company 

and Parsons and Whittemore Incorporated for the construction of a completed and operating mill at a 

total cost, exclusive of the land, of $52,184,000 within 28 months following execution of the agreement. 

It is expected that the start-up date will not be later than July 1st, 1968. The Provincial Treasurer is a 

party to this agreement because the agreement provides that the Provincial Treasurer may appoint an 

independent engineer, acceptable to Parsons and Whittemore, to certify any major changes in the plans 

and specifications; attend mechanical tests and trials and verify that the mill has reached full rated 

production capacity. This agreement also provides that, if requested by the Provincial Treasurer, Parsons 

and Whittemore will provide a surety bond or satisfactory bank guarantee, guaranteeing due 

performance of the agreement. 

 

Fifthly, the Guarantee Agreement provides that the Provincial Treasurer will in consideration of 

$1,500,000 unconditionally guarantee the due and punctual payment of the principal of, and premium, if 

any, and the interest on notes to be given by the company covering loans in an aggregate sum of 

$46,500,000 in U.S. funds. The Provincial Treasurer‟s obligation to give the guarantee is conditional 

upon the pulp mill company entering loan agreements with responsible institutional investors on or prior 

to March 31, 1966, now extended by amendment to April 30, 1966, providing for the loan. The terms of 

the loan agreement and notes are to be in form and substance satisfactory to the Provincial Treasurer. 

The company agrees to execute an indemnity agreement to indemnify and save harmless the Provincial 

Treasurer from all or any claim arising or by reason of the guarantee. The company is also required to 

execute a trust deed, a first mortgage on its real property and a first floating charge on all its assets in 

favour of the Provincial Treasurer, so that, if there is default on the part of the company, and the 

Provincial Treasurer is required to make payment, all the assets of the company shall belong to the 

province. In other words, the province has security on all the assets of the company for its guarantee. 

There is also provision in the agreement to maintain working capital and requiring the province and 

Parsons and Whittemore to contribute in the proportion of their shareholdings. The agreement places 

limitation on the declaration of dividends, investment, incurring of liability while the guarantee is 

outstanding. 

 

The form of Note Purchase Agreement: Notes to be given by the Pulp Mill Company; the Note 

Guarantee to be executed by the Provincial Treasurer; the Deed of Trust and Mortgage; and the other 

documents to be approved by the Provincial Treasurer under the Guarantee Agreement have now been 

completed and approved and the form of these agreements have been placed before the legislature. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1630 

So far I have dealt with the five agreements in which the provincial government is directly involved. As 

I said earlier, there are two agreements between the Pulp Mill Company and Saskatchewan Forest 

Products; and two agreements between the mill and Parsons and Whittemore. 

 

The two agreements with the Timber Board are the Logging Agreement and the Acquisition Agreement. 

I do not intend to deal with these agreements at any length. The Logging and Acquisition Agreements 

provide that the Timber Board will supply 1,500,000 cords of pulpwood to the mill over a four-year 

period ending June, 1971, at prices fixed in the agreement and at the expiration of that period the mill 

will take over the pulpwood operation of the Timber Board. 

 

The two agreements between the Pulp Mill Company and parsons and Whittemore cover management, 

consultant and technical services to be performed by Parsons and Whittemore for the mill and un 

undertaking on the part of Parsons and Whittemore that it will sell on a first requirement best effort basis 

all the pulp which the company will produce on a commission basis of three per cent on all sales of pulp 

made by it, with no commission on sales made by the mill with the intervention of Parsons and 

Whittemore. 

 

In the foregoing I have attempted to summarize the many and varied agreements executed and to be 

executed in connection with the pulp mill. I can assure the assembly that if I have omitted any important 

aspect of these agreements, and I know I have, these omissions are not because of any desire to hide 

anything, but solely for the sake of brevity. 

 

I know that this mill has been criticized in and out of the House for the so-called “massive support” 

being given. I disagree that the assistance is more than is reasonable and more than is require. I know 

that it has been said by some members of the opposition that they are not necessarily opposed to the 

mill, nor to the assistance proposed to be given, but that before they could support it, they will require 

the answers to a number of questions. 

 

The first one is that a full and complete study has been made showing that the mill is feasible, Mr. 

Speaker. I have with me a copy of a confidential report setting out in detail the feasibility study 

completed before final negotiations opened. Mr. Speaker, it is a very interesting document; it is entitled 

“Feasibility Study for Saskatchewan Pulp Mill Project, NY998”. It contains an analysis of market 

surveys, wood supply and pulp quality, water and effluent treatment and climatic conditions, fuel, power 

and steam, labour, construction, site location, chemical, equipment lists, process description, project cost 

and proposed financial structure, manufacturing costs and profitability, plant layout and flow diagrams, 

time schedule and some appendices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t pretend to have read all these feasibility studies, and I certainly don‟t pretend 

to understand all that I have read. It is much too complicated and too technical for my limited capacity, 

but I do pretend to be able to understand the conclusion, and the conclusion set out at the beginning of 

the summary, and I am going to read only the last paragraph which says this: 

 

 Cash flow projections indicate that sufficient cash will be generated in each year of operation to cover 

all debt obligations with a substantial margin of safety, and still provide for a conservative dividend 

policy and a reasonable 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1631 

capital improvement program. Even during the first year of operation there is no cash outflow as 

depreciation charges will exceed the estimated operating costs. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Will the hon. minister table the report? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to table this feasibility study. I do not think it is in 

the public interests or is it fair to the company . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What are you reading it for then? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — As I stated, Mr. Speaker, I take full responsibility for this feasibility study that was 

handed to me as a confidential report and I would not want to table it without permission of the people 

who undertook the study. 

 

The question was asked, I think, by the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). He posed a 

question as to whether we were satisfied that this project was feasible and I am merely telling the House 

that before negotiations were opened the conclusion was arrived at that this project was, in fact, feasible, 

and that not only would it be capable of meeting debt charges and obligations which is, of course, very 

essential and very important as far as the province is concerned, but before negotiations were opened 

they satisfied themselves that it was feasible and they satisfied us as members of the government that the 

mill is definitely feasible and that when it is in full operation it will be able not only to meet all its 

operating expenses and debt charges but will be able to make a profit. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to ask the minister a question if he 

will permit. Who made this study? What company was it? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — It was made by a branch of P and W. It is called the Parsons and 

Whittemore-Lyddon Organization with offices in New York, London and Paris, and Mr. Speaker, there 

were independent consultants engaged in the study. Furthermore, these people who are coming into the 

province and are prepared to invest their money, came here, made a study and satisfied themselves that 

this was a feasible project. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, to clear this point, wasn‟t there an independent engineering 

company, and there are lots of them, hired to take responsibility for this report? Parsons and Whittemore 

themselves take responsibility for the report. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t propose to answer that question now because I am going to 

deal with it in a few moments. I am going to deal with it because we as a provincial government did 

engage the services of a consulting firm to look at this report and I propose to deal with it in a moment. 

All I want to point out at this time is that the company which is coming to Saskatchewan to build this 

pulp mill satisfied themselves that such a project 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1632 

is feasible, that they would be capable of meeting debt obligations as I said before, and furthermore, Mr. 

Speaker, . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — They are not risking very much. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — The study shows that the mill could break even despite some drop in prices below 

existing prices, a risk which any industry, or commercial undertaking must be prepared to face. 

 

The second matter brought up is that the freight rate hurdle has been overcome. The answer, Mr. 

Speaker, is, not completely. A concession has been made on the original rate fixed by the railways 

amounting to five per cent, as an example an 80-cent per ton reduction on a $15.80 rate. Further 

representations must be made and the government has undertaken to join in such representation. We 

believe that because of the injustice in the existing freight rate structure further concession will be given 

but the mill is viable under existing rates. 

 

Thirdly, it was asked whether the sponsors of the mill are going to go ahead with its construction within 

a fixed period of time. The answer to that question is, “Yes”, and I wish to make it an emphatic, “Yes”. I 

want to point out that this is not a CCF-NDP pre-election mill. Already there is evidence everywhere 

that construction of the mill is underway now. The construction and equipment contract of December 

2nd, 1965, provides as follows: 

 

P and W will begin site preparation and construction of the buildings and necessary facilities within 

the site within eight months from the date of execution of this agreement and will substantially 

complete construction within 24 months from such date. P and W will start delivery of the machinery 

and equipment within 12 months from the date of execution of this agreement and will deliver at least 

95 per cent of the machinery and equipment agreed upon with 24 months thereafter. P and W will 

substantially complete erection and installation of the machinery and equipment with 28 months from 

the date of execution of this agreement; provided, however, that People and W shall not be held 

responsible for delays due to non-receipt of any equipment or materials for which orders have been 

duly placed and expedited. 

 

There is, of course, the usual provision for delay in the event of strikes, force majeure, acts of God, the 

Queen‟s enemy. No provision was made for opposition by Her Majesty‟s loyal Socialist opposition. It is 

no longer deemed a sufficiently major force in Saskatchewan. 

 

The fourth question is “What is the assistance which will be given to the mill in road construction and 

any other benefits? Article III of the Master Agreement provides that the province will do certain things 

as follows: 

 

(a) The minister shall construct, or cause to be constructed, a gas line to the mill. It provides that the gas 

pipe line shall be capable of producing 450,000 cubic feet per hour from the nearest existing line of 

adequate capacity to the mill site at a pressure suitable for firing the gas-fired steam boiler, line kiln and 

recovery boiler. No concession is given on rates. The pulp mill will be treated as any industrial 

customer. It cannot be said that there is any assistance in this provision. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1633 

(b) It is agreed that the province will construct a road and bridge from highway no. 2 in the vicinity of 

Prince Albert to the pulp mill site. The road will be a multipurpose, black topped, 24-foot surface road 

capable of carrying 100-ton loads at a speed of 50 miles per hour. The bridge referred to is the bridge 

over the Little Red River. This road and bridge will form part of the highway system and the estimated 

cost from highway no. 2 to the mill site is in the neighbourhood of $575,000. 

 

(c) In addition, it is agreed that during each ten year period of the original 30 year term of the 

management license, the government will construct 200 miles of main, public, multipurpose, all-weather 

roads as specified in Schedule “C” of the agreement. This means that the government has undertaken to 

construct an average of 20 miles of road per year. It is to be noted that the provision covers only public 

multipurpose roads, and that no agreement or concession has been made toward the construction of 

forest access roads. Some of these roads would be built whether or not a pulp mill had been built. The 

development resulting from the pulp mill itself would have required the construction of many of these 

roads regardless of whether they were provided for in the agreement. It is difficult to estimate the cost of 

these roads, or even more difficult to say what proportions are attributable to the mill. 

 

Fifthly, it has been asked whether firm commitments that the sponsors are not making a large profit from 

the construction of the mill which would offset any investments which they may be making in the mill. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the answer is that the Construction and Supply Agreement contains provision for the 

appointment by the government of a consultant to advise on this and other matters. Before signing the 

agreement the government obtained expert opinion on this very matter. The opinion given is that the 

Prince Albert Mill is being constructed at a price equal to or below the average cost of similar mills. 

 

It engaged the services of a firm recognized as one of the leading firms in the USA on pulp mill 

construction located at San Francisco, far removed from any area where Parsons and Whittemore have 

ever operated. I will give the assembly the substance of the report It opens with: 

 

This is to present my comments on the contract price of $52,184,000 submitted by Parsons and 

Whittemore Incorporated, for a 650 ton bleached kraft market pulp mill and on the process for that 

mill proposed for the Prince Albert Pulp Company, Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. The price is to cover 

. . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Would the minister tell us what he is quoting from now? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Yes, I am quoting from the report of Associated Consultants International 

Incorporated of San Francisco, which was engaged by the government to examine the feasibility of this 

mill and to report to the government . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I am asking if the minister is prepared to table the report that he is 

quoting from? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, this is a report made to the Saskatchewan 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1634 

Economic Development Corporation, addressed to Mr. Wilshire, General Manger, and it merely gives 

the opinion of the feasibility and I am going to quote from it and I am taking full responsibility . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, this is the second time the minister has quoted from documents which are 

not available to the members of the House to peruse. The rules are quite clear; no member of the House 

may pretend to the existence of documents he is not prepared to show to the House, or put on the table. 

It is perfectly obvious that this puts the rest of the House at a disadvantage. We have no knowledge of 

whether he has taken these statements out of context, whether, indeed, they may be misrepresented. The 

rules of the House prevent that sort of thing. I suggest, Your Honour, that Your Honour must now 

require the hon. member to table both documents that he has quoted from. I refer Your honour to 

Citation 159 of Beauchesne‟s Rules and forms, Clause II, it deals with precisely this point, Mr. Speaker: 

 

A minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or quote from a dispatch or other state paper not 

before the House unless he is prepared to lay it upon the table. This restraint is similar to the rules of 

evidence in Courts of Law which prevent counsel from citing documents which have not been 

produced in evidence. The principle is so reasonable that it has not been contested; and when the 

objection had been made in time, it has been generally acquiesced in . . . 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, I will table this document that I am quoting from. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, there are two documents which the member has quoted from, and the rule 

is so plain that it is open to any member to mislead the House by quoting something from context unless 

he is prepared to table the document. The rule is so plain that the hon. member should table both 

documents, otherwise the House cannot be asked to place any credence in the documents whatever. The 

minister may say that someone told him this, but that is gossip as far as the House is concerned unless he 

is prepared to put the documents . . . 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Why don‟t you sit down . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The member has indicated that he is prepared to table the documents that he has in his 

hand, and that ends that part of the argument. As to the other part of the argument, if that was a point of 

order, I think it should have been raised at the time. The member did state that this was a confidential 

report. I can‟t recall just what specific part of that report he read if he read any at all. Now, I can‟t recall 

that, although he said he had a confidential report. I think this is where we have a question of a conflict 

of interests as to what is and is not in the interests of the public. At a previous session of the House I 

gave a ruling on this subject to the following effect: 

 

The basic rule governing the laying of state papers as stated in Erskine May, 17th Edition, page 458, is 

as 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1635 

follows: 

 

„A minister of the Crown is not at liberty to read or quote from a despatch or other state paper not 

before the House, unless he is prepared to lay it on the table‟. 

 

There is, however, a qualification to this rule, for while a State paper cited in debate ought to be tabled 

a minister can decline to table such a paper on the grounds that it is not in the public interest to make 

the document public. Herein lies the source of conflict between a minister‟s responsibility to the 

House and his responsibility to safeguard the public interest. The speaker must be careful that in 

defending the rights of the House he doesn‟t place the minister in a position in which he must act 

contrary to that interest. 

 

Mr. Walker: — I‟m sorry I didn‟t get the citation of the second reference. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The same holds true today as held then and the minister indicated that he is going to 

table the matter from which is he presently quoting . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Would Your Honour be kind enough to tell me the citation of the second authority he is 

quoting. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You will find it in the journals of the House, and I think I was the authority, but I will 

dig it up for you. It is a ruling that I made some time ago in regard to a similar set of circumstances. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Your Honour, may I just draw attention to a distinction between a ruling that the 

Crown is entitled to refrain from producing a document at the request of the House. It is undoubtedly the 

rules of the House that if a member of the House asks for the production of a document, the Crown may 

take the view that it is not in the public interest to disclose it, but I submit that is not the same situation 

as where a minister of the Crown himself puts the thing before the House by reading from it. The rule is 

quite different, then, because the minister has himself chosen to make it an issue, to put it before the 

House. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, may I speak in reply? 

 

In connection with the first document, I pointed out that this is not a state paper, it is a privately owned 

document belonging to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill Company and Parsons and Whittemore. A specific 

question was raised in the House as to whether or not a proper feasibility study had been made. I am 

trying to point out to the House that the people coming to Saskatchewan had made a proper feasibility 

study, and that they had nothing to hide. They had presented this in a confidential manner to the 

government and to myself, as a minister of the Crown. 

 

I don‟t think it would be in the interests of the province, it would not be in the interests of this company 

to make this costly document available to all competitors and to everyone else. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1636 

I did not quote from this document, all I said was that it covered a multitude of subjects and I said that 

there was a summary. I said that I did not pretend to understand it and I merely referred to the 

conclusion in the summary presented over here and what it indicated. All I did was say there was one 

paragraph that said in effect that the conclusion was that the mill was a feasible one and that there would 

be sufficient cash to meet all obligations and to show an excess. 

 

Now, as far as this other document is concerned, it may be described as a state paper, I have indicated 

that I am prepared to file it and I will file it now. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order . . . 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — You‟d like the pulp mill kept out. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — The very fact that the minister produced this document, the feasibility 

report, that he has it in his possession makes it certainly an official paper, otherwise he should not have 

it. If somebody stole it the members of the government would be the first to say this document, this state 

paper, has been stolen, and just by an interpretation of the term “state paper” I don‟t think we can get 

around it. Now, the minister did quote from it. He quoted the headings of the different chapters, all 

through the report first. Then he turned to the conclusions of the report which he said are in the 

beginning and he read a paragraph, at least one paragraph on the conclusions. Now, I agree that under 

the circumstances this document should not have been brought in it should be tabled, but I am willing to 

forgive the mistake made by the minister on this occasion. It was a mistake because he could expect that 

members would want it once that was done. He is not playing quite fair with Parsons and Whittemore if 

he agreed to keep this confidential when he did that. I am willing to forgive him this and accept the 

tabling of the later document, but just don‟t in the future start quoting documents if you are not prepared 

to table. 

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t quite agree with that view. I think this document 

should be tabled. The hon. minister mentioned that it wasn‟t tabled principally because competitors, etc., 

might get a hold of it. May I suggest there are no competitors now. The same company who made the 

feasibility study now have an agreement and large areas of land and other concessions for the 

construction of a pulp mill. Therefore, the feasibility study in terms of being of any value to competitors 

is redundant. Since the minister has brought the document into the House and read from it, the minister 

should table it. 

 

An Hon. Member:  Why don‟t you admit you don‟t want this Bill passed? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I am not going to discuss the matter of whether there 

was a mistake made or not in bringing 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1637 

in this feasibility study. All I can say is that I, or rather the government, was challenged to establish 

whether or not a feasibility study had been made. If I could not have come into this House and stated 

and demonstrated that there was, in fact, a feasibility study made, I would have probably been accused 

of taking a step that was unwarranted in giving and executing some of these. Now, all I wanted to point 

out is, Mr. Speaker, that there was a feasibility study made. It was a good one, and the study had 

demonstrated that a pulp mill was feasible. And it was stated that this would be of no value to others 

because there are no other competitors. Well, I would like to tell the House now that at this very moment 

there is a second feasibility study being made by another company in Saskatchewan and it is being made 

under a contract at a cost of not less than $300,000. Would it be fair that one company would have spent 

approximately that amount and we would make it available, even if it is in the same province, to another 

company? Mr. Speaker, work is going ahead so much faster in the last two years than during the last 

twenty years that they want to do anything that they possibly can to hamper the development of this 

mill, and there is no doubt about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — I am now going to proceed, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to refer to the report 

which I have tabled, a copy of which I have tabled. The whole project was given very careful study by 

this independent group of consultants and this is what it says: 

 

This is to present my comments on the contract price of $52,184,000 submitted by Parsons and 

Whittemore, Incorporated, for a 650 ton bleached kraft market pulp mill and on the process for that 

mill proposed for the Prince Albert Pulp Company. The price is to cover all capital charges for the 

complete mill as outlined in your letter of October 19th, but excuses the cost of the site itself, and 

financial charges such as interest during construction, working capital, etc. 

 

Now, this is the comment on the contract price: 

 

A common measure used to judge the comparative cost of a mill is the „cost per daily ton‟, that is the 

cost of the mill divided by the tons of product per day for which it is designed. In this case the cost per 

daily ton figure is $80,300 which is considered normal for current construction costs of a mill of this 

type. 

 

The report then refers to two lists attached to the report which compare construction costs of the Prince 

Albert mill with 12 mills in B.C., five in the U.S.A. and two in eastern Canada. 

 

It is interesting to note that the “cost per daily ton” of the P.A. mill is $12,000 below the average cost in 

B.C. — only three mills there are being constructed at a cost slightly less, with nine mills at costs 

ranging from $4,000 to $26,000 higher than the P.A. mill. A mill in Quebec is . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — May I ask the hon. member a question? Does this take into consideration the $5,000,000 

federal grant? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — This is taking the entire cost of $52,000,000 to build 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1638 

the mill and it has nothing to do with the $5,000,000 or where the money comes from. It is quite plain 

that this report says that the construction of this mill at a cost of $52,000,000 is a cost below the average 

cost that is being incurred by other similar mills elsewhere. 

 

Now, a mill in Quebec is being constructed at $7,000 less per daily ton; the one in Nova Scotia is being 

constructed at a cost of $20,000 more per ton than the P.A. mill. Then the report goes on to say: 

 

We submit these lists as support to our statement that the figure of $80,300 daily ton as quoted by 

Parsons and Whittemore, Incorporated, for the Prince Albert mill is normal and acceptable for today‟s 

construction costs of a bleached kraft market pulp mill. 

 

And then it goes on and concludes its report by saying this: 

 

Comments on process: 

 

You will recall that I scanned the preliminary flow diagrams for the Prince Albert mill in your 

presence in New York and gave you my verbal comments. My opinion is still the same, namely, that 

the proposed process is standard according to modern practice, and if translated into a mill using 

competent engineering and good quality construction, the mill should produce the desired quality pulp 

in the proposed quantity and at a competitive price. This assumes that the wood supply will be 

available according to . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Will the member tell us what he is quoting from? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — I am quoting from the document that I filed. I told you I was quoting from the 

document I filed. 

 

This assumes that the wood supply will be available according to species and quality and at the price 

per cord as described to me. The pieces of major equipment in the various departments are those 

commonly specified for the specific functions, and the process flow as proposed is that in general use 

in many mills. I saw no „experimental‟ features which, because of unknown performance, could cause 

trouble. 

 

Now, this is the report which we were able to obtain and which we obtained before these agreements 

were signed. This report has been placed on the table before the legislature. 

 

Now, finally the sixth question was: what concessions have been made by local government? The 

answer is, “none” other than fixing the yearly tax as set forth in the private Bill now before the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have attempted to briefly summarize the arrangements and agreements made or proposed 

in respect to this important industry. I have attempted to answer questions that have arisen in connection 

with this mill. I believe that this mill is the answer to the dream of many for many years on both sides of 

the House and certainly the dream of many in the northern part of Saskatchewan. I assure the House that 

the terms under which the 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1639 

mill is coming to Saskatchewan were not entered into lightly but following weeks and months of 

intensive study and negotiations and following major concessions in the stand originally taken by both 

sides. 

 

The passage of this Bill is the final step required to assure a pulp mill for Saskatchewan and I earnestly 

appeal to all members to support the Bill. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move second 

reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I will want to make some comments on the Bill. I 

want first to thank the hon. Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) for his presentation and for 

the pattern of his remarks by which he attempted to answer queries which were raised in this House 

previously and were raised as genuine queries. He has filed some additional material this morning, and 

he, a few days ago, filed some amendments to agreements which were earlier before the House and 

which I had had an opportunity to peruse. I apologize for not having had an opportunity to peruse the 

amendments fully and, of course, I have not perused the report which was filed this morning. 

Accordingly, I beg leave of the assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of bNo. 4 — An Act to amend The 

Securities Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, these amendments to The Securities Act are two small amendments. 

 

Section 2 of the Bill amends sub-section 2 of section 18. This sub-section now gives the registrar power 

to recommend to the Board of Revenue Commissioners that a refund of all or part of the fees would be 

made where an application is refused or a registration is cancelled. This amendment, the effect of the 

amendment, would be to extend the power to grant a refund in cases where an application is withdrawn 

by the applicant. It is really the same sort of situation whether an application is refused or the 

registration is cancelled. This would simply give us the same power. The Board of Revenue 

Commissioners would look into the circumstances and if we thought it was advisable we could refund 

the fees in the case of an application being withdrawn. 

 

Now, the other amendment, Mr. Speaker, sub-section 2 of section 20 at the present time contains a list of 

18 securities in respect of which registration is not required in order to trade. This amendment would 

add another type of securities to this list of exemption, securities of a private company which have not 

been previously distributed and where the securities are not offered for sale to the public. Mr. Speaker, 

in 1959 there was a similar type of exemption in the act. It was deemed at that time advisable to repeal a 

similar exemption as to private companies because of a case, a lawsuit before the courts in Ontario in 

which a prosecution had failed under the section. It has since been found that the case in Ontario was 

limited to its particular facts in that it only held that a single trade was insufficient to constitute offering 

to the public. We checked with the Ontario Securities Commission and they advised us that they haven‟t 

had any difficulty since with the exemption. They have been instituting 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1640 

prosecutions and getting convictions. 

 

Now, the reason why we want to put this exemption back in the act, Mr. Speaker, is that the lack of such 

an exemption with private companies may mean, I don‟t say it does mean, but it may mean that, for 

example, a father owning most of the shares in a private company, strictly speaking, may not be able to 

issue shares, treasury shares to his sons, for example, or to other members of his family without 

registration. This is because of the uncertainty sometimes as to what constitutes an offering to the public. 

It has been so represented to us and my officials have recommended to me that there may be a problem. 

There may be some question in private companies strictly speaking with this exemption in that there 

should be a prospectus and this was never intended, of course. 

 

We are putting this amendment back in. We have altered a few words in it to make it clear that the 

exemption is limited to sales of treasury stock by private companies which is what I think the former 

exemption was intended to cover and probably did cover, as a company cannot issue other shares than 

treasury shares. We have specifically stated in the proposed amendment that securities of a private 

company which have not been previously distributed are exempt. So with the explanation, Mr. Speaker, 

I now beg leave of the assembly to move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 83, An Act to amend The 

Magistrates Court Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this proposed amendment is patterned pretty well after section three of the 

Summary Convictions Act in Ontario which was amended in 1964. The main reason for amending this 

section is to make it clear that section 426 of the criminal code applies to prosecutions under provincial 

statutes. Now, section 426 of the criminal code says that: 

 

Every judge or magistrate has the same power and authority to preserve order in a court over which he 

presides as may be exercised by the superior Court of criminal jurisdiction in the province during the 

sittings thereof. 

 

It is by virtue of this power in section 426 of the code, Mr. Speaker, that judges can commit for 

contempt of court. Now, there was a case in Ontario in 1964, the case of Re — Harry Rose, and in that 

case it was held that a summary conviction court has no power to commit for contempt unless that 

power is expressly given by the statute. The court in that case pointed out that section 426 was not 

included in the applicable parts in sections set out in the Ontario Summary Convictions Act. So 

following this case before the courts in Ontario, the Ontario act was amended by including specifically 

section 426. 

 

Now, in Saskatchewan we have always considered the section 426 and other sections of the criminal 

code did apply in Saskatchewan and under the present section 26 of the act. However, we deem it 

advisable now to expressly set out in the Magistrate Courts Act those parts of the code that are to be 

applicable to summary conviction proceedings under provincial statutes and municipal bylaws. 

 

It is a clarification really to make it crystal clear that 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1641 

our courts of summary jurisdiction, our magistrate courts, do have the power to commit for contempt. 

This doesn‟t happy very often but every once in a while there is some suggestion that somebody before 

the court has been guilty of contempt and there is a bit of doubt as to whether or not the courts have 

power to commit. The other sections that are referred to and are made applicable to proceedings in each 

court, part 19 of the code as referred to in the amendment, that part contains sections having to do with 

procuring the attendance of witnesses. Part 23 contains sections having to do with proceedings in 

criminal matters by way of certiorari, habeas corpus, mandamus, and prohibition. We‟re making that 

whole part applicable, part 24 which is referred to as the part of the code dealing with summary 

convictions. Section 20 which is referred to is made applicable. It provides for the execution of a 

warrant or a summons on a Sunday or statutory holiday and for the granting of bail on such days. 

Section 21 deals with parties to offences. Section 22 deals with persons counselling other persons to be a 

party to an offence and makes such persons guilty of an offence. Section 446 is made applicable insofar 

as it relates to obtaining the attendance of witnesses who are in custody in a jail or similar institution. 

Section 621 provides for the court having a discretion as to whether punishment is to be by way of find 

or imprisonment and also for the court making a number of sentences cumulative. 

 

Section 624 provides that a sentence commences when it is imposed unless the statute provides 

otherwise. It also provides that the time when the person is out on bail does not count as part of the 

imprisonment. It also provides that the sentence only commences when the person is taken into custody 

under the warrant. Section 625, which is made applicable, deals with the effect of a part payment of a 

fine, provision for program rating of the number of days where part payment is made. The new 

subsection two of section 26, which is in the amendment, provides for an appeal to the Court of Appeal 

for a conviction for contempt against the punishment imposed. We feel this provision is necessary in 

order to provide for an appeal in the case of contempt of court committed in the face of the court. 

Subsection one of section nine in the criminal code limits the field to one against punishment and we 

deem it advisable to provide for an appeal against the conviction in the case of a conviction by a judge 

of the magistrate‟s court. Section three of the Bill provides for a new section 40 which enables the 

Lieutenant Governor to make regulations governing hours of work, holidays, and so on and generally for 

carrying out the provisions of the act . I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the Magistrates‟ Association has 

asked for this section three that these matters be dealt with by regulations under their act  rather than to 

have them dealt with under the Public Service Act. With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of 

the assembly to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 84, An Act to amend The 

Provincial Magistrates Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, these amendments are identical with the amendment to the Magistrates‟ Courts 

Act. As most of you will know we have judges in the magistrate‟s court and we also have provincial 

magistrates. The amendments for this act  covering provincial magistrates are exactly the same as the 

amendments which I have just explained in connection with the Magistrates‟ Courts Act. Mr. Speaker, I 

beg leave of the assembly to move second reading 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1642 

of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 86, An Act to amend The 

Interpretation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a continuation of the same amendments. This Bill amends section 27 of the 

Interpretation Act and is necessary in order to make the same sections to the criminal code applicable to 

justices‟ of peace as are made applicable to judges of the magistrates court and provincial magistrates. 

The only difference between these amendments and the last two are that section 426 which provides for 

contempt of court proceedings is not made applicable to justices of the peace. We feel that perhaps 

justices of the peace should not have contempt powers. They have all the other powers, the same as the 

other two courts, but we felt that probably it wasn‟t a good idea to give justices of the peace contempt 

powers so we haven‟t made section 426 applicable to justices of peace. Other than that one change it‟s 

the same as the other two act  s. I beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 85, An Act to amend the 

Surrogate Court Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a small amendment to the Surrogate Court Act which has been asked for by 

the surrogate court judges. All it does is that it increases the number of judges on the Surrogate Court 

Board which is responsible for setting the rules for the surrogate court and providing the schedule of 

fees for the surrogate court. It simply increases the number of judges from three to five and makes 

provision for a majority acting when there are more than two present. It also provides for payment of 

reasonable expenses incurred by members attending the meeting of the board. They have felt that they 

could do the job better if they had a board consisting of a chairman and four members rather than simply 

three. So the purpose of this amendment is to comply with their request. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the 

assembly to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. G. J. Trapp (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No.87, An Act to amend The 

Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendment here would give to the government the legal right to pay to the 

Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation the teachers‟ portion of the accrued premium surplus of the 

Teachers‟ Group Life Insurance Fund. The Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation will use this money to 

pay extended sick leave benefits to teachers. Earlier this year when it was desirable to pay these funds 

over to the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation, it was found there was no agreement or legal basis to 

pay this money to the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation on behalf of the teachers of Saskatchewan. It 

could have been returned to the individual teacher but this was never the intention. So this amendment is 

needed so that this amount of money can be paid over to the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation on 

behalf of the teachers and it is to 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1643 

be used for extended sick leave benefits. There never was any doubt in my mind or anyone that had 

anything to do with it that this money belonged to the teachers in the proportion in which they paid the 

premiums. The other portion belonged to the government. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to 

move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. D. W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Would the minister permit one question? Is this for the teachers 

being superannuated due to disability? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — No. This is to do with the group life insurance. You understand, there was a . . .I‟ll put it 

this way. The teachers had been paying, we knew this, more than necessary to keep the funds solvent in 

the group insurance. Now, there is an accrued premium surplus and this is being divided proportionately, 

the government‟s portion and the teacher‟s portion, and it is to give a legal basis for paying this portion 

that belongs to the teachers to the Teachers Federation which will pay extended sick leave benefits to its 

members. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — On what basis will they be paying teachers? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I cannot state right offhand, but I can get it for you if you like. The rates of pay — this is 

not involved in this amendment mind you — the rates of pay are not involved. The amount here is to be 

paid over to the Federation to pay extended sick leave benefits. Do you understand? They are now 

paying the rates, by the way, since last September. The Teachers‟ Federation has borrowed money and it 

is paying these sick leave benefits now, out to a few teachers in the province who have need. You are 

allowed 20 sick days in a year and you may have accumulative sick leave buy beyond that this fund will 

pay the sick leave. I think, up to 25 months. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, I am still not clear. Under the School Act the teacher is allowed 20 

days every year sick leave with pay. Teachers have through collective bargaining accumulative sick 

leave up to a maximum of 200 days. Will this fund then be used to pay for teachers who are sick over 

and above the 200 days, if they have so bargained? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — That‟s right. This is an extra insurance benefit. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — On a point of order. Is the member closing the debate now? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I think it‟s a question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If it‟s a question it might as well be pursued in committee. But if anybody wishes to 

make a speech this is his prerogative at the present time. I have just put an end to this line of 

questioning. This is something that can take place in committee. If the member from Redberry (Mr. 

Michayluk) wishes to make a speech on this, this is his privilege now. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll bring this up in committee. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1644 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. J. C. McIsaac (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 89 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Municipal Advisory Commission Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the act   before us is an act to amend the Saskatchewan Municipal Advisory 

Commission Act. As of the beginning of this year there were no members of the commission and yet the 

act   in its present form states that there shall be a commission. If is felt that the services of a 

commission may again be required to some future time and therefore rather than repeal the act  , it is 

being amended so that the existence of the commission is not mandatory but permissive. I explained in 

an earlier debate and I can briefly review here some of the reasoning behind the move that was made at 

the end of the year to dissolve the membership of the commission. I would again like to express my 

appreciation of the work performed by members of the commission during its lifetime. 

 

As many of the members might know, this commission was originally established by an act of the 

legislature in 1952. The terms of reference were very broad as set out in the act ; to conduct research in 

municipal matters; to consult with and make recommendations to municipal authorities on any matter 

relating to municipal administration; to examine the problem of obtaining additional sources of revenue 

for municipalities; and generally speaking to do a number of other things relating to municipal 

government including dealing from time to time with special problems referred to the commission by 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs. All in all very broad powers. It appears that the commission would be 

able to carry on studies in almost any matter affecting municipal government. However, during the last 

four, or five, or six years, it‟s fair to say that almost all of the time of the commission has been devoted 

to the question of negotiating locations of grid roads with rural municipalities. The initial ten-year grid 

road program has now been completed and we are beginning another phase of construction. It is our 

feeling at this time that a new approach must be taken to the determination of grid road locations, an 

approach which rationalizes the routes on the basis of traffic volume. Therefore, we feel that the Grid 

Road Authority itself is best equipped with its trained personnel in the field to carry out this function. In 

ana  that we passed earlier, the Grid Road Authority was given this task. The commission‟s main 

function of undertaking research in municipal problems was, I believe it is fair to say, largely neglected 

in the past, perhaps chiefly because proper research staff was never assigned to it. As a matter of fact , 

the entire department has not had adequate research staff. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that members on both 

sides would agree that there is no use having duplication of research staff, and this year we intend to 

increase the research staff in the department itself. If at any time a task presents itself that could be best 

handled by an independent commission then a commission will be appointed to carry out such duties as 

may be assigned to it. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 91 — An Act 

to amend The Telephone Department Act. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1645 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill designed to amend the Telephone Department Act. As members will 

recall I announced in the House that we had launched a program to bring telephone services to the 

un-served areas of the province. We had hoped this year to pick up the costs of this service from the 

earnings of Saskatchewan Government Telephones. We have set aside some $500,000 for this purpose 

in our present planning but the requests are coming in for this type of service from the vast majority of 

all of the un-served areas. It would look as if this program will receive wide acceptance. It indicates that 

there is a genuine need for this type of program to bring telephone service to the rural areas. Because of 

this it may be that the demand will exceed the financial capacity of SGT to carry from retained earnings. 

Rather than have the program delayed or bogged down because of insufficient funds available in SGT, 

we are asking in this Bill the right of the legislature to vote certain specific sums to this program. That, 

in essence, Mr. Speaker, is the substance of the Bill and I beg leave of the assembly to move second 

reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 92 — An Act 

to amend the Mineral Taxation Act. 

 

He said: This, Mr. Speaker, is an Act to amend the Mineral Taxation Act. The proposed amendments 

have been designed to clarify certain sections in the act . There is some question as to how you assess 

the mineral tax against a fraction of an acre. So an amendment is proposed in one section clarifying that 

a fraction of an acre shall be taxed as a whole acre, not as a fraction of an acre. Three cents an acre, 

one-third of an acre as some maintain is one cent. It‟s not clear that it should be three cents for a fraction 

of an acre. 

 

Under section 32 of the present act , a notice that unless the arrears of taxes be paid on or before a 

certain date specified, must be mailed. In the notice, it says: It shall not be less than six months after the 

date of the mailing of the notice. Now, there is some question here as to the precise meaning of six 

months. If your notice, for example, stated February 10th and it was mailed that day and in the notice it 

stated that if your arrears weren‟t paid on or before August 10th, they would be forfeited. There is some 

question whether that is a clear six months, from February 10th to August 10th. I find on looking back 

over the records that this has been the general course followed, namely to take six months hence from 

the same date. There is some question whether or not it is legally proper because there may not be 

exactly six months and one day and this is to clarify that the six months as so specified in the date shall 

be the time necessary for notice. Such period as this would be deemed to be sufficient for the purpose of 

this act  and make no mistake that this is the intent of the act . 

 

Section 32 of the present act  also says that the mineral tax administrator shall cause a notice of arrears 

and a forfeiture for failure to pay the arrears to be sent by registered mail to the owner of the minerals. It 

does not, however, spell out any particular address of the registered owner. This puts a heavy onus on 

the tax administrator to be sure that he had the proper address of the owner. The amendment proposes 

that the address of the owner as registered in the Land titles Office shall be the address for service of 

notices. If it has been mailed to the address as shown 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1646 

by an abstract in the Land Titles Office, then that should be sufficient to meet the requirements of the 

act. But it also says that the tax administrator may, if he knows the present address of the owner and it is 

different from that shown in the Land Titles Office, send it to the address which he knows to be the 

correct one. 

 

The new section serves to validate a notice properly sent in accordance with the act , notwithstanding 

any allegation by the owner that he did not receive the notice of the tax arrears, stating that failure to pay 

will result in the forfeiture of the minerals. Now, some may maintain perhaps that they did not receive 

the notice. I want to clarify this: if it is sent by registered mail to the address shown in the Land titles 

Office, that is evidence that the letter went forward and if it has been returned, it is assumed to be 

received. With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly not going to oppose the Bill because I 

believe, as the minister stated, it is clarifying, it is a housekeeping Bill, but we will want to ask some 

questions to get details on each clause when it is in committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 93 — An Act 

to amend The Mineral Resources Act. 

 

He said: This, Mr. Speaker, is an Act to amend The Mineral Resources Act. I think it is complementary 

to the other act  which permitted the setting up of voluntary units. These amendments provide in the 

Mineral Resources Act that the minister may enter a voluntary unit on behalf of the Crown land in that 

particular unit. If we have some Crown land in a voluntary unit that is being formed we have to sign as 

well as the participants in a unit because we are a royalty owner. It gives the minister the right to sign on 

behalf of that Crown land within a voluntary unit. If he agrees that the tract factors and working 

arrangement and sharing of profits are agreeable to the department and to the minister, then he may sign 

on its behalf. If he doesn‟t then, of course, he can withhold his signature the same as any other 

individual. Of course, it will then be sent to the Oil and Gas Conservation Board for a public hearing and 

become an ordered unit. It is just simply to permit the minister to sign on behalf of the Crown if there is 

a quarter section or half section of Crown land in a unit that is being organized in a voluntary unit. I beg 

leave of the assembly to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I have some doubts about this Bill. I am not too sure 

that we are justified in giving these additional powers to the minister. To deal with land and property 

and royalties in the case of unit operations of an oil field at the present time, the royalty has to be settled 

by Order in Council. I think we are getting very close to the position in this where the minister‟s actions 

in regard to these agreements concerning lands probably should be subject to the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council, but we will be able to discuss that further in committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

The assembly recessed at 12:30 o‟clock p.m. until 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1647 

 

WELCOME TO VISITORS 
 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a group of 

students from my constituency from the town of Alvena, the Alvena High School, together with their 

principal, Mr. Bob Saborney. They are touring the city and they will be in the Legislative Building this 

afternoon. I am sure you and all the members of the assembly will join with me in wishing them a 

pleasant stay here and a safe trip home. 

 

Mr. H. A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to a group 

of boys and girls in the first row in the Speaker‟s gallery. They are from the Morris 4H Home craft class 

and they are accompanied by Mr. & Mrs. Murdens, Mr. and Mrs. Rayner, Mr. & Mrs. Soelid, Mrs. 

Stone and Mr. Johnson, who are the drivers and attendants of these children. I would like to pay tribute 

to all the 4H people that do take the time in Saskatchewan to teach and to organize these things because 

I think these children are learning a lot in their 4H Clubs. We hope that these children have a great time 

— they have said so already — and that they have an enjoyable afternoon and a fine trip home. 

 

Mr. J. E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, there is supposed to be a group of children 

here from Henry Kelsey School in Saskatoon. Perhaps they haven‟t arrived so I will take a page out of 

the book of the member from Moose Jaw yesterday when he said welcome to the students from 

Saskatoon wherever you are. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 82 — An Act respecting 

Home-owner Grants. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as hon. members know, the purpose of this Bill is to bring relief to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers, and to encourage home ownership. Our government has felt for a good number of years that 

local government taxes have reached the danger point. Earlier this session we attempted to bring indirect 

relief to the local government taxpayer, by increasing grants of various kinds to municipalities and 

school units. in addition, this Bill brings or provides direct aid. 

 

In the coming year these Home-owner grants will be paid to most rural and urban home-owners. The 

amount of the grant will by $50, or one-half of the property tax, whichever is the lesser. We think that 

some families will have their property taxes reduced by as much as 50 per cent. On the average, we 

expect that this Bill will provide a seven per cent reduction across the province. 

 

As I said during the Budget Debate, we think it will cost the Provincial Treasurer between $8,000,000 

and $10,000,000. The Royal Commission on Taxation, to which members opposite frequently make 

reference, suggested that immediate steps be taken to shift the burden of property taxes, which is 

regarded as one of the most regressive taxes, to other fields. This we are accomplishing, or trying to 

accomplish by the Bill before us. We go even further 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1648 

than the Royal Commission‟s recommendation, in that the overall tax burden of Saskatchewan citizens 

has been reduced rather than merely shifted from municipal taxes to provincial taxes. I propose to deal 

with the details of this legislation in committee. However, perhaps at this stage I should set down a few 

of the principles involved and some of the mechanics. 

 

The proposed act  sets out a number of conditions of eligibility for the Home-owner grant. First, the 

applicant must own his own dwelling which is affixed to land, and reside in it for the greater part of the 

year. It is recognized that there are differences in assessment practices between rural and urban areas. In 

urban areas the property tax is assessed on the land, plus the dwelling which is affixed to the land. 

 

The eligible application in urban areas must own the dwelling and the land on which the dwelling is 

affixed. In rural areas the property tax is assessed on the land, and the farm dwelling is exempt. The 

farmer, who owns and resides in a dwelling located outside an urban area, will be permitted to designate 

any parcel of rural land which he owns and operates for his farming operation and in respect of which he 

has paid property tax. It has been drawn to our attention, Mr. Speaker, that some farmers own their 

dwellings but do not hold a title to the parcel of land on which the dwelling is affixed. A house 

amendment has been prepared which will enable a farmer who owns and resides in a dwelling on rural 

land, title of which is held by some other owner, to obtain a Home-owner grant in respect of general 

property taxes paid on farm land which he owns and operates. 

 

Secondly, he must give evidence that he has been assessed and has paid the current year‟s taxes on his 

property, or paid an amount at least equal to the current year‟s taxes. 

 

Thirdly, an individual and family who owns and resides in a multiple purpose dwelling, such as a 

boarding house, rooming houses and small apartment blocks, will be eligible for a Home-owner grant. 

However, hotel or motel owners and owners of large apartment blocks of seven or more self-contained 

units will not be eligible. 

 

Fourth, the applicant must be a resident of Saskatchewan; a valid hospital and medical card will serve as 

proof of Saskatchewan residence. However, again a House amendment has been prepared to ensure 

eligibility of Armed Service and RCMP personnel with no dependents who are not required to pay the 

hospital and Medicare premium tax. 

 

Fifth, the Home-owner grant will be limited to one grant per family unit or household. 

 

Six, only one Home-owner grant per year will be paid for each eligible resident. 

 

Seven, as I mentioned in the Budget Speech, Saskatchewan residents in the city of Lloydminster and 

residents in the outlying area will not be eligible for the Home-owner grant. The exact boundaries will 

be described in the regulations and will approximate a radius of about six miles surrounding the city of 

Lloydminster. Even this exclusion will not completely offset the estimated tax loss of approximately 

$140,000 in Lloydminster. We estimate that approximately 600 homeowners in the city of Lloydminster 

and surrounding area will not receive the Home-owner grant. However, the government will consider 

this arrangement as a solution to the tax problem in Lloydminster until such time as a more 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1649 

effective alternative can be adopted by the city of Lloydminster in consultation with the provincial 

governments of Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that we have had a number of questions about trailers. It is the intention in the 

regulations to permit trailer owners to receive the Home-owner grant if they pay local taxes. If, on the 

other hand, they do not pay local taxes but merely a rental to a particular owner of a trailer park, they 

will not receive the grant. 

 

The amount of the tax, as I said, will be determined by making it $50 or one-half of the current year‟s 

taxes, whichever is less. Local improvement taxes and other special purpose tax levies will be excluded 

from the definition of a general property tax. The reason these types of taxes are excluded is that such 

taxes are generally not of a permanent nature. A person would be discouraged from prepaying local 

improvement taxes if he was allowed each year to include local improvement tax in the general property 

tax, for the purpose of obtaining the maximum grant. 

 

The Department of Municipal Affairs has obtained a qualified official to design the procedures and 

forms, and to recruit and train the clerical staff required to process applications for the Home-owner 

grant. These procedures will be designed in consultation with the SARM and SUMA, and we will 

announce when applications can be submitted to the Department of Municipal Affairs. I believe it is the 

intention of the department to have each homeowner pay his local taxes. The Municipal Secretary in the 

rural areas will forward receipts at the end of each month to the department. 

 

To conclude, I want to repeat what I said in my Budget Speech. The Home-owner grant is made possible 

by the industrial development and diversification which has recently taken place in Saskatchewan. The 

resulting buoyancy of the economy has made it possible for this Liberal government to pay a dividend to 

the people of Saskatchewan. We hope, of course, that the amount of the dividend can be gradually 

increased as our province moves ahead economically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that I favour this Bill. This is one 

way in which money can be gotten into the hands of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and, goodness 

knows, since the Liberals have come into office they sure need it. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I applaud that. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Without this bill which is before us, the Budget which was brought down would have 

added a good deal to the tax load of the ratepayers. Without this, it surely would have. There were more 

tax additions than there were tax reductions, aside from the $8,000,000 which is outlined in this Bill. 

And even with this $8,000,000, if you take into consideration other tax increases by the Saskatchewan 

government, such as Medicare and so on, and when we consider the increases in property taxes which 

are very likely to come and will undoubtedly come, it is quite sure that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

will be paying more this year, even 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1650 

with this Bill, than they have previously. So I can‟t see, Mr. Speaker, how I can very well help but 

support this Bill, because the taxpayers of Saskatchewan need this money. 

 

I kind of snicker a little softly to myself, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier introduces it by saying that the 

reason they are able to do this is because of the great increase in productivity in the province when DBS 

shows that in general the average income in the province is down last year and the year before compared 

with what it was back in 1963; and a good many other things prove otherwise. It is still good for a little 

merriment for the Premier to get up and make statements like this. You know it kind of makes it 

interesting to be in the legislature. 

 

But there are some things about the Bill, Mr. Speaker, that I don‟t just care for. One point I would like to 

make is that in this Bill, in regard to the small taxpayer, there are instances in which when complete 

taxes are only $50 he only gets $25 help. In the province of British Columbia, for instance, they pay all 

the taxes except for one dollar. The taxpayer has to pay one dollar. And this would be a good deal more 

beneficial to the little taxpayer, the man who actually needs it possibly more than the larger one. I think 

this is something possibly the government should take a look at: that, instead of only paying half of the 

taxes for the little fellow, he will only be getting $25, they should give the full $50 to the persons who 

need it. This is one thing that I don‟t like about it. 

 

Another thing I don‟t like about it is that it doesn‟t pay this $50 grant in regard to the people of 

Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, two wrongs don‟t make a right. The fact is agreed that the people of 

Lloydminster should be paying their taxes as well as anybody else should, but not paying them this grant 

by way of retribution, I don‟t think is going to help the overall situation. In the first place, it is going to 

be the little people who are hurt again. There are those people who buy enough taxable products in a 

year that the taxes that they would normally pay, that they fail to pay, amount to more than $50 and they 

are going to be ahead of the game, even if they don‟t receive this 450. But the little people who don‟t, 

under any circumstances, even if they paid all their tax — and many of them will be paying part of their 

taxes at least — even if they paid all the sales tax that there is payable on their small incomes, it would 

not amount to $50. And these people are going to be hurt because the Premier is prepared to take it out 

on the city of Lloydminster in regard to this and I don‟t think this is fair. 

 

Another thing too that this will not clear up is in regard to the trades people in outlying areas. As I 

understand, one of the troubles which we have had up there is that the people in the small towns and 

such around Lloydminster have a habit of going to Lloydminster where they are able to buy things 

without tax. This has been quite a thorn in the side of the small shopkeepers in this area. But this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, is not going to help this in the least. These people are still going to go to Lloydminster to 

obtain any tax-free items and they are going to have to do it now in order to break even because the 

province isn‟t going to be paying them this $50 grant. They are going to feel it is a matter of religious 

duty that they go and get this tax-free gasoline and get these tax-free materials in order to make up for 

what they are being robbed of by the provincial government. I think the whole situation, instead of being 

improved, is going to deteriorate. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1651 

There is another matter on which I would like to speak and this is in regard to renters. I am very pleased 

to hear the Premier say what he did just now. I am very glad to hear that at least some of the renters are 

going to be able to obtain this grant. I hadn‟t gotten this information earlier . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That is not correct. Where did you get that? 

 

Mr. Wood: — I thought that was what you said. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Most certainly not. No. I said the RCMP and Armed Forces who own their own 

homes would get it but no renters will get it under this Bill. 

 

Mr. Wood: — I thought you indicated that in some of the blocks there would be, only not in the larger 

blocks. I‟m sorry, I misunderstood. Then my earlier fears in regard to this Bill are still here. I was 

thinking that the Premier had said something today that it was going to mean that the renters were going 

to be able to obtain help under this Bill. Now, whereas the city of Lloydminster is cut out entirely, if this 

is true that no renters are able to obtain assistance under this Bill, then 40 per cent of the people of the 

city which I represent are going to be cut out, not the total city like Lloydminster is, but 40 per cent. I 

think this is something that I, as a representative of that city, should stand up and say something about. I 

don‟t think this can be just blandly brushed aside. 

 

I have before me here a breakdown, according to the census of Canada, of the percentage of people who 

are renters throughout Saskatchewan, the average I believe is 23.3 per cent. This means that for all of 

Saskatchewan very nearly a quarter are not receiving any help under this Bill which is brought before us 

today. Mr. Speaker, again these are the people who need the help, the Metis people and the people who 

can‟t afford to own a home. These are the ones that are being left out. They will still have to pay their 

sales tax; they will still have to pay the taxes of the province to help to support this payment which is 

going to others who don‟t need it nearly as badly as they do. In rural Saskatchewan I see they are 17 per 

cent; in the farm portion of rural Saskatchewan, 11 ½ per cent; and in the non-farm portion of the rural 

area, 24.7 per cent. So there is even a good percentage of the rural people who won‟t be qualifying for 

this tax, this grant. Pardon me, we get so used to talking about taxes here, that is what we get most of the 

time, that I forget to use the word “grant” when we come to one that has a grant. in the urban areas the 

overall average is 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and in those cities over 5,000 the average is 32 per cent. in 

the city of Estevan there are 27.4 per cent of the people who are renters. In Lloydminster, I guess this is 

beside the point really, but just for interest sake, it is 27.4 per cent. In Estevan it is 32.1; in Lloydminster 

27.4; in Melville 27.6; in Moose Jaw 22.3; in North Battleford, 34.9; in Prince Albert 33.8; in Regina, 

32.9; in Saskatoon 29.1; in Swift Current, 39.5; Weyburn, 34; and in Yorkton, 31.7. So in these cities, 

Mr. Speaker, over 30 per cent of the people in these areas are not obtaining this grant and I think this is a 

very poor situation. I feel that the fact that this large percentage of the people of our province are being 

bypassed, while they are still paying taxes the same as other people are, means that this Bill is unfair. It 

is unfair to these people 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1652 

and I think this could be avoided. 

 

As nearly as I can ascertain from what the Premier said today the municipalities will be sending the tax 

receipts in to the Department of Municipal Affairs which will notify the Treasurer‟s office and the 

Treasurer‟s office, after the taxpayer has made direct application to the Premier, will make payment of 

$50 or what portion of it the small people are able to obtain. I think that this is rather a poor way of 

doing things. I think it is a wasteful thing to first collect the money from people by way of taxes and 

after taxing it away, then return it to them in this manner. I think that it could be done in a much less 

complicated and easier manner. If, for instance, these monies which have been obtained from the people 

of the province — if they are going to help the municipalities and help the municipal taxpayer — could 

be paid directly in a lump sum to the municipalities. this would save a great deal of red tape and I think 

it would be a good deal better. 

 

There is one thing that has not been cleared up to my satisfaction and that is as to whether or not this 

grant is going to be taxable for income tax purposes. This is something that we can bring up in the 

Committee of the Whole, but at the present time I have not been satisfied by reading the Bill that this 

grant is not going to be taxable for income tax purposes, that is the money that is turned back to the 

homeowner. If he has to pay taxes in the first place, then sends it to the Provincial Treasurer, gets it back 

as a grant and then has to pay income tax on it again, this is going to be rather a serious situation, it 

would appear to me. 

 

I think too, that instead of going through the roundabout rigmarole that is proposed in this Bill, when the 

municipal secretary receives the taxes from the individual, he might make a note in his receipt book to 

the effect that it has been paid. He will then know how much, according to the act , the taxpayer is 

supposed to have deducted from his taxes because of this Bill and he could make the deduction right 

there in the municipal office and save a good deal of this roundabout method of the taxpayers having to 

make application to the Premier and so on. The deduction could be made directly in the municipal office 

when the tax is being paid. This would be the end of it as far as the taxpayer is concerned and he 

wouldn‟t have to go through all this rigmarole. then the municipality could requisition the minister and 

this could be handled in this manner. I think it would be a good deal easier and a good deal less 

expensive to the people of the province and with a good deal more sense to it than what is proposed by 

this Bill. I will say, of course, that it wouldn‟t have the political impact that this Bill will give to these 

payments by having a cheque directly from the Premier‟s hands with the Premier‟s signature on it in the 

hand of the taxpayer. This, I will admit, does have some very strong political kudos for it, but I think this 

should be foregone due to the fact that we could save some money for the people of the province in 

setting this up in a realistic manner. 

 

They have had these grants in other provinces — Saskatchewan is following suit in regard to this matter 

— but I would like, if I may, to make a few comments on what has been said in other provinces about 

them. I have in my hand a report on provincial-municipal financial relations as prepared by the 

executive of the Union of British Columbia Municipalities and presented in abridged form to the 59th 

Annual Convention of the Union of British Columbia Municipalities, September, 1962. The proposals 

with regard to the 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1653 

Bill — they are not just proposals in British Columbia — there the regulations in regard to the payment 

of this householder grant are somewhat different to what are proposed in this Bill, so all the things 

which are said in the section of this booklet about these householder grants are not applicable in this 

case. But I could, with your consent, Mr. Speaker, read the concluding paragraph of this portion which 

deals with householder grants: 

 

Whether or not the provincial government can be persuaded to give effect to its own statements is 

possibly a question outside the terms of reference. But, it is not outside the terms of reference to say 

and to say categorically that unless the Home-owner grant can be fitted into the school finance 

structure on the lines of the compromise proposed, so that it serves a definite and a reasonable fiscal 

purpose, it will remain what it is now, an insuperable obstacle to the pursuit of the Union of British 

Columbia Municipalities‟ search for a better deal for municipal taxpayers. 

 

They don‟t think very much of it there, where they have had it for a good many years. they are not 

happy about this way of handling the taxes, the moneys which are collected from the taxpayers of 

British Columbia. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to quote, if I may, from a clipping from the Calgary Herald of 

Saturday, February 26th, 1966. It has in here a few excerpts from the speech of one Bill Switzer, a 

Liberal who was just recently elected in Edson. It is in regard to his first major speech in the House and 

it goes on — there is one little excerpt that I think the members of this House might be interested in: 

 

He describes the government‟s homeowner bonus as a handout and hinted that the Liberals are going 

to offer some alternatives to ease the burden of property taxation. 

 

I am glad the Liberals elsewhere are able to see through this sort of hoax that is being perpetrated upon 

the people of Saskatchewan in regard to this Bill. 

 

Mr. I. H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Are you going to vote against it? 

 

Mr. Wood: — No, I am going to vote for it, as I said earlier, as I think this is the only way that the 

people of this province are going to get their money out of this government, but I just don‟t quite like the 

way they are going about it and I have a few succinct things to say about it as we are going along. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — Good old honest Woody! 

 

Mr. Wood: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that as I said earlier, this tax, this grant, should be given to renters 

because they pay taxes too. Saying that the renters do not pay taxes is pure sophistry because renters do 

pay taxes and same as anybody else does. They not only pay the taxes on the House in which they live 

but they also pay the upkeep and the capital cost of this House. they also pay profit to the owner. These 

people are the people who need the help more than anyone else and they are the ones who are not getting 

it. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1654 

I think the fact that this Bill does not take in renters is a great weakness in the Bill which should be 

remedied. It is not something I can move any motion about because it would mean an extra charge upon 

the treasury of the province, but I think the hon. members opposite should definitely take this into 

consideration, that they are leaving out the people of this province who need the most help and are 

by-passing them in this way. They may not numerically be as numerous as those who do own houses 

and thus may not be as important politically. But simply because they are not important politically does 

not, I think, excuse the fact that they should be treated in this manner. 

 

Now, I think there are inadequacies in this Bill. I think this money could be handled in a better way, as I 

pointed out, and I will be having some more things to say in this regard when the Bill is in committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say immediately that, as I said previously in the 

House, I oppose this Bill on every fundamental count. It is not only wrong in principle; it is not only 

inconsistent with the jurisdictional responsibilities of a provincial government or a municipality to 

attempt to make a redistribution of wealth, but to do so in a manner as discriminatory as that mentioned 

by the hon. member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood), makes it entirely worse. I am also not impressed by 

the basis on which these grants are being paid. The impression is being left that this after all is not tax 

money; furthermore, it is being handed back to a special group of taxpayers regardless of their ability, 

their wealth or economic position. I said previously in the House and I say again that it would have been 

much more appropriate and more responsible had the government used this money to do such things as 

build a university hospital in southern Saskatchewan, or raise the Old Age Pension and not vote against 

it as they did in this legislature; to do something for those people in great need. This certainly, this type 

of redistribution does not do anything for people in great need, Mr. Speaker. But his argument was that 

the buoyancy of the economy makes possible this beneficence, sort of “from the Premier of the province 

direct from me to you, Mr. Homeowner, as a means of reducing your taxes”. I said before, Mr. Speaker, 

and I repeat again, this will not reduce property taxes in Saskatchewan. This is nothing more than a 

political handout consistent with the type and make-up of the Premier of this province. 

 

I oppose it, too, because it not only discriminates in other areas, but the Premier (Mr. Thatcher), this 

magician, this man of wonder, who in the space of two years can make our economy so buoyant that he 

can make this Home-owner grant, is unable to solve a comparative miniature tax problem in 

Lloydminster area and has to, in his frustration, discriminate against those people in the worst possible 

manner, thereby not correcting or solving anything at all, Mr. Speaker, but heaping fuel on the problem 

which is already serious enough and has grown increasingly serious since this so-called new Liberal 

administration assumed office in this province. 

 

I want to draw to the attention of the House and of the Premier that the contributions made by the people 

in the Lloydminster area to the economic prosperity of Saskatchewan are tremendous. They were the 

ones that pioneered in oil development. As a result of the exploratory and development work done in 

that 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1655 

area this gave stimulus to further oil development and exploration throughout the province. 

Lloydminster was the first urban centre of any size in Saskatchewan — if not the only one — had 

natural gas services. As a result of this contribution, in the area of resource development, plus 

agricultural development, these people have contributed immensely to the general economic wealth of 

Saskatchewan. In terms of revenue from these oil resources, I say to the Premier, you can very easily say 

how much you might be losing in sales tax, but tell the House too how much oil revenue you get from 

that area of the province as well, and it will increase in the years ahead. Then, the crude oil from the 

Lloydminster area is being conveyed by pipeline to the Trans-Canada pipeline and to eastern Canada. 

these are some of the contributions made to the economy of Saskatchewan by these pioneer 

forward-looking people in this part of the province. 

 

I might also say this that the people in that entire area pay the sales tax on automobiles, which are 

bought in great quantities because of the prosperity there. There is no loss there and this is the big 

revenue item. the Premier doesn‟t mention this at all. Of course, he glosses over entirely the serious 

problem that confronts the merchants in the city of Lloydminster whom he requires to collect this tax. 

The merchants and residents, Mr. Speaker, did not create the tax enforcement problem in that area. The 

responsibility for correcting this problem rests on the shoulders of the provincial government. I say this 

because the people of this area should not be discriminated against by virtue of their geographic position 

because of having originally settled at or near the Saskatchewan-Alberta boundary, where the city is cut 

through the middle by the 4th meridian. This is no fault of the people in that area. The complex 

problems created in that area were also created by provincial law. This was recognized when both 

Saskatchewan and Alberta gave legal status by special clauses in the charter of the city of Lloydminster, 

which, through no fault of its own, placed this city and the surrounding area in a most unique position. 

This is recognized in the charter granted to that city. 

 

The Premier has merely taken advantage of this situation by refusing to assume responsibility for 

rectifying a growing tax collection problem. It is an accepted taxation principle that the application of 

taxation should not discriminate in terms of the application and enforcement. Neither should it 

discriminate against merchants who place their business in jeopardy by asking them to perform the 

impossible task of collecting such taxes when their own business competitors across the street are free 

from this obligation and when their customers can so easily purchase in a tax-free area whether by 

choice or for other business reasons. There is an unique situation in the Lloydminster area and it is 

beyond question that the government itself must accept its responsibility to collect the now higher sales 

tax and gas tax, as it does in other unusual circumstances. May I give an example, Mr. Speaker. Let‟s 

assume that my wife, if she had the money, and if I were, I suppose, generous enough, purchased a 

$2,000,000 - $2,000 (God help me) mink coat in Manitoba or Alberta and came into Saskatchewan, and 

this was brought to the attention of the taxation officials, they would collect that sales tax. I am saying, 

Mr. Speaker, this applies also to a person who buys a motor car in Alberta or Manitoba and comes to 

Saskatchewan and endeavours to register it. He must identify where he bought it; he must pay the sales 

tax. I am saying that, where the government is compelled to collect in these unusual circumstances, it 

must also assume its responsibility to collect this tax in the Lloydminster area. Certainly the Premier has 

come up with no magic formula in 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1656 

this regard. He blandly says it is up to the city of Lloydminster to tell us. I say to him, it is up to you and 

your administrators to find out and explore the possibility of some alternative method of taxation, or a 

better method of tax enforcement with the government assuming its responsibility for it. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, a letter which pretty well expresses the situation and the viewpoint of 

merchants in the city of Lloydminster. It was written to the editor of the Leader Post and Star Phoenix 

by L. J. Doucette, the manager of the Co-operative store in Lloydminster, which is situated on the 

Saskatchewan side, and he says: 

 

The news report carried in the Star Phoenix, March 3, 1966, quotes the Premier as saying, „Residents 

of Lloydminster pay little or no sales tax, no tobacco tax and less than 14 cents a gallon gasoline tax.‟ 

This statement distorts the truth and is misleading. When the Premier said this he said it knowing it to 

be untrue and for purposes other than ascertaining facts. 

 

I think if the Premier were more interested in ascertaining facts and less interested in political 

manoeuvres he would find an answer to this problem. And then it goes on: 

 

On June 16th, 1965, the Premier of Saskatchewan met a delegation from Lloydminster who presented 

a brief protesting the fact that the Premier was insisting publicly that the merchants be responsible for 

the collection of all tobacco tax in Lloydminster and remittance of same to the government. Fifty per 

cent of all tobacco sold in Lloydminster, Saskatchewan side, are to Saskatchewan residents. Fifty per 

cent of the shoppers live in Alberta and the tobacco vendor has no way of differentiating between the 

two. Mr. Thatcher, on June 16th, 1965, upon being presented with the above facts ruled imperiously 

that all tobacco merchants would pay the treasury 40 per cent of the tobacco tax due, knowing at the 

time that it was not possible for the Saskatchewan merchants to collect this from the customer. 

 

This is obvious, Mr. Speaker. Then it goes on: 

 

Rather than say the Lloydminster residents pay no tobacco tax, Mr. Thatcher should say the Liberal 

Lloydminster merchants are paying the government 40 per cent of all tobacco taxes out of their 

earnings. 

 

And, incidentally, in the Co-opposition store alone, in 10 months time, they paid in $1,650 for the 

tobacco tax alone. It goes on: 

 

Lloydminster is a very complex and complicated problem created by provincial law; when the 

community was first established, special clauses were agreed to by both Alberta and Saskatchewan in 

its charter recognizing these unique problems. Some of North America‟s leading authorities have been 

approached to solve the problem but with no apparent solution. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I thought the magician would surely be able to solve it. Then it goes on: 

 

Mr. Thatcher has taken advantage of the complexities of the situation and has seized the opportunity to 

distort 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1657 

true facts to the problem. Instead of saying Lloydminster merchants subsidize the tobacco tax, Mr. 

Thatcher says Lloydminster residents pay no tobacco tax. Instead of saying Lloydminster service 

stations remit 12 cents per gallon gas tax in Saskatchewan, which is the same as Alberta, Mr. Thatcher 

says Lloydminster residents receive full benefit while paying less than the 14 cents a gallon tax. The 

Premier has ruled Lloydminster residents will be denied $30,000 in homeowner tax rebates which he 

justifies by the aforementioned statements. Many retired old Saskatchewan residents are being denied 

these rebates which would be available to them anywhere else in Alberta or Saskatchewan. This is 

discrimination at its worst. The Premier of any province has a responsibility to enforce the laws of the 

province. His inability to do so does not justify passing discriminatory legislation. The Premier has a 

responsibility to the minority as well as to the majority. Passing legislation which discriminates 

against any minority group is a dangerous step. If this legislation becomes law, where do we go from 

here and what minority group can rest easy? The very essence of our democratic society dictates that 

legislation be positive and constructive; that ethics and principles rule over position and power. Mr. 

Thatcher has taken advantage of his position. In addition to shifting his responsibility where possible 

to the merchants he continues to condemn the Lloydminster citizens for failure to obey the laws of his 

government. 

 

In addition to this, he is now passing discriminatory legislation which is far worse and far more unfair 

and, indeed, I might add, that will only complicate tax collection enforcement problems for him in his 

method of discrimination. I will say a bit more about that later. The letter then goes on: 

 

In the meantime Lloydminster merchants continue to subsidize the Saskatchewan treasury with 40 per 

cent tobacco tax out of their earnings. the service station operators will also absorb the additional 

one-cent per gallon tax on gasoline, effective march 15, 1966. The Premier stated last week: „No 

relaxation of present regulations in Lloydminster‟, even though he has announced the discriminatory 

legislation. It is bad enough for a community to be written off politically, but it is almost intolerable 

for it to be harassed by discrimination and prejudice by its own Premier. 

 

This was written by the manager of the Lloydminster and District Co-operative Association store. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s deal with this matter of an area surrounding Lloydminster that is going to be 

discriminated against and the possibilities, or the impossibilities of ever making it stick. He suggests that 

an area roughly six miles surrounding Lloydminster and the people in it will be denied the Home-owner 

grant. May I point out to him that the farmers within that area are eligible as residents under this 

legislation and no arbitrary drawing of lines by the Premier can deny that. They are still the residents; 

they are farmers living on their land. But this dictator Premier says I am going to draw a line and 

exclude them from the benefits of Home-owner grants. Now, this is six miles out but may I tell the 

Premier people travel to trade in Lloydminster from as far as 45 miles away . . . 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1658 

Mr. Thatcher: — We haven‟t made those lines yet. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — The Premier can use his discretion if he wants to. I am talking against this, I am asking 

him to find a solution to the taxation problem in Lloydminster, which I think can be found, and not deny 

these people anywhere in Lloydminster or outside of Lloydminster the right to share in the benefits 

so-called of the Home-owner grant. 

 

All right, here we will find this unhappy situation, which compounds the difficulties of discrimination 

and injustice. Here is one farmer six miles out, he is denied the Home-owner grant. His neighbour just 

across the road allowance can receive it. Where do you stop? Is this justice? This indicates so clearly, 

mps the injustice of discriminatory legislation and of drawing arbitrary lines and of saying that people 

on this side of that line can‟t get a benefit but people on that side can receive the benefit, although the 

people on the other side of the line also trade in Lloydminster. They could walk over to the other side of 

the border and not pay their sales tax or their gas tax either. I notice the Premier has departed. I don‟t 

think he wants to hear. I don‟t think he wants to give any sensible and serious thought to this problem. 

All I can say, from my point of view, I am not raising this for political reasons but for cold, factual 

reasons of discrimination. If I were politically minded I would say, “Sure, include my whole 

constituency and see where you land”. But it is wrong; it is completely wrong. No people, either in 

Lloydminster or outside of Lloydminster, either six miles out or 25 miles out or any distance, should be 

denied the Home-owner grant, Mr. Speaker. It is only fair that they all get it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as you know, Lloydminster is in what is termed a so-called depressed area. They are 

much more greatly depressed now as a result of the discriminatory action taken and I am sure that the 

residents in that area, particularly the old pioneers who live in their own homes will be very greatly 

disappointed in the action of the Premier. 

 

The Lloydminster and District Co-operative Association are establishing a feed mill in that area. A press 

release was made that I just received a short while ago to indicate that at least there is one agency of 

government that doesn‟t discriminate. I want to draw attention to this press release. It says: 

 

The city council‟s . . . 

 

That is the city of Lloydminster council. 

 

. . . decision to sell industrial property assures the building of a new feed mix mill in Lloydminster. 

The Co-operative Centre announced building of a new feed mix mill in Lloydminster which will give 

service to grinding of customer‟s grain, mixing of grain with concentrates, molasses, mixing, blending, 

etc. 

 

This is quite an enterprise. It goes on: 

 

The expected capacity of the mill will be 20,000 tons annually. the estimated cost of the total project 

when completed will be in the neighbourhood of $150,000. Capital costs on the eligible assets are 

agreed to by Ottawa. The total amount of grants for the development of the project 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1659 

from the federal government could reach $60,000. 

 

These federal grants are being made available. I hope it will take them out of the depression somewhat 

in an economic sense because federal grants do not discriminate against people in a particular area. But 

the provincial Liberal government does discriminate against them in receiving benefits that they 

rightfully should have access to and are being denied by the Premier of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again may I say I am going to vote against this Bill on second reading, endeavour to have 

amendments made in committee, and certainly vote against it if necessary, in third reading as well. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, could I crave the indulgence of the House to make a correction in the 

speech that I just made? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the House will be more than willing to afford the courtesy. 

 

Mr. Wood: — When I was reading these figures in regard to the percentages of the renters in each city I 

did not have my two thumbs even and I did not have the right figures for each city. I gave the incorrect 

information. Could I correct it? Estevan was 27.4; Lloydminster, 27.6; Melville, 22.3; Moose Jaw, 34.9; 

North Battleford, 33.8; Prince Albert, 32.9; Regina, 33.4; Saskatoon, 29.1; Swift Current, 39.5; 

Weyburn, 34 per cent; Yorkton, 31.7. I got those slightly mixed in the first part earlier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the members to the fact that the mover of the motion is 

about to close the debate, if anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, as I said a moment ago, the purpose of this 

legislation is to pay Home-owner grants to all rural and urban residents, in the amount of $50. The only 

group or the main group, that it excludes, is in the vicinity of Lloydminster city and the country 

immediately surrounding it. 

 

I am not going into all the arguments again why we propose not to include Lloydminster. This has been 

a thorny problem for many, many years. The former government failed to solve it; indeed I don‟t think 

they even tried to solve it. We have found that in the city of Lloydminster today, the sales tax for the 

most part is not collected except on automobiles and liquor. Oh, there is some revenue but generally 

speaking residents of Lloydminster and area do not pay the sales tax. Neither, Mr. Speaker, do they pay 

the gasoline tax in full. the Saskatchewan gasoline tax is 15 cents. the Alberta gasoline tax is 12 cents. 

When we imposed the tobacco tax we ran into the same problem. We did not feel it was fair that the 

residents of all Saskatchewan should pay the tobacco tax, and yet the residents of this small area be 

allowed to ignore it. We had representations from the merchants led by this man, Doucette, who 

incidentally is a very strong Socialist. That, of course, is his privilege. This man Doucette came down 

with some other businessmen. They said, in effect, if we attempted to collect the whole tax on tobacco 

from Lloydminster residents, it will simply mean they could not handle tobacco 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1660 

because people would go across to the Alberta side. We asked, “What is your alternative?” Some of the 

merchants suggest that if we would take a percentage of the tax, they would be willing to absorb that 

portion under the circumstances. The figure we arrived at was what we would ask the merchants on the 

Saskatchewan side to pay directly if they did not want to collect a tax from the consumer. The figure 

suggested was 40 per cent of the regular tax. I may tell the hon. member for Lloydminster (Mr. Nollet) 

that if the merchants of his city and area do not feel that the 40 per cent is fair, we will immediately be 

pleased to take that regulation out and let them collect the full tax from the consumer, the same as 

residents do all over the rest of Saskatchewan. 

 

This problem has caused the government a good deal of concern because merchants and consumers in 

other areas of the province object very strenuously to the privileged status of Lloydminster. The hon. 

member for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) quoted a letter from Mr. Doucette. I want to quote one that I received 

from Lashburn. I‟m going to quote three or four paragraphs of it: 

 

We all realize that we are losing considerable business to Lloydminster on account of the tax 

privileges that are available to them. We must also realize that we are sacrificing our profits by 

absorbing health and education costs in an effort to remain competitive with Lloydminster. With our 

present trend towards centralization we are also losing our schools, our hospitals, our agricultural 

representative, our aged people, as well as our business expansion to this larger centre. All of these 

things are being absorbed by the city of Lloydminster which is not paying its share toward maintaining 

the very things that it is stealing from us. 

 

But what do we hear from this city which has been endowed with special tax privileges? Do we hear 

thanks to the rest of the people of Saskatchewan for paying the taxes that they themselves avoid? No, 

we do not. Do we hear appreciation of the favoured position enjoyed by citizens and businessmen 

alike in the city of Lloydminster? No, we do not. What then do we hear from the city of Lloydminster? 

 

First, we hear a constant clamouring for more and better schools for which government grants are 

required. Secondly, we hear of greater needs for hospital facilities which require government 

assistance. Third, we hear of various complaints about imposing a sales tax on tobacco in 

Lloydminster. Fourth, we hear continual refusal to pay health and education tax as is required of every 

other Saskatchewan resident. Fifth, we hear the mayor of Lloydminster whining because his city, 

which has been successful in avoiding thousands of dollars of taxes throughout the year, must now 

forego a $50 Home-owner grant. 

 

If these people want the benefits, why should they not pay taxes on the same basis as you and I? It is 

quite obvious that the residents of Lloydminster want all the benefits that health and education tax can 

provide. It is also quite evident that they expect the rest of the province to provide the funds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government has had representations from towns, up and down the Manitoba 

border. We have had representations from many town up and down the Alberta border. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1661 

This is no solution. We don‟t put if forward as a solution, but we do say that if the people of 

Lloydminster and area are going to take all the benefits of being citizens of Saskatchewan, like school 

grants, hospital grants, and so on, then they must also assume some of the responsibilities. The fact that 

we are not paying the Home-owner grant to people in this area still does not solve the problem. I may 

tell you that I intend to ask our tax people to go up into this area in the ensuing months, to take more 

strenuous efforts to see that these people do begin paying their fair share of taxes to Saskatchewan. I 

know there are special problems, but we are not going to sit back and treat the people of Lloydminster 

one way and the rest of the people of Saskatchewan the other way. 

 

The hon. member for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) talked about discrimination. There has been discrimination, 

Mr. Speaker, discrimination against the rest of the people of Saskatchewan by the people of 

Lloydminster, because they are not paying their way. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — You haven‟t got the guts to enforce your own laws. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Hon. members were in power for 20 years and did nothing. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They created the situation. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — You‟re the new one. You‟re the great man. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Then, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) said, “Why, 

this Home-owner grant is nothing but a political bribe”. If he thinks it‟s a political bribe I‟ll tell my 

officials they don‟t need to pay it to him. We won‟t send it to anyone in Saskatchewan who doesn‟t want 

it. All they have to do is write us, and we will see that the grant is not forced upon them. We wouldn‟t 

want to bribe anyone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Louder. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I think it was the hon. member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) who said he had been 

out in British Columbia. He said, “I talked to a lot of people and they don‟t like that homeowner grant”. 

I have talked to a lot of people too, and I haven‟t found anyone that doesn‟t like it. I don‟t think there 

will be many people in Saskatchewan, who won‟t like it either. 

 

Then the hon. member for Swift Current said, of course, this legislation is unfair to the little man, 

because it doesn‟t pay the Home-owner grant to renters. I said in the Budget Speech and I said 

elsewhere, it does not pay the Home-owner grant to renters. Why doesn‟t it? This Bill is designed for 

one purpose, to bring tax relief to the property owner. Renters don‟t pay the property tax. if they don‟t 

pay any tax, how can you bring them relief? We make no apology whatever for not including renters in 

this particular legislation. 

 

I think the hon. member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) also asked why we didn‟t pay $50 to everyone, 

instead of paying $50 or one-half of the tax assessed or whichever was the lesser. At first we had 

considered doing this, but the SARM came to us and said, “If a man has a tax of only $60 or $70, we 

think the most 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1662 

you should give them is one-half of the tax that he would ordinarily pay”. Thus we changed the 

regulations at the request of the SARM. Mr. Speaker, I say again that this is a measure which really tries 

to do something to help the property owner. We intend to do more as the years go by, I think it will be 

very interesting to see how many of my hon. friends opposite vote against it. Perhaps my hon. friend 

from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) who won‟t be running again, will vote against the motion. Most of my hon. 

friends on this particular issue will do as they always do. They will get up and talk against it. When the 

chips are down most of the socialists will vote for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, before the Premier takes his seat, could I ask a question? He referred to the 

contention of a customer, potential customer in Lashburn or Lloydminster, I forget which, that claimed 

that because the merchant on the Saskatchewan side wasn‟t collecting the tax it was hurting his business. 

Now, the Premier might answer this question. Even though the merchant on the Saskatchewan side was 

compelled to collect the tax, couldn‟t this prospective customer from Lashburn, from Maidstone, from 

Neilburg, still go across to the Alberta side and buy the goods? Would it make any difference? This 

argument is invalid. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You might argue that way. The hard facts are that under the previous government — 

and I must admit up to this time under this government — the people of Lloydminster or the merchants 

in Lloydminster have not been collecting the sales tax. The government officials have been looking the 

other way. Maybe they could not do anything else. I don‟t know. But there are other border towns like 

Alsask, Lashburn and others where the merchants are having to collect the tax, and they feel that this is 

discrimination. This Bill doesn‟t remove the discrimination but at least it goes part way. 

 

The motion was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 49 

 

Thatcher MacDonald Blakeney 

Howes Breker Davies 

McFarlane Leith Thibault 

Boldt Radloff Willis 

Cameron Romuld Whelan 

Steuart Weatherald Nicholson 

Heald MacLennan Kramer 

Guy Larochelle Dewhurst 

Merchant (Mrs.) Hooker Michayluk 

Loken Coupland Smishek 

MacDougall Gardner (Moosomin) Snyder 

Grant Mitchell Broten 

Coderre Lloyd Larson 

Bjarnason Cooper (Mrs.) Pepper 

Trapp Wood Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Cuelenaere Walker  

McIsaac Brockelbank (Kelsey)  

 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1663 

NAYS — 1 

 

 Nollet  

 

Hon. D. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 49 — An Act to 

provide for the establishment and development of the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation 

Project. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in this act  we are requesting of the legislature necessary authority and powers to 

develop the irrigation potential of the South Saskatchewan River Project. I am sure that all members of 

the legislature are reasonably aware of the history of the South Saskatchewan River Project. Therefore, I 

will mention two points only in this regard. 

 

First, that in 1958, following protracted negotiations an agreement was signed whereby the Canadian 

government, the people of Canada in other words, agreed to build the South Saskatchewan river dam 

and pay at least $75,000,000 towards its cost. 

 

Secondly, that one of the undertakings given by the government of Saskatchewan, that is on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan, was that the province would develop the irrigation potential. As a particular 

emphasis, the agreement required that one year after the reservoir was filled an irrigation system would 

be constructed sufficient to irrigate 50,000 acres. I am equally sure that all members of this legislature 

will also recall the repeated representations made by the government of Saskatchewan in urging this 

undertaking on the Canadian government. The representations made to the Hogg commission in 1952 

and the disappointment, in fact almost the outrage expressed when the Commission‟s report at that time 

was unfavourable. 

 

Through all this the main theme for the arguments advanced was that we needed the dam for irrigation 

in this province. The recreation and industrial development were spoken of but the principal need 

advanced was for irrigation. In fact, of course, the only justification of the large federal contribution was 

for irrigation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are on the threshold of this development. Now, we are faced with the near 

realization of the visions of many people in the province who have supported and who have worked for 

this project. Like many great developments it doesn‟t come easy. It does not come without disturbance 

and it does not come without cost. This is the only major irrigation development that appears feasible or 

likely in our province. Altogether we have about 200,000 acres of very good irrigable land that may be 

served by this South Saskatchewan River dam. I have no doubt as works are installed and land is 

developed that additional acreage will be irrigated both by sprinkler system and by ditch methods. I am 

confident that members of this legislature realize, at least in general terms, what this development can 

mean to our economy. 

 

First to our great agricultural industry lying within 150 miles of the great part of our drought area, we 

look to it for some insurance for fodder supplies in the future. The dairy industry particularly, and the 

milk shed areas of Saskatoon, Regina and Moose Jaw will no longer have to look to the Tilley and the 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1664 

Rolling Hills area, 200 miles west of Moose Jaw, for the good quality hay they require in the future. 

 

Second, to our growing industrial economy for the many foods that are now imported from Manitoba 

and the irrigated areas of Alberta. 

 

Thirdly, with regard to the potential for secondary industry in the province. 

 

It is no secret, Mr. Speaker, that if we can develop sufficient area quickly enough that a sugar beet plant 

is available to us in Saskatchewan. In the Broderick area, making no allowances for additional acreage, 

that would undoubtedly be brought in by sprinkler above the ditch, there are 42,000 acres irrigable. In 

the Conquest area, similarly there are 28,000 acres irrigable. These are conservative estimates and we 

have no doubt that the project will yield acreage in the Outlook area that will adequately support a sugar 

beet plant. 

 

Members will be interested in nothing the recent statement of Ian Angus, the general manager of the 

Taber Sugar Refinery, that 45,000 acres in sugar beets injects $17,500,000 into the southern Alberta 

economy. half that acreage may be assumed to inject $8,000,000 into our central Saskatchewan 

economy. Compare that with our present situation of 100,000 acres in dry land farming with perhaps 

60,000 acres in crop averaging say 17 bushels of wheat per acre to give a total value in store at Fort 

William of just over $2,000,000 or 1,130,000 bushels at $2 per bushel. 

 

Under irrigation the area will produce not only the sugar beets, but twice as much wheat as at present 

plus hay and other crops. We are convinced that in this project the people of Canada have given us in 

Saskatchewan a golden opportunity for development. We are equally convinced that not to seize the 

opportunity would be not only the height of ingratitude but the unilateral voiding of an agreement as 

well as the height of folly, I suggest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I refer now more specifically to the legislation before you. Of necessity it involves some arbitrary 

powers and these are essentially three in number. It authorizes the establishment of an irrigation district 

without the vote that is prescribed in the present irrigation. District Act, incidentally, Mr. Speaker, under 

which no irrigation district has ever operated though it dates back from the ordinances of the North West 

Territories. It provides for expropriation of rights of way for the necessary works of the district and it 

provides for the application of water charges necessary for the operation and the maintenance of the 

works being assessed against irrigable land even though it is not irrigated, but only on the basis of a 

schedule approved by the minister. It is necessary in any system of continuous works whether it be a 

highway or a power line or an irrigation system that there be expropriation authority for right of way. 

 

The major difference in the powers conveyed through this act  and the old Irrigation District Act or the 

irrigation district legislation of Alberta is the authority for the Lieutenant Governor in Council in section 

three to declare or order the establishment of an irrigation district. This is the major difference, this is the 

main point at issue, and this is the point that those opposed to irrigation in the area dispute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how could a vote be held in good faith now when 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1665 

we have formerly committed to irrigation, when we have been formally committed to irrigation in the 

area since 1958 and what would we hold a vote about at the present time? I suggest that we would be 

holding a vote asking perhaps 200 people to vote on whether or not we should abrogate the agreement 

signed in good faith by two governments in 1958. We would be asking them, in effect, to vote on 

whether or not this government should break faith with the people in the rest of Canada or the people in 

the rest of Saskatchewan who through their tax dollars are paying for the dam. 

 

We have said before and I repeat again that if a vote was to be held, if the decision of whether to irrigate 

or not was still to be made, that vote should have been held before the agreement was signed, and before 

we said definitely and irrevocably that we would irrigate. A deal has been made. The former government 

made the deal. They said to the government of Canada that they would build the dam and pay 75 per 

cent of the cost of it, if Saskatchewan would proceed as rapidly as practicable with the construction of 

the said irrigation works. We, Mr. Speaker, are simply living up to that deal. 

 

Perhaps I should say a word further regarding the authority which might be termed arbitrary or 

compulsory, namely, that of assessing irrigable lands the water rate, even though they are not developed 

for irrigating. This authority, Mr. Speaker, is included in irrigation legislation. the launching of the area 

without a direct vote of those involved does, of course, make a substantial difference to the implication 

of this owner. This authority is Canada conferred in section 28, subsection 2 and in this section the board 

of the district is required to impose the appropriate water rate on land that is to be irrigated and also on 

an acreage of irrigable land on which the imposition of such rates has been approved by the board and 

by the minister. this policy was set out clearly in our interim policy statement issued in October, 1964. 

This statement says that the policy being considered would be application of water rates against 20 acres 

per year or 10 per cent of the owner‟s irrigable acreage whichever is the larger. In other words, we are 

looking to a ten-year development period. 

 

In actual practice we would expect that land would be developed in blocks of 40 or 50 or 60 acres. our 

experts tell us that development of 20 acres at a time is really not sensible as it does not give sufficient 

acreage to be worth the attention it requires. The policy will permit a starting irrigation farmer to 

develop or improve an acreage one year, irrigate it the next year, and then undertake improvement 

during the second year of another block. I would draw to members‟ attention the fact that this gradual 

transition that is envisaged still leaves farmers in the area some time to reach their decision regarding 

irrigation. 

 

We consider it necessary that some development be required because we will be asking the legislature to 

embark on an irrigation project that will involve the expenditures of about $8,000,000. To undertake 

such a development without some assurance of use would seem foolhardy in the extreme. Without some 

requirement for development the landowner, whether absentee or resident, could simply hold land 

awaiting further price increases. This policy provides some deterrent against this. Without it other even 

more distasteful measures such as requiring a landowner to divest himself of surplus acreage or of 

approving or disapproving private sales would seem necessary to discourage purchases of land for 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1666 

speculation purposes. 

 

Finally, I would note that all the advice that we can get reading the history of other projects, the 

experience of Alberta, and so on, all confirm that it is necessary for the ultimate success of the irrigation 

project that it be developed as rapidly as possible. this is true of the individual farmer as well as of the 

project itself. The sooner we can real full development, the sooner the new irrigation farmer can bring 

his full acreage under the ditch, and the more profitable it is to the farmer the greater the benefits to the 

economy as a whole. The act  proposed authorizes the establishment of an irrigation District by Order in 

council. It authorizes construction, operation, and maintenance of works by the minister and authorizes 

disposition of utilization of lands acquired under existing legislation. 

 

I would draw the attention of the legislature particularly to clause E of section five. This section 

authorizes the making of grants for the operation and maintenance of the project; for meeting deficits of 

the irrigation district Board and for assisting farmers with land development and for the construction of 

the works. 

 

We recognize very well that if we are to have a viable and useful project the farmers operating it must 

have every opportunity of success. We recognize that farmers in the district cannot pay for the capital 

works. We recognize that in the early years of development water rates will have to be subsidized. It is 

our full intention to render every assistance necessary to be sure that farmers in the project have every 

opportunity to develop the irrigable acreage on their farms properly. We are placing no limit on the size 

of the farms and this will depend entirely on the individual‟s own initiative and resources. 

 

On page four, section 7 and 14 inclusive, confer authority for direct credit up to $50,000 per farmer for 

provincial guarantees to banks and credit unions and for the possible agreements with the federal 

government to support its agency the Farm Credit Corporation in making loans in the district. These 

loans may be for a considerable variety of purposes; for land development, for land purchased, for the 

purchase of livestock, for machinery purchase, and for the equipment that is included in all these. 

Members will have noticed various press comments to the effect that this Bill did not make it possible to 

waive interest on loans for land development. This was suggested in the interim policy that interest 

would be waived on loans used for land levelling during the initial period. May I, Mr. Speaker, draw 

your attention to subsection two of section ten, at the bottom of page four of the Bill. This clearly gives 

the government authority to waive or to defer interest. We recognize that during the first few years this 

would be desirable encouragement and support to the farmers who are developing their land for 

irrigation. May I repeat that we are convinced that the way to get this project going, the way that farmers 

in it will make the most money, the way that it will contribute most to the provincial economy, is to give 

it every support that we can and as quickly as we can. And the government, Mr. Speaker, intends to do 

just that. 

 

The act  provides for the district being managed by a Board of Trustees of five people. Initially three of 

these including the chairman will be appointed by the government and two elected by the district. It is 

our intention to set up the board as soon as the project approaches the operation stage. Through 

agreement with the board, authorized in section 21, we look forward to 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1667 

vesting in this board just as much responsibility for the project as we can including the administration of 

land and of loans. Provisions are made in the act  that when most of the land is under irrigation the board 

may be transferred to an entirely elected local board, believing that when it is on its feet the project can 

be best operated by its own members. The act  sets out in some detail the procedures that are to be 

following in establishing water rates, notification of them and the collection of these rates. Members will 

note features contained in section 28, subsection Canada, clauses A and B, on page 12 of the Bill, again 

referring to the schedule of imposing water rates and the ceiling on water rates and grants made to the 

board. 

 

One of the troublesome areas in irrigation districts is the classification of land. The general tendency is 

for the manager and the board to wish to extend the irrigable area as much as possible. Section 29 

provides for the board classifying land as irrigable but in subsection four provides the right of appeal to 

the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission from decisions of the board. Section 34 makes provision for 

the waiving of water rates on particular parcels. It is included to provide for extraordinary or 

compassionate cases. When such waivers are made the province would compensate the district 

accordingly. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I will just briefly review the general framework of the act . Section three, as 

I have mentioned, authorizes the establishment of a district by Order in Council. Section four is a section 

to provide for formally listing lands in the district in the Land Titles Office and in the offices of the 

government that may have irrigation land under control. This is considered desirable so that all who are 

dealing with land by purchase, by lien, or by mortgage will know that it is subject to this act . Sections 

five and six outline the powers of the minister regarding construction of the project, grants to the board 

in land development and entering agreements with the board. Sections 7 and 14 deal with the loans, 

section 15 with acquiring land for right of way, sections 16 to 20 to make provisions for the Board of 

Trustees and for procedures for the nomination and election of these members. Sections 21 to 25 set out 

the various powers of the board. Sections 28 to 35 set out the procedures for establishing water rates, the 

notification of them and the maintenance of water rates records. Sections 36 to 39 deal with and confer 

on the board the necessary authority for enforcement and collection of water rates. Sections 40 to 49 

deal with a miscellaneous number of matters regarding liabilities, reports, penalties and regulations. May 

I emphasize, that in undertaking this first phase of irrigation development that we are doing, we are so 

convinced that it offers an usual opportunity for the development of our province and to the farmers who 

will be involved in it. We appreciate the opportunity that has been given to us and I would pay tribute to 

the many people who have worked long and hard toward its realization with no thought of the possibility 

of personal gain. We see this as the first phase of a tremendous project in the heart of Saskatchewan, 

providing food, employment and security, an altogether fitting development to further support the total 

development now occurring in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully and attentively to the reasons 

given by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1668 

for compulsory irrigation in Saskatchewan. I wasn‟t at all impressed by the reasons he gave. I probably 

had many more years of experience in irrigation development and the administration of the legislation 

apropos to irrigation development than he has. My total experience points in the opposite direction that 

irrigation cannot be hastened on any justifiable grounds by compulsion. He mentioned the comparatively 

large investment that we are committed to for the irrigation phase of the project. This does not justify 

compulsory irrigation. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this would be a new first. This is the first time 

that legislation of this kind has ever been introduced in the history of Saskatchewan. It is evident that 

where this approach has been attempted elsewhere, it proved to be not only unsuccessful but very costly 

indeed. I will have more to say about it and will deal a bit more with some of the reasons and 

justification for this hasty and unwise act . 

 

He mentioned or he posed a question: how would it be possible to take a vote in this area under existing 

circumstances? May I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the government, that it is not necessary to 

take a vote where an irrigation project is being initiated. Innumerable projects have been initiated in this 

province without any vote at all by mutual arrangements between the farmer who is interested in 

irrigation and the department and eventually by petition, e.g. the establishment of a Water Users‟ 

Association. So this argument is without foundation. the minister suggested that if the vote were to have 

been taken that it should have been taken at the time or previous to the time when the province of 

Saskatchewan and the federal government committed themselves to the development of this project. 

this, Mr. Speaker, is sheer undisguised nonsense and shows a complete lack of knowledge or irrigation 

farming and all of the factors that a farmer must have available to him before he can intelligently decide 

whether he is going to vote himself into an irrigation area or not. This information has been 

painstakingly made available to farmers in that area precisely for that reason, so that, when the time 

came when they were prepared to irrigate, they could vote if they wished to vote themselves into an area 

or not vote themselves into an irrigation area. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a few notes that I want to place before the committee in this regard and in 

some further detail, outlining my very firm objections to this legislation and the reasons for it, and also 

to propose a more acceptable and alternative policy to the farmers in the area to be chosen for initialling 

irrigation development in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the agreement which was signed on July 25th, 

1958, merely called for the province to have works constructed to provide water to some 50,000 acres 

on or before one year from the date the main reservoir is filled. This was the only obligation to construct 

those works and it wasn‟t as the preamble to the Bill said, “Whereas Saskatchewan agreed to complete 

construction of irrigation works to the extent necessary to provide full irrigation to not less than 50,000 

acres of land”. That is not the way the agreement was worded at all. It was worded as I mentioned 

previously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is irrigation, as I stated, by compulsion and it also involves a grossly unfair method of 

land acquisition. The objectives of orderly development of irrigation cannot be achieved by this method. 

It will not only prove to be more costly but will generate much ill will and strong resistance to irrigation 

development throughout other areas of Saskatchewan. The only practical conclusion that can be drawn 

from this legislation is that the government is not justified in committing itself so 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1669 

drastically, when this policy will not in fact expedite satisfactory irrigation development or provide any 

more evidence of successful irrigation benefits to farmers. The success of irrigation depends on good 

will and on establishing a forthright understanding regarding the problems associated with the transition 

from dry land to irrigation farming. Previous to irrigation the farmer naturally fears all the unknown 

factors involved. This fear can only be removed by gradual and voluntary irrigation experience. Above 

all else he wants to know, and rightly so, if his income benefits will be commensurate with the extra cost 

and labour involved. in short the fear of unknown factors must be removed before and during the initial 

development period in order to achieve general acceptability of irrigation by farmers. The results of 

compulsion will only heighten their fears, and outright resistance could very easily develop. I certainly 

would not want to have the duty of endeavouring to enforce compulsory irrigation on Saskatchewan 

farmers. There is nothing, Mr. Speaker, that removes fear better than knowledge and experience. This 

cannot be obtained by compulsion. In addition, compulsion will not speed up but retard the general 

acceptance of irrigation because of resentment against this approach. Mr. Speaker, the government must 

first of all discharge its own responsibility before expecting farmers to respond favourable to irrigation. 

The government‟s first responsibility is to provide an acceptable policy for initial development. With 

reference to this the minister has outlined the policy announced by the previous minister in October, 

1964, when it was then forecast that we could anticipate compulsory irrigation. More of the same, Mr. 

Speaker. then again this is evidence of frustration in some circles of the government and their inability to 

deal with the problem realistically and in a responsible and fair manner. It says, in effect, we‟ve got a 

big investment; we‟re going to make you irrigate whether you like it or not and we are going to justify 

this hasty actions, this arbitrary action, on the basis that we know what‟s good for you better than you 

do. There need be no compulsion by law for a viable irrigation project acceptable and beneficial to 

farmers. Farmers like people in every other line of business will voluntarily accept irrigation if there is 

reasonable prospect of return on investment and improved income. Therefore, given an optional right in 

this regard, farmers will gradually develop irrigation on their land to the point where it will be 

experience and results become generally acceptable within an irrigation area. When this point is reached 

an expression of viewpoint by petition or plebiscite should be provided for the establishment of a Water 

Users‟ Association, or a full-fledged irrigation District which would determine water rates based on 

assigned costs as agreed upon between the individual farmers or the local organization and the minister. 

All of this has been swept aside in this arbitrary legislation. 

 

To expedite and achieve progressive irrigation development the government must of necessity first 

discharge, as I say, its own responsibility by: 

 

1. Construction of the main works including reservoirs, other main works, canals and laterals to the farm 

turnout without cost to the farmer. 

 

2. Operation and maintenance costs of the reservoirs and other main works such as pumps, canals, 

lateral to the farm turnout, etc., without cost to the farmers and relieving the farmer of the full cost of 

operation and maintenance of other works during the initial development period by making grants 

available on 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1670 

a sliding scale over a five year period, based on costs as follows: first year, 100 per cent; second year, 90 

per cent; third year, 60 per cent; fourth year, 40 per cent; fifth year, 20 per cent. 

 

3. (a) Direct financial and other assistance for construction of field ditches and land levelling up to at 
least 75 per cent of the cost on the first 80 acres to be irrigated by each farmer. This would give 

greater incentive to bringing acreage under irrigation quicker than compulsion, Mr. Speaker. It is the 

kind of policy and help one makes available to the farmer to enable him to get into irrigation as 

rapidly as possible but which will achieve results better than by compulsion. 

 

(b) Equivalent alternative assistance for sprinkler systems. Here I emphasize that every thought should 

be given to an alternative method of irrigation by giving assistance for sprinkler systems. I personally 

believe that the old ditch system of conveying water and the old method of spreading water is pretty 

well out of date. It is inefficient, it involves costly land levelling, costly maintenance of ditches and 

proper efficient water utilization and control, avoids tremendous water losses. It is inefficient on every 

count and I would suggest to the minister that he had his people make careful cost studies as between 

the sprinkler method and the ditch irrigation method and between the old method and permanent 

sprinkler systems. 

 

(c) Assurance to the farmer that his prospects for return on his added investment and labour will be 

justified. 

 

4. No water charge for the first ten years after water is available. 

 

5. Providing technical assistance such as engineering service, practical irrigation specialists, farm 

management help and extension service free of charge. 

 

6. Long term low interest loans with an initial interest free period of five years to farmers for all matters 

relating to irrigation development. 

 

7. (a) Any land purchased by the government should be by voluntary arrangement between the farmer 

and government at an agreed price and certainly not under compulsion as it will be under the legislation 

being proposed by the minister. 

 

(b) Preference to Saskatchewan residents in disposition of Crown-owned land. 

 

8. Further financial assistance to be requested of the federal government through ARDA for irrigation 

development. 

 

9. Assistance when warranted under SEDCO for the establishment of storage and processing of 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this type of policy has proven to be acceptable and successful for innumerable irrigation 

projects developed to date primarily for fodder and field production. Going over some of these policies, 

Mr. Speaker, one can look in the annual report of the Provincial Department of Agriculture and find that 

thousands of acres of land have been developed successfully in the province by this approach without 

any compulsion. We have gained a great deal of experience in irrigation in these other projects. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1671 

There is no reason that I can see anywhere why a different approach should be taken to the South 

Saskatchewan project. As a matter of fact looking back, well over 65,000 or 70,000 acres of land have 

been developed outside of the South Saskatchewan project. 

 

I would like to underline some of these policies. The purpose of the policy which I just enumerated has 

been the policy of the department for many years which has for its purpose the effective use of land for 

irrigation by active local responsibility which rests fundamentally on local assumption of control and on 

the clear understanding of the respective roles of the province and the local irrigation, this being a 

function of legislation and day to day relationship between the administration and its clientele. Effective 

use will be encouraged by proper financial and economic conditions. And these are the keys. Farmers 

will irrigate if the economic circumstances are proven and no compulsion whatever is needed. Under our 

former policy, if reasonable feasibility was demonstrated, it was proposed that the agricultural 

representative would call meetings in the area, would carry on extension work, would provide full 

information to each prospective irrigation farmer as to what his land levelling cost would be and more 

particularly, what specialist assistance would be made available and what the division of cost would be 

between himself and the department in relation to operation and maintenance and all other facts. By 

following this type of policy we have had no difficulty whatever. Surely there is no need for the drastic 

action envisioned in this legislation. the same policies followed in the past could have been applied 

initially and if by any chance it appeared that there was insufficient interest after a reasonable period of 

time, consideration might then have been given to an alternative approach. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation comes strangely indeed from members of the government who, when 

in opposition so strongly opposed even the mildest kind of legislation which would provide access to 

land for the purpose of making the necessary surveys required to obtain vital information to define the 

irrigable area, plan works and to give farmers information regarding costs of irrigation to them without 

the farmer being first contacted and consent obtained. I am going to go back, Mr. Speaker, to a debate 

that revolved around an amendment to the Department of Agriculture Act which was requested by the 

department in, I believe, the 1962 session of the legislature. It contained a simple amendment giving the 

officials of the department authority to make these surveys, and the opposition at that time made a great 

to-do in opposing this legislation. So I am amazed that they have gone as far as they have, to now go all 

out by introducing legislation, denying local autonomy completely, having no regard to individual 

property rights whatever. This will give them authority to go in with their seven league boots, stride 

across the farmers‟ land, build ditches, construct and say, “We‟re the almighty Lord‟s best; we know 

you don‟t know anything; we‟re going to do it for you”. Treating farmers under a trusteeship much as 

they would treat Indians on an Indian reserve, Mr. Speaker. May I refer to some of the things that were 

said at that time in this legislature about a comparatively very mild amendment to the Department of 

Agriculture Act. I have here in my hand, Mr. Speaker, Hansard Debates and Proceedings, March 22, 

1962, and here are some quotes, most interesting ones. I will go first to the Minister of Agriculture 

himself (Mr. McFarlane) and let us hear what he had to say on that occasion: 

 

I notice that the act  is being amended as the Minister of Agriculture has stated . . . 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1672 

That reference was to me at the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that I am in agreement with much that the member for Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker) 

has said. He has said, and I believe that the farmers in this province today do not look very favourably 

towards this government for some of the actions they have taken in the past and by different 

departments of this government in dealing with the farmers in general. There are a great many farmers 

in the province today who remember the treatment they got from one Crown corporation and I refer to 

the Power corporation and the Department of highways, etc. 

 

And then it goes on: 

 

I would hope before any official from the Department of Agriculture goes on to any farmer‟s land, this 

act  gives him the authority to do so that the first thing that he will have from the farmer is written 

consent and agreement to go on to this land, not the type of practice that was employed by some of 

these other corporations in the past. 

 

He expected we would get permission and get consent but here he now comes in with legislation that 

denies any right whatever to the farmer. He can go in, he can do anything. He can construct, he can take 

land away, he can levy water rates in an arbitrary manner, at least in the minds of the farmers, without 

any say at all, without any local autonomy. He can do all of those things, Mr. Speaker. and he goes on: 

 

The first consideration to serve, I would suggest, that the government give to the farmers in this 

province is that they obtain a gentleman‟s agreement, a written consent and first of all exhibit good 

public relationship between the farmer and the government before anything is done. 

 

Is this legislation an example of good public relationship? If anything is going to make these farmers 

grow in their resistance — there is wide resistance to irrigation — this is the kind of legislation that will 

do it. I am saying that this will retard and put irrigation in Saskatchewan back many, many years. It will 

discourage other farmers in other areas of the province from going into irrigation development. 

Certainly this is a free county and a free people. these people are intelligent. We give them guidance. 

Give them information and they will do the rest, if you can demonstrate that your policies are 

sufficiently meaningful, that their income position will be improved as a result of irrigation. No amount 

of compulsion is going to hasten the development in this regard. 

 

Now, I have a quotation from the hon. member from Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) and he had something 

to say too. He said: 

 

I am leading up to this, Mr. Speaker, this is just the thin edge of the wedge that has been mentioned. I 

am very sorry, I am very, very opposed to the principle of giving the government any right to enter a 

farm or anyone‟s property without the proper permission being given by the owner. 

 

I am going to watch the minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) the member 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1673 

for Gravelbourg, to see how he votes now, to see if he still stands up and defends the rights of the farmer 

to have some say about who is going to walk through his property. 

 

The Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) the hon. member for Melville, what did he have to say? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with other members of the opposition side of the House in raising 

objections to the Bill that is now before us with regard to providing a minister and his workers, his 

department, surveyors, engineers, agrologists, workmen and servants to enter upon any land to 

whomever it belongs, and survey and take levels of the land and take such borings and samples of 

surface or lower levels, ready to study for investigation of irrigation, etc. 

 

I will be glad to see how this hon. member votes on this particular legislation. I am amazed that he 

should now be a party to bringing in legislation that will give power to have access to land, to obtain 

information, etc., and to ride roughshod over the farmer and do things the farmers can do better 

themselves and more democratically. And also, Mr. Speaker, by the exertion of pressure to enforce 

water rates and other compulsory measures thereby to put these farmers in an unfavourable position in 

terms of finding buyers for their land. Under the circumstances they are almost being compelled to sell 

their land to the government and no one else. No wonder we see so much in the estimates for land 

acquisition. The hon. Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) and member from Melville, goes on and 

says this: 

 

It has been pointed out by the previous speaker that this is placing too much power in the minister to 

decide in the first place as to which of these projects necessitates this act  to be . . . 

 

What about the power of the minister now? My heavens, they are not comparable, Mr. Speaker. I jotted 

them down when the legislation was being presented to this House. He not only has destroyed local 

autonomy completely, but he has given himself power to do everything, to set up a trusteeship in which 

local people have no voice for many, many years. I think it is pretty typical of the Premier of this 

province when he can‟t find a viable solution to a problem he proceeds to exert force. Under this 

legislation it establishes an irrigation area by compulsion and it puts farmers under an arbitrary 

trusteeship, like Indians, and third, it gives entry upon land not only for surveys but for construction and 

to do other things associated with irrigation, and to expropriate land too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, for some more quotes, there are a few other members who also had some things to say. I think the 

hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) had some things to say regarding the amendment to the 

Department of Agriculture Act. He said this: 

 

Well, we are trying to bring this legislation up in keeping with the 20th century. Well, if that is the 

thinking of the 20th century, that the government should have the right without consultation with the 

farmer, to walk over his fields, go into his backyard next to his barn, go around all his buildings, and 

say to the farmer, „So what‟. Then I can‟t go along with such thinking. We talked about the old days in 

history, yes, about some of the things that William the Conqueror did. I noted that even in 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1674 

William the Conqueror‟s day in British history there was always an understanding that a man‟s home 

was his castle; even in those days they didn‟t invade a man‟s home. No one dared . . . 

 

I can see him yet, hear him yet, working himself up to a high crescendo . . . 

 

. . . invade a man‟s home or property without a duly sworn search warrant to do it, because they 

respected that man‟s castle. that is where a man would hide away from the world and its problems. 

You would destroy all that because you think you are in keeping with the 20th century outlook of 

things. 

 

And he went on and said a great deal more: 

 

I say that I am not going to prolong this; it isn‟t necessary: it is too wide in its scope; it is giving 

complete authority to the Minister of Agriculture to have anything at any time, or anyone at any time 

run over anybody‟s property without even a rap at the door and asking permission to do so. Such 

sweeping legislation I cannot support. 

 

I ask the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) now, not to support this legislation that is ten 

times more arbitrary in its scope. I would just like to hear how he can build up his justification for it on 

any logical ground. Now, there were other members who had a few nicer things to say — at least in their 

opinion they were nicer — and I can still remember them being hurled at me. Here are some more 

quotes. Another hon. member said: 

 

At present, the Minister of Agriculture . . . 

 

That was under the old act . 

 

. . . has no authority to enter upon the land if the owner objects. 

 

And the member went on. 

 

I suggest this is a jolly good way to keep it. 

 

If the owner objected under the old Agriculture Act and the minister thought that he had some project at 

hand that was in the interests of all the people, then he could make application to the courts of this land 

to decide the question. Why don‟t you go to the courts now? The courts would issue an order as to 

whether or not he could tramp over the farmer‟s land or whether he should not. I would suggest that he 

is trying to bypass and short-circuit the courts of Saskatchewan by bringing in this amendment. Well, if 

we were short-circuiting the courts then we are certainly bypassing them by a wide margin now. 

 

Then he went on: 

 

This gives the Minister of Agriculture permission to send in any of his minions across our land 

without any permission whatever. 

 

Then there was an altercation here. Exception was taken to some of the things that were said and that 

weak watered-down legislation that we proposed in the Department of Agriculture was referred to in 

these terms: 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1675 

It is all part and parcel of the Socialist invasion of the rights and freedoms of human beings. This is an 

infringement on the rights and freedoms of farmers who own land, on our rights and privileges. This is 

part of the Socialist dictatorship. You deny me the right to speak on this, typical of the Socialist 

arrogance that is displayed towards farmers. You would arrogantly march across our land with the 

minions of the Department of Agriculture without even having the courtesy to say you are coming or 

asking our permission. When you have left you will raise our taxes up. 

 

That is another one, and I say to the minister now (Mr. McFarlane) that when you get through with your 

compulsion, you will not only raise taxes on the land you will devalue the land because of the situation 

and the predicament which you are putting these farmers in. But then this speaker wound up, he wound 

up like this: 

 

What you are trying to do is lay the groundwork, take your land samples, survey our fields, lay the 

groundwork for the boundary of the collectivised farms that you are proposing to set up. 

 

So, here we have got compulsion in legislation . . . 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — That is most interesting. Who spoke those 

words? 

 

Mr. Nollet: — It was His Honour, The speaker, and I imagine he would have second thoughts . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Well, I heartily agree with the speaker whoever he was. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — I don‟t think he would let me say these same things now. He wouldn‟t let me call you a 

bunch of collective Communists, and everything else. I don‟t think so. Regarding the other kind of 

legislation you brought in, it would be much more justifiable for me to say that you are hell-bent for 

Communism in these areas. I am not going to say that. I think you are hell-bent for great 

disappointments if you think that you are going to speed up irrigation by this method. 

 

An Hon. Member: —Get . . . brown shirts on. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Compare now, compare this legislation to a simple amendment to the Department of 

Agriculture Act, Mr. Speaker. There is no comparison and I am going to watch with great interest how 

these good defenders of freedom and liberty, these Liberals, that have personified freedom and human 

rights, stand on this legislation they are bringing in. I am in the position now where I am arguing against 

the most arbitrary, unnecessary piece of legislation that was ever introduced in this legislature and you 

cannot justify it on any grounds whatever. It was absolutely unnecessary. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — If you had done your duty 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1676 

when you were the government we wouldn‟t have to do this. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — What can be done? This legislation which is completely compulsory is not only 

enforcing irrigation but it is a big stick method of acquiring the land of the farmer who does not choose 

to irrigate. the farmer is denied any choice whatever; his basic right as a free citizen is denied once the 

trusteeship under this legislation is established. Cost charges are levied against the farmer‟s land without 

regard to his view or the possibility of any benefit being obtained, as a result of the establishment of the 

irrigation. You had better prove your point and convince the farmers first before you start pushing them 

around. This is a fact because commensurate benefits can only be ascertained by actual irrigation 

experience. Without this knowledge the fear of unknown factors still haunt the dry land farmer whether 

he lives within or outside the irrigable area. This factor plus the burden of an arbitrary irrigation cost 

charge will inhibit a land sale to anyone other than the government. This places the farmer in an 

impossible position to bargain for the sale of his land plus the added cost of moving and acquiring land 

at a comparative price elsewhere. This is in a practical sense compulsory expropriation of the farmer‟s 

home and holdings without a shred of justification. Where are the great freedom fighters now, who so 

strongly opposed a mild amendment to the legislature? It is now they who are moving in with seven 

league boots under a Bill to regiment irrigation farmers for the first time in the history of this province. 

 

We are now to have without real justification regimented irrigation development for Saskatchewan. 

Under Socialism? No! Under Thatcher Liberalism? Yes! Yes, they have not only taken legal power to 

invade a man‟s property but to take it unfairly as well. May I now remind the hon. member for Maple 

Creek (Mr. Cameron) of the words he spoke in this legislature in 1962, Volume 22, page 1, of the 

Hansard, when he said: 

 

Well, if that is the thinking of the 20th century that the government should have the right without 

consultation with the farmer, to walk over his field, to go into his backyard, etc. 

 

and he said: 

 

We talked about the old days in history, yes, some of the things that William the Conqueror did. I 

noted that even in William the Conqueror‟s day they would not do these things; they respected a 

man‟s home as his castle. 

 

And now I will assume that the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) to be consistent will 

oppose the new personality that we have in terms of William the Conqueror in the person of Thatcher‟s 

Liberal government. 

 

It is true we do not have William the Conqueror to contend with now, but Thatcher, the Blunderer. It 

seems to me he might have used his super-salesmanship qualifications to better advantage in the field of 

irrigation rather than the strong-arm methods inherent in this legislation. Or is it merely a case of billing 

and cooing to big business abroad while using the big stick on farmers in his own province. 

 

Big cash grants, loans, guarantees and tax subsidies for an 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1677 

outside pulp company by mutual agreement on the one hand, while on the other hand compulsory 

agreement and regimentation of farmers under a government trusteeship for irrigation development. 

 

This approach runs counter to all 20th century concepts of advanced technological progress made in 

successful irrigation farming to date. He will learn that Saskatchewan farmers cannot be led around by 

the nose and made to irrigate. They can be led by providing frank information, explanations and 

appropriate assistance policies to make irrigation attractive and beneficial to them by way of improved 

income. Once the fear of unknown factors is removed by actual experience, irrigation will automatically 

spread to other parts of Saskatchewan as it has done elsewhere. Compulsion will prove to be much more 

costly and will retard rather than expedite irrigation development in our province. this legislation should 

go to the Select Standing Committee of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, so that we can hear the viewpoint 

of the farmers involved. This would be the least that I would ask members opposite to do, to at least give 

the farmers in the area an opportunity to express their viewpoint and their reaction to this kind of 

legislation. 

 

I say again that if you proceed with it you are, indeed, in deep, deep trouble, and you will set irrigation 

development back in this province for at least 25 or 30 years. I will not support the Bill. 

 

Mr. F. Larochelle (Shaunavon): —Could I ask the hon. gentleman a question? This is typical Socialist 

talk as usual, talk one way and act another. I would like to ask him the question: under what authority 

did you put irrigation canals through my property when you were minister in 1956? 

 

Mr. Nollet: — The authority was in the hands of the local Water Users‟ Association and the minister at 

that time, and still doesn‟t have any authority to put any ditches or water across any farmer‟s land. This 

is a typical Liberal question. He prefaced it by saying these are typical Socialist attitudes. Well, if this is 

his view, the hon. member should then stand up and vote against this legislation, if he complains that the 

government hasn‟t any right to go across his land, to construct ditches across his land, etc. I‟m going to 

be watching his reaction to this legislation in view of his question. 

 

Hon. J. M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Could I ask the hon. member a question? 

You quoted the hon. member from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) a moment ago when he spoke in 1962, 

to what act  was he speaking at the time? 

 

Mr. Nollet: — He was speaking in opposition to an amendment to the Department of Agriculture Act 

which would give the minister authority to enter upon land for the purpose of surveying and obtaining 

information necessary to be made available to farmers who wished to irrigate. We had to get in to 

determine the cost of land levelling, the cost of ditches, etc., just for information so that we could give it 

to farmers in the area who expressed an interest in irrigation as to how much their cost would be. This 

was necessary. You can‟t make any agreement with farmers at all unless you have 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1678 

the information available to them to make a decision as to whether they wish to irrigate or not irrigate. 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments I wish to 

make. I want to reiterate what I said in 1962. When I came in, it rather warmed my heart to hear those 

words being repeated because I subscribe to them today, but I must point out that the member from 

Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) is speaking about two entirely different matters. I was interested in his commend 

when asked what were the changes that were proposed in 1961. It said it was to give the minister 

authority to go over a farmer‟s land to make surveys, to test the soil, to see the formation in order that 

they could devise some plan or pattern of an irrigation work — to assess what the costs might be in 

order to get all of the information possible to set up a system of irrigation, which is pretty sweeping, 

which gives him the right to go over every quarter of land, to put his surveyors on, to go into the 

barnyard, the back door. He had a sweeping right to go over every acre of that farmer‟s land, to drive 

around every slough bottom, to tramp through every field, and he didn‟t even have to bid the time of day 

to the farmer. He didn‟t have to at all. 

 

Now, look at the act  here and if this act  was as sweeping as that I would have fought it bitterly, but this 

act  says here — and he conveniently neglected to read this part: 

 

The minister may for the purpose of an irrigation system of works, which means water mains, pipes to 

carry water, ditches, etc., that would carry the water in order to convey the water from point A to point 

B. 

 

That is all, period. He is not interested in tramping over the farmer‟s whole quarter section. He is not 

interested in drilling holes with an auger or some machine to test every 20 acres. It says: 

 

He may acquire the land, or an interest in the land, by an agreement or by an easement, or if the farmer 

does not agree . . . 

 

And thus you can‟t get from A to B to continue on from B to C. 

 

. . . he may go on and dig his ditch, or lay his pipeline, 

 

Now, that is precisely what the minister is empowered to do, nothing more. An amazing thing is that it 

gives exactly the same power that the minister of highways enjoys if he wants to build a highway from 

A to B, and there is one fellow in between who won‟t let them cross his land. He can‟t deny the other 

nine farmers because one farmer says, “No”, so he has the power to build his highway across there. A 

municipality has precisely the same power; an operating railroad, precisely the same power. Under many 

of our Acts, in mineral resources the oil companies have precisely the same power; they are granted 

right of entry. If the farmer refuses right of entry the minister may grant right of entry because you can‟t 

permit one individual to hold up the development which is in the interests of all, or in the community 

good. 

 

This is restricted precisely to that, one operation . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet (Cutknife): — Would the minister read clause five . . . 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1679 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . laying your pipeline and believe me this is as restrictive as you can give any 

power to a minister. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Would you read clause five? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I want to make this distinction. This does not give the minister or any of his officials 

the right to wander over the farmer‟s land. It doesn‟t give him the right to punch holes here and there all 

over the land. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Read clause five. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You made your speech. I am making mine. This does not give him the right to survey 

the land or see whether it is suitable for irrigation. It doesn‟t give him the right to put levels on, to gauge 

the rise and slope of the hills and valleys and the peaks. It doesn‟t give that right . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, clause five . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Oh no, under the sections you are referring to, merely for the construction of the 

irrigation work. It does not give the right to assess whether or not the farmer‟s land can be irrigated, not 

to soil test, not to drill here and there, not to put your machinery on the farmer‟s land except for this one 

particular purpose which is the same as must be granted to highways, to towns, villages, and RMs. It is 

precisely in line with all of these public bodies which must enjoy certain rights in order to accomplish 

these specific things that are spelled out. That is why I can wholeheartedly support this legislation 

because it is a right granted for one specific purpose and that specific purpose only. Your legislation was 

so broad and so wide, and so sweeping they could tramp all over any place they wished under the pretext 

they wanted to come in and survey. That is what we strenuously objected to. If this act  was drafted like 

that one I would be on my feet together with the member from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet), shoulder to 

shoulder opposing this if he says we should be doing it. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the minister a question? After his strong opposition, I want to 

draw this to his attention. It says: 

 

Subject to the regulation, the minister may with respect to a district, by surveyors, engineers, 

agrologists, workmen, and servants, enter upon any land for the purpose of carrying out surveys and 

the planning, construction, operation, and maintenance of an irrigation system and works, and any 

alterations, improvements or extension in respect to the irrigation system or works and the provisions 

of section . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We‟re not in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Is this wide ranging? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — You made your speech. 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1680 

Mr. Nollet: — You‟re in the hole. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! Order! I think these matters can well be discussed in committee. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say something about this Bill and before I sit 

down I want to move an amendment. I will read it to the House so that I can address my remarks to the 

amendment as well as to the motion. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move, seconded by Mr. 

Nollet, to leave out all the words after “That” and add the following words in substitution therefore: 

 

the second reading of the Bill be deferred until the Select Standing Committee on Agriculture has 

inquired into all matters relating to the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation project and in particular 

into its impact on the Broderick Area; and that this committee be authorized for the purposes of this 

inquiry to require the attendance of any person and the production of all relevant papers and 

documents. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have been treated here to a rather singular spectacle. The Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron) has said that the entrance upon land for the purpose of a survey is a more 

severe encroachment upon the rights of the owner than the entrance upon land with bulldozers and earth 

moving equipment and tractors for the purpose of building a ditch. Now, the fact is that the amendment 

which was before the House some years ago and to which he made reference dealt only with the powers 

of the minister to send surveyors on the land for the purpose of taking soil samples and doing surveys. 

And that is the only power that the minister had under the Department of Agriculture Act. The hon. 

member for Shaunavon (Mr. Larochelle) misconceives the situation — I can understand how he got into 

the Liberal party. He only sees part of the picture. He always sees things wrong, sees things backwards. 

The fact of the matter is that it was not the Minister of Agriculture or the provincial government that 

crossed his land with a ditch. It was the Water Users‟ Association that has the powers of expropriation 

and not the minister. 

 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Given by the legislature. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Long ago. And as a matter of fact, the Department of Agriculture has no right under its 

act  to do this. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I was rather struck by the fact that in 1961 the Liberals 

took the attitude that there should be the consent of the farmer before there were any surveys. I notice 

that provision is lacking in the Bill before the House. I was struck by the remarks made by the member 

for Saltcoats (Mr. Snedker) in a previous debate, in 1961, when he suggested that there ought to be 

provision for a decision or an order of the court before there was any encroachment upon the land for 

any purpose. As a matter of fact, the Irrigation District Act says, - and that is the act  which prevails until 

this one is passed — that the secretary may apply as party to a judge of the Court of Queen‟s Bench for 

an order vesting the land in the board. This is the only way that an irrigation district, as it stands today, 

can expropriate land for the purposes of a ditch. As the law stands now it can only be done, Your 

Honour, by first appealing to the court for an 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1681 

order. So, Mr. Speaker, quite literally the words which Your Honour used in 1961 apply to this Bill 

today. This Bill bypasses that provision contained in the Irrigation District Act requiring that an 

application be made to the court before there can be any expropriation. So, the hon. member from Maple 

Creek (Mr. Cameron), if he would just the member for Shellbrook (Mr. Cuelenaere) to explain to him 

what the issues are, will see that he is making a laughing stock of himself when he says, “Where I would 

object most strongly to anybody going to make a soil survey or sampling of the soil, to go on with 

transits and other surveying instruments, that is a severe encroachment. But bring on your bulldozers 

and your earth movers and your le Tourneaus. That‟s no encroachment on the man‟s land; after all that‟s 

only to build a ditch across it”. When the surveyor leaves he leaves no damage of any permanent nature 

but when the ditch is built the man has suffered many damages. 

 

An Hon. Member:  He gets paid. 

 

Mr. Walker: — He has suffered many damages. As a matter of fact, there is no provision anywhere 

which allows the surveyor to move the man‟s house if it‟s in the way of his survey. But under this act , 

that‟s being proposed now, if his house is in the way it can be simply shunted aside and the ditch put 

right through the living room. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — that would sure louse up the TV. 

 

Mr. Walker: — As a matter of fact, the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) with his smart 

perception of what is going on in this House can explain his peculiar attitude toward these two Bills. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You could have an indoor swimming pool. 

 

Mr. Walker: — If he is objective and realistic and understands what this House is doing, Mr. Speaker, 

he would regard the 1961 amendments as picayune and trifling and of no consequence as compared with 

this act . Now, I don‟t know if I made it clear but the act  which presently applies will permit the 

department or the Irrigation District to go on the land only after obtaining a court order. I read the 

section from the Irrigation District Act. This act  applies the formula used by the Department of 

Highways. The Department of Highways merely has to draw up a plan and register it in the Land Titles 

Office and then the land or the easement is henceforth the property of the department, henceforth the 

property of the Irrigation District. There is no comparison between the two Bills. This Bill uses the 

harshest, most abrupt, most direct method of expropriating; whereas the irrigation District Act was one 

of the few Acts which provided that there had to be a court order before the land could be taken, could 

be expropriated or used. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it perfectly clear here, on my own behalf at least, that I welcome and 

endorse any practical proposal for improving the food production capacity of our agricultural land. We 

on this side of the House welcomed the construction of the South Saskatchewan River project. We on 

this side 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1682 

of the House urged it in season and out of season and we were only able to get it in Saskatchewan after 

we got a Liberal government out of office in this province and got the one out of office in Ottawa, so 

that nobody needs to say that we on this side of the House are in any way averse to progress. We on this 

side of the House promoted the idea, fought for it, and it was only after we got Jimmy Gardiner out of 

office in Ottawa that we were able to get something done about it. As far as we are concerned in 

Saskatchewan no one on that side of the House can say that we are opposed to the progress that is 

possible under this project. But on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we like to consider that while we 

are in favour of progress we are not in favour of trampling upon the rights of people who have no other 

means of defending themselves. We on this side of the House say that progress must come in harmony 

with protection for the rights of individuals. We on this side of the House will not willingly accept the 

arbitrary and the dictatorial provisions in the present act . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is obvious that if you are to have irrigation you can‟t just build ditches and 

then bring a bunch of Egyptian coolies in and turn them loose and tell them to irrigate. If we are going to 

irrigate this land, Mr. Speaker, we are going to have it irrigated by free farmers, free to make choices of 

their own volition, free to pursue their own self-interest in this matter. I regret the paternalistic attitude 

which the department now takes with reference to this project. The department can be wrong and can be 

very wrong as evidenced by the experience in other places. For example, I have here a clipping from the 

Family Herald of October 14, 1965, which refers to Alberta‟s dilemma and the opening sentence says: 

 

Alberta which pioneered the use of irrigation in this country is now trying to extricate itself from the 

mire left by unequal basis of public funds and government intervention. 

 

It goes on: 

 

For sometime now a government appointed policy committee has been holding meetings with 

irrigational officials, advisory committees, farmer boards, and trustees, in an effort to find a way to get 

out from under the old policies and establish a program which would be more equitable both to the 

farmers and to the irrigation districts and the taxpayers in general. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who should be consulted first off in any proposals to irrigate ought to be the 

people on the land themselves. The previous government took great pains to consult with the people on 

the land. the previous government did not single out a little area and say, “You are going to have 

irrigation thrust down your throats whether you like it or not.” The previous government recognized that 

there was some 400,000 or 500,000 acres of irrigable land within the range of the South Saskatchewan 

dam. This was, I understand, sometime after the agreement cut down to 300,000 or 350,000 acres, but 

that there was at least five or six or seven times as much land subject to irrigation, capable of being 

irrigated economically within the range of the South Saskatchewan dam. The previous government 

engaged in promotion work, in extension work, amongst farmers in most of these area, with the idea that 

in at least one 50,000 acre area it would be possible to find farmers who would find the government‟s 

policy sufficiently acceptable, that they would accept willingly the government‟s policy for irrigation. 

The 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1683 

previous government always made it clear that it had no notion of thrusting irrigation down the throat of 

any particular designed group but rather it was going to be a matter of local choice. This was made clear 

over and over again. For the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) and the Premier to do as they have 

done on occasions in the past, to say that the farmers of Broderick were singled out by the previous 

government on the 25th of July, 1958, at the time of the signing of the agreement for irrigation, was to 

misrepresent the facts. The previous government did not single out the farmers of the Broderick area or 

of any of the other irrigable areas for irrigation by entering into this agreement. The previous 

government believed that its policies would have found themselves acceptable to enough people in some 

of these irrigable areas so that they would accept irrigation. This is why the extension program was 

carried on so actively during those years and in so many different alternative areas during those years. 

 

I don‟t want to try to say that the present government is wrong in trying to induce farmers to irrigate 

50,000 acres. I don‟t say this at all. What I say is that if the policies of this government are arousing so 

much opposition, so much hostility on the part of the people on the land, then those policies should be 

looked at. They should be re-examined and the government should be prepared to reassess its policies in 

the light of that. So, Mr. Speaker, I was rather struck by the fact that on February 8, the day before the 

session commenced, I received a letter and I think other members did too, which I would like to place on 

record, from the president of the irrigation Investigation group at Outlook. The letter reads: 

 

Robert Walker, MLA, 

Legislative Building 

Regina, Saskatchewan. 

 

We understand that legislation pertaining to irrigation will be discussed in this session of parliament. 

We respectfully request that you consider our views on these matters, and have enclosed articles 

bearing on the economics of irrigation. 

 

We are not against the principles of irrigation. We are not interested in irrigating our farms because we 

feel that irrigation in the Broderick area may not be economically feasible under present steel costs 

and uncertain market conditions. We request that the government abide by the Saskatchewan Irrigation 

Act, 1953, a statute that was law before the agreement was made to irrigate our lands. This agreement 

was made without consulting the farmers concerned. This act  requires a two-thirds majority vote 

before any canals can be placed on our property. This act  is valid and protects our property rights. 

Any infringement of these rights will concern all the farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have repeatedly asked the government for a vote and our municipal council has sent a resolution to 

the Department of Agriculture to this effect. We feel that irrigation canals are not public utilities. Why 

should we be compelled to accept them, pay water rates and adopt farming practices we feel to be 

risky and possibly no more profitable than our present dry land operations without a vote on the issue? 

We also feel that the government‟s land policy is not equitable with respect to land values 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1684 

and severance compensation. We have been here for two generations. Had we preferred to farm in 

another area we would have moved before now. 

 

Earl R. Duncan, 

President. 

 

(Signed on behalf of the Irrigation Investigation Group) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, apart altogether from who turned the first sod in this matter or who first committed 

this province to irrigate 50,000 acres that is not the issue at all. Why are these farmers so adamant? What 

can be done by the Department of Agriculture to make irrigation acceptable to them? How can the 

Department of Agriculture establish communication with them in order to find out how to remedy their 

policies to make irrigation more acceptable? I think there is only one way and that is to establish fresh 

lines of communication between the Department of Agriculture and the farmers. Furthermore, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that the members of this legislature are not as well acquainted and as familiar with the 

problems connected with irrigation as are those farmers who have been concerned about this now for 

several years. I think it will be an excellent thing for the members of this legislature to have an 

opportunity to hear from them at first hand what their problems are, what their views are, what their 

proposals are to further this project. I think they will recognize — certainly they tell me this — they 

recognize that they can‟t stand in the way of irrigation. They can‟t prevent irrigation in Saskatchewan. 

They don‟t want to but what they do want is to see an irrigation policy implemented under policies 

which are practical, which are viable, which will make it possible for them to make a living. So often the 

experience in irrigation districts has been that the first generation to go on the land simply invest their 

lives without any return, and then the irrigation project becomes productive, perhaps, a generation later. 

These folks think that there is some way of avoiding these hardships and they would like to have an 

opportunity to present their case to this legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to cash any blame on the government for having denied them this 

opportunity for so long. I don‟t want to leave any suggestion that the motives of the minister in 

introducing this Bill five or six weeks ago and letting it stand on the Order Paper until this late date, for 

the deliberate purpose of preventing these farmers from coming and presenting their views, I don‟t say 

that, but I do say that the minister, if he had wished to hear from these farmers and if he had wished you 

and me to hear from the, could have allowed my motion to pass without bringing this Bill thereby 

crowding it off the Order paper as he did five or six weeks ago. The government could have allowed this 

legislature to express its views on this question of public consultation. But for some reason this 

government has brazenly and arrogantly turned its back on farmers. It has said we don‟t want to hear 

from these farmers. They may say something unpleasant. They may say something to crack the stucco 

image of the Premier. Well, whatever explanation is there for the government‟s failure to welcome these 

people to a committee of this House to hear them? So having brought the Bill down four or five or six 

weeks ago, thereby crowding the resolution off the Order Paper and then sitting on the Bill until 

practically the last item of business on the Order Paper, the government has made it very difficult for the 

members of the legislature to have the benefit of hearing from these farmers. Are you so afraid of what 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1685 

these farmers might say that you don‟t want to hear from them? Are you so afraid of public 

consultations that you clamp down and shut off any opportunity from the citizens to be heard on this 

important matter? I say, Mr. Speaker, that it isn‟t just the farmers of the Broderick area who feel a keen 

sense of resentment over this denial of their rights of access to the foot of the throne. It is everybody 

who is concerned about civil liberty and human rights who will see this denial and who will judge this 

government accordingly. But it is not too late. It‟s not too late yet for the minister, and the government 

to accept this motion. So far as I am concerned I don‟t think it would take very long for those farmers to 

come in here and tell their story, present their case, but I think it might take a good deal longer for the 

government to explain its policies to the committee. It might take a good deal longer for the government 

to satisfy the committee that its policies are the right policies. 

 

The press up to now have been limited to those handouts which the minister (Mr. McFarlane) makes 

periodically, those self-serving statements which he issues trying to justify the government and the only 

very brief and occasional replies that are printed by the local farmers there. There is no opportunity to 

have an exchange or contest of ideas in a public forum where the public can hear the arguments and 

make its own judgment as to their merits. This is what is needed. I say, Mr. Speaker, that if the minister 

doesn‟t take advantage of every opportunity to acquaint himself with the grassroots problems of 

irrigation, to afford the government the benefit of ideas which come from the men of the soil 

themselves, and this irrigation project takes 50 years to get on its feet — as it very well might — the 

blindness and the short-sightedness of this government in refusing to consult with the farmers, refusing 

to lay its policies before some kind of an independent tribunal will be the reason for that failure. I put 

this forward in all sincerity to the minister that it wouldn‟t be a bad idea right now to accept the idea of 

consultation between the legislature and these farmers because it is going to involve, year after year, 

adjusting the statutes, and adjusting the policies of the government to meet their problems. 

 

I accept the fact that we are pioneering a new area in this province and that there will be new problems 

which cannot possibly occur to the minister or to any of them at this stage and as the years go on. I think 

it would be a healthy thing if he would right now start the policy of consultation, because when we are 

dealing with municipal affairs, when we are dealing with social aid, when we are dealing with 

education, when we are dealing with all the other aspects of provincial government policy, we are all 

more or less expert in these fields because we are all more or less acquainted with the functioning of 

local government and the administration of government programs. But so far as irrigation is concerned 

many of those problems will be unique. They will be of knowledge only to members who are well 

acquainted with the farmers of that area, who see the problems at first hand. Other members of the 

legislature will have no opportunity at first hand to learn of those local problems. I think that it would be 

highly statesmanlike on the part of the minister (Mr. McFarlane) now to accept the principle that there 

should every year be consultation between an interested committee of the legislature and the farmers 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the government will continue to try to extricate itself from this issue by saying 

that, “Oh well, the whole thing was launched by the previous government”. I say again, I made no 

apologies on behalf of the previous government for 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1686 

having entered into an agreement to provide the works to irrigate 50,000 acres in this province, but I say 

that the previous government made no decision that it had to be this or that particular 50,000 acres. I 

think the previous government could have laid down policies which would have been sufficiently 

attractive, if not to the farmers of the Broderick area, to the farmers in some other 300,000 irrigable 

acres so that they would have embraced this idea of irrigation and would have developed it accordingly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I would beg leave of the assembly to move the foregoing amendment. 

 

Hon. J. M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of entering 

into the debate but after listening to the diatribe that we were treated to this afternoon by the member 

from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) and by the member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) it is very difficult to refrain 

from doing so. 

 

The hon. member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) said that the 50,000 acres that had to be irrigated was not 

an issue. Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that it is the very issue, the fact that 50,000 acres must be 

irrigated under the terms of the contract. The hon. member says it doesn‟t say what 50,000 acres but it 

does say 50,000 acres. If there are other 50,000 acres to be irrigated elsewhere, why doesn‟t he come 

forward and tell us where they are? Why doesn‟t he come forward and say that in some other area the 

people there would be satisfied? What guarantee is there that there would not be equal dissatisfaction no 

matter where you went? 

 

Now, the recommendations of the engineers, the recommendations of the people that are in charge of 

this work, recommend that this is the 50,000 acres that can be irrigated most economically, most rapidly, 

and most effectively. So it is only natural that this is the area that has been chosen. If some other area 

had been chosen, I could venture to say that probably the same situation would arise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he says, the hon. member says this, that we are afraid to listen to what the farmers have to 

say. Mr. Speaker, I know that the farmers in the areas have been contacted. I know that the Minister of 

Agriculture, the predecessor to the present Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McDonald), met with the 

farmers. Secondly, we, the cabinet, have met with the farmers from the Broderick district. There were at 

least 20 of them who came to Regina with their organization their president and their spokesman and we 

met with these people. They came and we were very pleased to listen to them and I think, I am quite 

satisfied, that when they left many of them were satisfied that it wasn‟t the fault of this government that 

they were in the predicament that they are in but the fault of the men, some of whom now sit across the 

say. Mr. Speaker, they talk now about protecting the interests of the farmer. What were they doing back 

in 1959 when they were signing this agreement to protect the interests of the farmer? What steps were 

they taking to put into the agreement that there would be some safeguard, that if farmers objected it 

would not be necessary to proceed? Why didn‟t they provide that we would have to irrigate 50,000 acres 

provided the farmers consented. Not at all. Mr. Speaker, this is what the contract says and it‟s very, very 

plain. It says: 

 

Before the expiration of one year from the day on which 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1687 

the reservoir is filled to minimum irrigation level as determined by the minister or of three years from 

the date of the transfer of the reservoir to Saskatchewan whichever is the earlier, complete 

construction of the irrigation works to the extent necessary to provide full irrigation to not less than 

50,000 acres of land. 

 

It says that very specifically. And then what does it go on to say? It says: 

 

Saskatchewan assumes responsibility . . . 

 

And this is all we are doing now, Mr. Speaker. It was their contract. It was the Douglas-Diefenbaker 

contract that says “Saskatchewan will assume responsibility for and undertake the construction of 

operation and maintenance as part of the project”. Now, because the government now wants to assume 

the responsibility that was provided for, that was contracted for, in a solemn agreement between two 

provinces, because we are now trying to assume that responsibility and carry out that responsibility, we 

have to listen to such remarks as were made across the way, remarks to the effect that we are now being 

unfair to a group of farmers, that we are not taking the proper steps. They sat here, Mr. Speaker, on this 

side from 1958 when this was done until 1963, and they did not do a single, solitary thing to decide in 

what area this irrigation was going to take place. They did absolutely nothing. Now that this government 

is trying to assume the responsibility provided for in a contract between the province of Saskatchewan 

and the Dominion of Canada we have to listen to this type of nonsense. I tell you when the hon. member 

from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) talked about unrestricted nonsense a few minutes ago and accused us of this, 

I am going to say that he was the one who was treating us to just that very kind of nonsense because he 

was asking us not to assume the responsibility which is provided for by this agreement. Then it goes on 

to say: 

 

The irrigation work will be operated and maintained and the cost thereof defrayed pursuant to 

arrangements to be made by Saskatchewan. 

 

And throughout this entire clause, throughout this entire section it goes on to point out that 

Saskatchewan will bear the full cost of constructing the irrigation works and will purchase — this is 

what it says — “will purchase, acquire and provide all the land required for the purpose thereof”. They 

contracted that Saskatchewan will purchase, acquire — the clause said so — that we would be required 

to acquire this land. And because, Mr. Speaker, we are now taking the only steps available after we tried 

last year to acquire the land by purchase, we have acquired, the government or Department of 

Agriculture has acquired quite a large tract of this land, but, Mr. Speaker, we have gone out and tried to 

do it on a voluntary basis. But because it has become necessary in order to carry out the terms of this 

contract to take this type of step, the opposition now becomes the great champions of the very people 

that they sacrificed back in 1958. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that is so. And then they talk about the methods that 

were going to be followed. Mr. Speaker, there is no comparison between section II and now section II of 

the Department of Agriculture Act. This section 8(a) as it was then in 1962 (it‟s now 6 and 11 under the 

new consolidation) gives complete wide powers not for any specific area or a specific purpose. It says 

that for the purpose of irrigation and drainage they could enter upon the land. In adopting this section, 

the present act  very carefully, Mr. Speaker, limits its purpose only to the works and when it 



 

April 1, 1966 

 

1688 

adopts section 11, it makes this change. It provides, section five provides, that subject to the regulations 

the minister may, with respect to a district, plan, construct and so on, the works. “(c) says, “by 

surveyors, engineers, agrologists, workmen and servants enter upon the land” and so forth and it goes on 

to say, “and maintenance of an irrigation system and work and any alterations, improvements, or 

extension in respect of the irrigation system or works”. Now, in other words, it particularly restricts the 

right to enter for the purpose “of the irrigation system and works” and not to go on the land itself other 

than what is necessary to carry out the obligations under the agreement. That‟s all it says. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and I am going to conclude, I suggest that the proposed amendment is just another 

delay. It‟s attempting to stall this matter. They know that it is now very urgent that this matter be 

proceeded with. This is only the second session that this government has had control of this matter. It‟s 

less than two years since this government was elected, and we were faced with the responsibility of 

carrying out the terms of this agreement. We had no opportunity of doing it a year ago. It was felt that 

we would department everything at that time to acquire the land on a voluntary basis; and now we are 

compelled, because of an agreement entered into, to proceed in this way. I suggest that this amendment 

should be defeated, that we should proceed with the works in the proper way and as was agreed upon by 

solemn agreement. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this amendment should be defeated and that the Bill 

should be read for the second time. 

 

The assembly recessed at 5:30 p.m. until 7:30 p.m. o‟clock. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, as we rose for recess we were debating the 

amendment to the motion for second reading of the Bill for irrigation, and at this time I would beg leave 

of the assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

On the motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart, the assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 

 


