



















































Hansard: April 02, 1966


1689 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

40th Day 

 

Saturday, April 2, 1966 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m., 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTION RE SEED GRAIN SUPPLIER 
 

Mr.. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr.. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would like to ask the Premier if any action has been taken yet to advise the municipalities that the 

government will implement the provisions of the Seed Grain Supplier. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — No. 

 

Mr.. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — As a supplementary question could I ask if this will be done in the near 

future. 

 

Mr.. Thatcher: — You can ask. 

 

QUESTION RE RETURN NO. 45 
 

Mr.. Gordon Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr.. Speaker, before Orders of the Day are proceeded with 

I wonder if I could direct a question to the government with respect to Order for Return No. 45 from 

February 22, 1965, when we may expect this to be forthcoming? 

 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — We will take it up with the Provincial Secretary 

and have him look into it. 

 

THIRD READING 
 

Hon. J. McIsaac (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved third treading of Bill No. 89 — An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Municipal Advisory Commission Act. 

 

Mr.. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr.. Speaker, I regret deeply that I was not here to speak on this 

Bill on second reading regarding principle, but I would like to say just a few things regarding the 

contents of the Bill and put on the record just a few words of tribute to the Municipal Advisory 

Commission, if I may. 

 

I note regarding the contents of the Bill that the word “shall” has been changed to “may”, I’m not 

opposed to the change. I don’t think it is necessary that we tell the government that they must have a 

Municipal Advisory Commission, but I think that the government has made a mistake in disposing of 

the Municipal Advisory Commission. Not that given sufficient and proper staff the Municipal Road 

Assistance Authority isn’t capable of handling the work that is to be done. I do think that an experienced 

and non-committed outside group dealing with matters which are sometimes controversial regarding 

different municipalities, and between the government and municipalities, is often invaluable. 

 

I think we have this group in the Municipal Advisory 



 

April 2, 1966 

 

 

 

1690 

Commission. We had a group who have a distinguished record of work in municipal school affairs, 

especially in regard to Dean Cronkite, Dr. Charles Fisher, Mr.. Norman McGillvray and Mr.. Tom 

Garvin, who served the province long and well. I think the grid roads were drawn up by them, and they 

worked with the municipalities in the location of these roads. They stand as a monument to their work. 

In regard to the work that was done as a Boundary Commission in which they worked with Mr.. Ab. 

Douglas, Mr.. Les. Johnston, Mr.. Vic. Van Allen, I don’t think they have been as much appreciated, but 

their work has been utilized to a good extent by the school units; and I think it may be used more yet. I 

notice the words of the Premier in this regard. I think there is some interest still in municipal 

reorganization. I have noticed also the words of the President of the SARM in his opening address to the 

recent convention. I think there is still a good deal of interest in municipal reorganization and possibly, 

no, it is quite probable, entirely probable, in the years ahead there will be more interest in this sort of 

thing and the work of this commission may yet come into its own. 

 

Now possibly some of the things I have said here are not entirely in regard to the contents of the Bill, but 

thank you, Mr.. Speaker, very much, and I thank the House for their indulgence in this matter. I just 

wanted to go on record as appreciating what these men have done for the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

On the motion of the Hon. Mr.. Steuart, the Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o’clock p.m. 


