



















































Hansard: March 10, 1966


1005 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

23rd Day 

 

Thursday, March 10, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to draw to your attention a 

fine group of students in the east gallery; they are from the Kinistino High School. They drove in this 

morning, 200 miles, and they are visiting in the city today and will spend the rest of the day visiting 

around the buildings. As this is Education Week, which I have pointed out on previous occasions, I am 

sure that this trip will make a great contribution to their education. I hope that the house will be on good 

behavior while they are here. I want to point out also that their teachers are Mr. Buck and Mr. Carlson. 

Their bus drivers are Mr. Briter and Mr. Thorson, and I also want to wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, may I draw to your attention at this time that 

there is another class today from Hugh Cairns School in Saskatoon. They are in the west gallery. I would 

like to welcome them to this assembly and I know the members would want to join in wishing them a 

very happy day and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): — I also would like to call the attention of the members to a 

very fine group from Athabasca School. I think there are 45 students and I believe I see their principal, 

Mr. McDonald, with them. We would like to thank all teachers who bring their students to the 

legislature. We hope they will enjoy themselves. We hope they will find it interesting and profitable. I 

know you will all join with me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of 

the house to a group of really fine students from the greatest city in the province, Prince Albert. They 

attend St. Anne's Separate School and they are accompanied by their teacher, Sister Valentine. I would 

like to welcome them to Regina. I hope they have a very pleasant day and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — I would like to join with the member from Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) 

in welcoming these students from St. Anne's School. There is one face in there that I am quite 

accustomed to seeing from time to time, smiling down on the Liberal members here, so 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1006 

I hope she enjoys herself along with her comrades up there. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to call the attention of all hon. 

members to a group of students who are in the west gallery from the Kitchener School in Regina. They 

are a large group, some 55 to 57 of them. They are here as part of their course of studies, being led by 

their teachers, Mrs. Gary and Mr. Secure, and I am sure that all of us would want to join in wishing them 

an enjoyable and instructive afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, want to join with the other two Regina MLAs 

in welcoming our local schools, the Athabasca School and the Kitchener School. I had the privilege of 

speaking at the Athabasca School graduation last year. I also want to welcome the Saskatoon School and 

Prince Albert School students. Of course, the member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) has again invited me 

to welcome the Kinistino High School and I do so, as I did yesterday with the group from Yellow Creek. 

I hope they, and even those from Saskatoon, will take time out as others from other cities to see the fine 

sights in the city of Regina. We hope their visit here will be most fruitful to them and some day they 

may, too, be legislators as we have the privilege of being. May you have a good trip home and an 

enjoyable stay. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

REPORT ON SALE OF SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, last year 

the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp), I understand, was able to provide before the Committee on 

Estimates, information with regard to the distribution of the general formula grants to school units and to 

towns and cities outside the school units. I ask the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) when it will be 

possible for him to distribute similar information with respect to the grants this year. 

 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — I will as soon as possible. I wouldn't like to say the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1007 

date, we have been rather busy, but I say as soon as possible I can give you those again. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I take it they will be available prior to the 

estimates being considered. 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I would hope so. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

MOTION RE CONSTITUTION OF CANADA 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West) moved, seconded by Mr. Walker: 

 

That this Assembly: 

 

(1) Expresses its approval of the principle of providing for the amendment in Canada of the 
Constitution of Canada; 

 

(2) Expresses its opinion that the provisions in that respect contained in the White Paper issued by the 
Federal Government entitled "An Act to Provide for the Amendment in Canada of the Constitution 

of Canada" are unacceptable; and 

 

(3) Expresses the opinion that provision to amend the Constitution of Canada should not be finally 
determined without the widest possible public consultation and debate so as to permit the opinions 

of all interested groups and individuals to be solicited and obtained. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a motion dealing with the Constitution of Canada, and as you will see from 

the way that it is phrased on the Order Paper, the motion is in three parts. It first asks the assembly to 

express its approval of the principle of providing for the amendment in Canada of the Constitution of 

Canada. It then asks the assembly to express its opinion that the provisions in that respect (i.e. for the 

amendment of the Constitution of Canada) contained in the White Paper issued by the federal 

government and entitled "An Act to Provide for the Amendment in Canada of the Constitution of 

Canada: are unacceptable. Thirdly, it asks the house to express the opinion that provision to amend the 

Constitution of Canada should not be finally determined without the widest possible public consultation 

and debate, so as to permit the opinions of all interested groups and individuals to be solicited and 

obtained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will be recalled that we had a similar debate in the house last year which surrounded the 

White Paper issued by the federal government last year, a White Paper in a little gray book, issued by 

the Hon. G. Favreau, Minister of Justice as he then was, and in which there is outlined a proposal for the 

amendment of the Constitution of Canada which has come to be known popularly as the Fulton-Favreau 

formula. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to express some views on the three headings which are set out in the resolution. 

Dealing first, Mr. Speaker, with the first proposition asking the assembly to express its approval in 

principle of the principle of providing for the amendment in Canada of the Constitution of Canada, I 

believe that this proposition will be noncontroversial. I think that with the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1008 

general idea that it would be desirable to arrive at a way whereby the Canadian Constitution could be 

amended in Canada there will be no quarrel. The procedure of using the Imperial Parliament is one 

which appears to rankle the pride of some Canadians. I agree that one of the necessary trappings of 

sovereignty is the ability to amend our Constitution here in Canada. When I use the phrase trappings of 

sovereignty I don't mean to use it in any derogatory sense. The sense of sovereignty, of governing 

themselves, which people may have, is made up of many items, many things, tangible and intangible. 

And we have seen in recent years how some things which are intangible, such as a national flag, can 

indeed stir the minds and hearts of substantial numbers of Canadians. So that I would like to see a way 

whereby we could amend our Constitution in Canada, I would like to find an alternative way to amend 

the Constitution — alternative to the present method of governing through the Parliament at 

Westminster. 

 

However, I think it should be pointed out in the clearest possible terms that the Imperial Parliament 

exercises absolutely no discretion with respect to amendment to the Canadian Constitution. Accordingly 

the arrangement whereby amendments are confirmed by the Imperial Parliament does not in any 

practical sense represent a derogation from Canadian sovereignty. The changing of the BNA Act to 

provide that it could be amended in Canada will not make us anymore sovereign as a nation than we are 

now. The Imperial Parliament has since 1926, perhaps, and certainly since the Statute of Westminster in 

1931, acted simply as a legislative trustee, if I may use the words of Mr. Ivan C. Rand, the former Judge 

of the Supreme Court of Canada, and formerly Dean of Law at the University of Western Ontario. 

 

The Imperial Parliament has made it clear that it will act only to confirm a request by the Parliament of 

Canada in the exact and precise terms of the request. In earlier years these requests used to be changed 

as to format in order to conform with the rules followed by the legislative draftsmen at the Parliament at 

Westminster, but in latter years because of some more felicity in draftsmanship in Canada, so as to make 

the amendments comply with the drafting rules which are normally followed in the Imperial Parliament, 

and because of the fact that the Imperial Parliament wanted to be particularly scrupulous, the 

amendments have gone through in the precise words passed by the Parliament of Canada. 

 

Accordingly, while it would be, as I have mentioned earlier, the completion of another symbol of our 

nationhood to arrive at an amending formula which would not involve the Imperial Parliament, it is of 

no real or practical significance in expanding the liberty or sovereignty of Canadians. The patriation of 

the Canadian Constitution will be a symbolic gesture. I do not suggest it will not be important as a 

symbol, but it will be no more than that. I think then, Mr. Speaker, that there will be general agreement 

with proposition number one, asking this assembly to express its approval of the principle of providing 

for the amendment in Canada of the Constitution of Canada. 

 

Propositions two and three are somewhat more controversial. I would like to turn to proposition three, 

which asks this assembly to express the opinion that provision to amend the Constitution should not be 

finally determined without the widest possible consultation. Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that this 

proposition was one which would not have been controversial. I would have thought that there would be 

general agreement that the Constitution of a country is something which ought not to be determined in 

secret. There is, I think, a sense in which one can 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1009 

say that a Constitution of a country belongs to the citizens of that country. Ideally it ought not to be a 

product of any bargaining between governments but ought to be something which evolves from the will 

of the governed. 

 

The Constitution of the country is the most basic legal document governing the lives of the citizens of 

that country, and accordingly, the terms of our Constitution are a matter of vital concern to all citizens of 

Canada whether they realize it or not. The terms are not something which should concern only lawyers, 

or only Attorneys General, or only Premiers, or only members of parliament, or members of legislatures, 

but rather all the people, because again, whether or not they appreciate it, the terms of the Constitution 

will have far-reaching consequences for people in every walk of life. And because this is true, I submit 

that no effort should be spared in obtaining the views of all interested and knowledgeable people in 

arriving at those terms. Nor should effort be spared in acquainting all segments of the public with the 

concept and framework of the constitutional document. Accordingly, I take the view that the 

Constitution of Canada should be subject to study by the House of Commons, by the Senate, and 

through some device which will enable public hearings to be held all across Canada, and a report on 

such hearings made to parliament and to the legislatures. 

 

I don't think it is enough for a committee of the House of Commons or a committee of the Senate to 

study the matter. However, I think it would certainly be a useful start if a Commons committee, or a 

Senate committee were to give the various proposals for amending the Canadian Constitution a thorough 

study and hold hearings, and hold them all across Canada. Certainly we have had many precedents of 

Senate hearings which have been public in the sense that briefs by interested parties have been submitted 

to the Senate. And I see no reason why a Senate committee could not go from coast to coast in Canada if 

Royal Commissions of various kinds can go to the farthermost corners of Canada in order to seek out 

opinions on banking, or tariffs, or bilingualism, and biculturism or some of the many other subjects 

which have come under study by Royal Commissions. I see no reason why a matter of equal or greater 

importance should not similarly be the subject of public hearings from coast to coast. It may be argued 

that the Constitution of Canada is fundamentally too complicated a subject to be suitable for public 

hearings, but when one thinks of some of the things which have been studied by Royal Commissions: 

banking, which is not a simple subject; tariffs, which are not something which are dealt with from day to 

day by the ordinary citizen; patents and trade marks than which there can hardly be a more complicated 

area, I think it will be seen that the argument that citizens across Canada could not, because of the 

technical nature of the subject, make useful contributions to a study of Canada's Constitution, is a faulty 

argument. 

 

Certainly if there is any subject on which it is more important that a consensus of the views of Canadian 

citizens be sought, any subject more important than the Constitution of our country, I am unable to call it 

to mind. The Constitution will guide the future of this country, of ourselves and of our children, for 

decades and presumably centuries and accordingly it deserves our closest and most earnest scrutiny. The 

idea that there ought to be widespread public hearings was advanced very early in the game by 

influential groups at the time of the constitutional discussions which started the present series of 

discussions: the ones which were held in Ottawa in 1960 and 1961 when the Hon. Davie Fulton was 

Minister of Justice. At that time the Association of 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1010 

Canadian Law Teachers was particularly forthright in urging that a Constitution was something which 

ought not to be arrived at in secret but ought to be something which is arrived at after the widest possible 

consultation with the people who will be governed by it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since we considered this last year the need for a public consultation has become all the 

more obvious because it now seems clear that the basis which was put forward a year ago, called the 

Fulton-Favreau formula, has become unstuck. And it has become unstuck because it did not effectively 

present an acceptable model for a Constitution of Canada in the eyes of the public. It is clear that the 

Fulton-Favreau formula was not fully understood and in order to reinforce that statement I would like to 

quote from the Montreal Star of January 28, 1966, and I am quoting from the text of a letter of Premier 

John Lesage of Quebec to the Prime Minister of Canada in which, after first indicating that many events 

had occurred since the formula was elaborated, he goes on to say the following: 

 

For instance I personally am struck by the fact that as early as last spring . . . 

 

that would be the spring of 1965 

 

. . . the formula was not being interpreted everywhere in the same way. This I had always assumed 

that, as regards the amendment of legislative powers, any diminution of provincial power required 

unanimity, whereas any increase of such power called for the concurrence of only two-thirds of the 

provinces representing one-half of the population. 

 

I thought that an interesting comment because I can recall preparing some remarks last year to address to 

this house in a similar debate and this very question occurred to me, "What consent would be necessary 

in order to transfer the administration of Indian or Eskimo affairs to provinces?" I read the document 

which was distributed to us, and I reached the conclusion that I didn't know whether or not unanimity 

would be necessary. I then felt that my doubts must have come from an inadequate study of the 

document, and that if I had given it additional attention my doubts would have been resolved. I now see 

that I was not alone in this, in that Premier Lesage says that there is a difference of opinion as to how 

this provision ought to be interpreted. 

 

I think also that it is fair to say that there is a degree of uneasiness in Canada because of the rigidity of 

the Fulton-Favreau formula. And because of the fact that the Fulton-Favreau formula is not interpreted 

the same way everywhere and because of the fact that there is a growing sense of uneasiness about the 

adequacy of the formula as a Constitution for Canada, I submit that the need for the widest possible 

public consultation and debate is greater now than it was heretofore. 

 

Certainly if I am right in thinking that the Fulton-Favreau formula has become unstuck, and if I am right 

in thinking that Canadians would like to find a way to amend their Constitution in Canada, then we must 

seek some other way in which to find a formula which will be generally acceptable to Canadians. I know 

of no other way which is likely to be met with more success and met with better results than a way 

which would involve the widest possible consultation and debate. I, therefore, will be inviting the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1011 

house to express its opinion in favor of such consultation and debate, and I doubt whether there will be 

any substantial disagreement with the point of view which I expressed, Mr. Speaker, in that regard. Any 

disagreement will, I think, be a matter of degree rather than of substance. 

 

I turn now to the second part of the motion which invites the assembly to express its opinion that the 

provisions in respect of the Constitution contained in the White Paper, to which I earlier referred to are 

unacceptable. Here, Mr. Speaker, there may be some greater measure of controversy, but I think that in 

view of developments which have occurred, there will be a much wider measure of acceptance than 

there would have been previously. 

 

As I have earlier indicated, the key question is not whether or not the Constitution is patriated. Rather 

the key question is the terms and conditions under which the Canadian Constitution will be able to be 

amended in Canada. To put it another way, the key question is not whether we have an all-Canadian 

amending formula, but rather the nature of the all-Canadian amending formula. 

 

As I indicated, there is general agreement on the desirability of an amending formula; the disagreement 

is on the question of what constitutes a satisfactory amending formula. As I have also indicated I think 

that the Fulton-Favreau formula is far from satisfactory. At the present time Canada has, I believe, the 

most rigid Constitution of any federal state in the world. One states these propositions with hesitation 

now because since I got up this morning there may be another national state and it may have a more 

rigid Constitution. But certainly, confining my remarks to any national state which was in existence two 

years or more ago, I believe we have the most rigid Constitution of any federal state in the world. 

Certainly this is true at least in practical terms. There maybe legal argument to the effect that the 

Canadian Constitution can be amended by a decision of the Parliament of Canada without the consent of 

all of the provinces, or indeed of any of the provinces, but in practical terms the consent of the major 

provinces, at least, is necessary, and it may well be that for any major amendment the absence of 

opposition, if I may phrase it that way, of all of the provinces is necessary. I say "absence of opposition" 

because there is no evidence based on precedent that the active consent of all the provinces is necessary. 

One can't state propositions with any degree of certainty here, because we are not talking about law 

which is written down; we are talking about practice which has grown up over a century, and we have to 

make our own judgment as to how rigidly past practice will be adhered to in any future situation. 

 

The most important transfer of legislative power which has taken place in recent years has been the 

transfer of legislation over unemployment insurance. Some may say that the Canada Assistance Plan 

was of equal importance, but viewed from a background of transfer of power respecting federal old age 

pension, I think it will be conceded that the most important transfer which has taken place in the last 

thirty or forty years has been the one on unemployment insurance. This is the one which started the 

transfer of legislative jurisdiction with respect to social welfare programs from the provincial 

governments to the federal government. This was brought about, — the transfer of jurisdiction with 

respect to unemployment insurance — was brought about by amendment to the British North America 

Act, 1940. Of the provinces, one province only, so far as I can ascertain, consented to the change by 

resolution of the legislature. Two provinces, Alberta and New Brunswick, specifically passed 

resolutions not 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1012 

approving of the proposed changes, dissenting from it. Each of the Premiers of those two provinces, 

Alberta and New Brunswick, subsequently advised the Prime Minister without consulting the legislature 

that the objection of his province was withdrawn. It seems that Premier Aberhart said that Alberta no 

longer objected to the change, or words to that effect, and I think Premier McNair followed a similar 

course. The other provinces gave consent by way of letters from the Premier, or responsible ministers as 

opposed to conveying resolutions of the legislature. I think it will be appreciated immediately that this 

type or form of consent, in some cases expressing approval and in some cases only a lack of disapproval, 

is a very far cry from a formal consent passed by all the legislatures. But this relatively informal 

procedure requiring unanimity is now the most rigid formula for constitutional amendment in the world. 

How much more rigid would it be if we followed the Fulton-Favreau formula and insisted that for any 

substantial change in our Constitution the consent of all provinces would be necessary as opposed to any 

absence of dissent, and that such consent had to be expressed by resolution of the legislature. 

 

Because we have the most rigid Constitution in the world it would be presumed that any change would 

be by way of making the formula somewhat less rigid, making it as flexible as the formula which is used 

in the United States or Australia, or Switzerland. In speaking of Switzerland I think I would call to the 

attention of hon. members the fact that Switzerland is a country which in some way is like Canada, in 

the sense that it is divided into two linguistic groups, in fact four linguistic groups but two major 

linguistic groups, and that their position in numerical strength is not very different from the numerical 

strength of the English-speaking group in Canada as compared with the French-speaking group. The 

German Swiss would, I think, be about twice as numerous as the French-speaking Swiss in Switzerland. 

 

The draft which was circulated last year by Mr. Favreau, and which has become known as the 

Fulton-Favreau formula, makes the Constitution much more rigid. In essence it provides that no changes 

may be made in the BNA Act unless they are concurred in by the legislatures of all the provinces. It is 

true that in section five the Act provides that, subject to previous sections, changes may be made in the 

BNA Act by the Parliament of Canada, concurred in by the legislatures of at least two-thirds of the 

provinces representing at least 50 per cent of the population. This would be a desirable measure of 

flexibility. In fact, it would be too flexible if it were not subject to modification. It should be modified as 

an amending formula to provide for unanimous consent with respect to a certain narrow range of 

subjects. These would concern the use of French and English languages, possible provisions with respect 

to education, at least in the province of Quebec, the amending formula itself and possibly some other 

matters. 

 

However, the Fulton-Favreau formula entrenches or requires unanimous consent to change virtually 

every provision of the BNA Act. In particular every power of a provincial government to make law is 

entrenched so that it cannot be changed without the unanimous consent of all the provinces. For 

example, it would not be possible for the people of Canada to decide that the federal government ought 

to provide prisons and reform institutions which are now covered by section 92 (6) of the BNA Act. And 

I don't need to recall to the hon. members the fact that there have been many discussions about the 

desirability of the federal government moving into the operation of penal institutions housing offenders 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1013 

who are sentenced to terms of more than six months. 

 

I repeat again that the Act would not allow consent to be given in the informal way which has hereto 

before been done. I simply give one example. I have others in my notes, but I think that any member 

who wishes to contemplate problems which could be met in the future should take the BNA Act, look at 

section 92 and think of matters which might come over those heads which he might wish to see handled 

by the federal government in some circumstances in the future which he might contemplate. The precise 

nature of the problems which arise in the future cannot be predicted. Suppose that the courts should 

decide that credit unions came under Savings Banks, which is a head under the section 91, and, 

therefore, come under federal jurisdiction. We might very well want to turn back to the provinces the 

jurisdiction over credit unions; would this require unanimous consent? We can't predict the areas where 

federal action might commend itself as desirable to the vast body of Canadians. 

 

Let's consider some of the problems which the Attorney General mentioned in this house in other 

debates. Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to deal with the Attorney General's remarks, but only to refer to 

some of the general subject headings. The regulation of sale of securities on a countrywide basis; many 

feel that this ought to be done by the federal government. It is unlikely to be done by the federal 

government if unanimity is required. The marketing of some natural products; many feel that this ought 

to be done by the federal government in certain instances. This is unlikely ever to be achieved if 

unanimity is required. We may at some later time believe that a countrywide basis of uniform labor 

standards would be desirable or the provision of a system of nation-wide system of post-graduate centres 

for scientific study and research. These are simply suggestions of matters which we as Canadians might 

decide ought best be handled by our federal government. 

 

Nor, I think, can we predict what powers we might think ought best be handled by the provincial 

government. One thinks of the control of affairs of the Indians and Eskimos. We hope that the day will 

come when the affairs of the Indians and Eskimos will be no different than the affairs of Ukrainians and 

Welshmen, and that, therefore, there will be no reason why their affairs ought to be under the control of 

the federal government. We might decide, if treasuries become impoverished, that provincial 

governments should levy an indirect sales tax. We might decide that some rivers which are now classed 

as navigable waters, — and you might be amazed at what rivers are classed as navigable waters, 

including Wascana Creek, — should be returned to the jurisdiction of the provincial government. The 

control of inland fisheries might be a subject appropriate for provincial government control. I am sure 

the Minister of Natural Resources has wondered from time to time why regulations which he propounds 

concerning the control of inland fisheries must be passed pursuant to a federal act. He is, legally at least, 

a nominee of the federal government in some respects in the control of inland fisheries although the 

practical control resides with the provincial government. One can think, perhaps, of certain aspects of 

Bankruptcy and Insolvency. The area now is divided; Bankruptcy and Insolvency are a federal matter. 

Fraudulent preferences have been thought to be a provincial matter. Some of our courts are taking a 

different view, but certainly there is an area here which suggests jurisdiction is divided and effective 

jurisdiction does not seem to be on one side of the line or the other. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1014 

All I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is that there are many areas where we in the future may wish to 

change the legislative jurisdiction either from provinces to federal, or from federal to provinces. Yet it is 

suggested that in order to do this the unanimous consent of all provinces would be necessary. One of our 

provinces represents less than one per cent of the total population of Canada; each of five others 

represents less than six per cent of the total population of Canada. Accordingly there are many, many 

opportunities for a small minority in each one of these provinces to prevent a change which might be 

desired, and desired ardently by a very large majority of Canadians. 

 

The Fulton-Favreau was put forward in the name of patriotism and stability. In this connection I can do 

no better than to quote the words of a great constitutional expert, and a great Canadian, the late, The 

Hon. Norman McLeod Rogers, who when he was pursuing his academic career said that: 

 

The purpose of unanimous consent is security through stability, but political societies are not static, 

but progressive. If their needs and aspirations grow with the times, stability of constitutional 

arrangements will produce friction instead of security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view, the Fulton-Favreau formula is so rigid that it may condemn Canadian 

governments in the future to inaction and sterility and thereby create serious problems. 

 

In the last twenty-five years or so we have amended the Constitution to provide for unemployment 

insurance, universal old-age pensions, now a Canada Pension Plan, and I feel that there is very real 

doubt that any one of those changes would have taken place if there had been a prior requirement that it 

had to be approved by the legislature of each of the provinces of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I oppose the Fulton-Favreau formula on another ground although similar, and that is 

because I believe it is based on a fundamental error of approach. The reason we are considering the 

matter at this time is because there is a wave of nationalism sweeping Canada. Now this is by no means 

the first time constitutional amendment has been considered seriously. It was considered very seriously 

for perhaps the first time at the time of the Statute of Westminster; and members will recall that the 

Imperial Parliament wanted to include in the Statute of Westminster, a provision which would say that 

no Imperial Statute should bind Canada. The Canadians said, "You can't do that. What will happen to 

the BNA Act?" Whereupon the United Kingdom representatives at the conference said, "Well, put an 

amending formula in the British North American Act whereby you can amend it", whereupon the 

Canadians tried to evolve a formula and tried unsuccessfully. 

 

There was a similar try at evolving a formula at the time of the countrywide study which was associated 

with the Rowell-Sirois Commission. There were additional tries immediately after the Second World 

War, at the time when we were considering nationwide social security measures, the Marsh Plan and 

other proposals which were based upon this plan. Then we had another round of negotiations which we 

are still engaged in. It started in 1960. So it is hardly a new subject and hardly one which, I suggest, 

requires immediate decision. It has come to the fore because of feelings of Canadian nationalism and 

particularly, because of feelings of French nationalism. This French nationalism has been coupled with 

demands for a larger measure of provincial autonomy for the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1015 

province of Quebec. Now, English Canadians have been prepared to concede that the French in Canada 

have a legitimate claim to a measure of autonomy, and have sought to incorporate these claims into 

amendments for the Constitution. Unfortunately, at this point, the error was made. The error persisted 

during the Conferences of 1960 and 1961, and those which followed, and the error was this; the error 

was to assume that every power which was given to the province of Quebec had also to be given to 

every other province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is, I believe, unsound in principle. In my view, it stems from the view that the province 

of Quebec is a province just like the others; and this is not true, either in history, or in fact. The province 

of Quebec is in some respects like the others but it is also the homeland and the heartland of the French 

Canadian minority, and with this special status it seems to me entirely appropriate to provide special 

provisions and protection for Quebec which need not be given to the other provinces. 

 

Now, this is reasonable not only because Quebec is the special representative of the French in Canada, 

but also because it is a large province. In respect of the latter head I would not suggest that it have any 

privileges because of its size which would not be enjoyed by, let us say, Ontario, but in respect of the 

former head, that is the heartland of French Canada, I think it must have some special position. A 

province such as Manitoba or Saskatchewan, or Prince Edward Island, neither represents any substantial 

minority group in a special way nor any large minority of the population in Canada. 

 

Now, my suggestion would be that the draft as presented be amended to provide that a substantial 

number of the powers falling within section two of part one of the Fulton-Favreau formula be transferred 

to section five and thereby come under the more flexible amending formula. 

 

I don't for example think that the power to legislate with respect to property and civil rights ought to be 

entrenched. This phrase has a very wide application; none of us can predict the meaning which the 

courts might give it in the future, and it seems to me that a degree of flexibility ought to be retained. 

However, because of the special interest of the people of Quebec in the Civil Code, I would see no 

objection provided that no amendment coming within the authority of the legislature of Quebec to make 

laws in relation to any matter now included in the Civil Code of Quebec shall come into force in Quebec 

unless it is ratified by the legislative assembly of Quebec. Similar provisions could be used to protect 

other agreed special interest of the province of Quebec without extending the principle to all the 

provinces. 

 

Before anyone reaches the conclusion that this is somehow a special concession to Quebec, I would call 

attention of hon. members to the fact that this, in fact, is what is happening now. This is the de facto 

position of the Canadian Constitution. We have an arrangement whereby the federal government carries 

on programs which are under the legislative jurisdiction, strictly speaking, of the provinces, and I may 

instance the hospital plan or the Canada Assistance Plan, and it is provided that any province may opt 

out and get a fiscal equivalent if it desires to do so and will operate a plan of similar scope in its own 

province. This option, in theory, is available to any province. In fact, if all or most of the provinces 

exercised it, the whole program would 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1016 

collapse. It only works because the province of Quebec is the only one that exercises its right to opt out; 

it might work with one other province opting out, but if any large number of provinces opted out of the 

National Hospital Scheme there wouldn't be a National Hospital Scheme. 

 

We have de facto a special status for Quebec, and I see no objection to legislating in law that which is 

already a fact. My prime objection to the Fulton-Favreau formula, and I have expressed it in several 

ways, is the rigidity of the formula. Saskatchewan has always opposed a rigid formula which should 

entrench provincial power. We have had a historic interest in preserving a federal government at Ottawa 

which had some strength. And the reasons for that are not far to see. Our interest as a province and the 

interests of our people are likely to be better served by a Canada governed by a strong federal 

government than a Canada governed by 10 provincial governments. Saskatchewan has been 

traditionally, and is likely to remain, an exporter of primary products such as grain, meats, oil, potash, 

metallic minerals and the like. These are frequently sold outside the boundaries of Canada on the world 

market. But the manufactured products we buy come from a protected Canadian market. The tariff laws 

of Canada hold us to ransom and we pay a continuing tribute to the manufacturers of eastern Canada. 

 

No doubt we will increase our manufacturing industries in the future, but for decades and, perhaps, 

centuries to come, it is likely that we will be the economic losers from the tariff structure designed to 

protect eastern industry. This is the price of Canadianism and it is now understood widely. In order that 

we may receive the quid pro quo for our tariff disadvantages we have, historically, pressed for a number 

of things. We have pressed for a federal government which collected the bulk of the tax stemming from 

the fruits of this industry; — income taxes, corporation taxes, and estate taxes, — and for a federal 

government that distributed these revenues across the whole nation, regardless of where they are 

generated. We have pressed for a federal government which would pursue a national transportation 

policy, protecting us against the evils which would flow if the monopoly position, particularly of the 

railway companies, was unregulated. We have pressed for reserve assistance from the federal 

government in case of a natural disaster, and we have pressed for national marketing legislation which 

would allow our primary producers to compete more effectively with the government assisted primary 

producers of other lands. All of these require a strong federal government. All of these are in the 

interests of Saskatchewan, and all of these will in some measure be threatened by a rigid constitution, 

and more certainly be threatened by the trend which this particular formula indicates. 

 

It is all very well for Quebec to favor extreme provincial autonomy; it is all very well for Ontario to 

favor provincial autonomy; but of all the provinces of Canada, Saskatchewan is the one which has 

perhaps the most open economy, the one whose economy is least self-contained, the one that has the 

most to lose from the current assault on the concept of one Canada being launched by today's crop of 

Balkanizers. Saskatchewan will lose almost as much as any province by the trend represented by these 

changes, that every province is somehow an island unto itself. 

 

I would have to do no more than ask the Provincial Treasurer to look at his estimates, at the very large 

amount of equalization payments, $30,000,000. You may say that these are not directly 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1017 

threatened. Let me say this, the manner in which the Fulton-Favreau formula entrenches and pays 

homage to provincial legislative powers and downgrades the federal powers, paves the way for a 

demand which is already being heard that the federal government has no right to raise revenues to spend 

for provincial purposes. If this demand were ever acceded to by the people who sometimes profess this 

ten little Canadas' point of view, — if it were ever adopted and it could be, — the result for 

Saskatchewan would be disaster. In the estimates which we are considering in this house, there is 

provision for federal spending for matters which are now within provincial legislative jurisdiction, — I 

haven't totalled them but I would think — $75,000,000. 

 

Then consider a national transportation policy. Railways are now under federal jurisdiction. But 

railways are declining in importance. We see that every day. Local trucking is not under federal 

jurisdiction. Who can tell what means of transport will come next and may well be called property and 

civil rights and be under provincial jurisdiction. I could say the same with respect to marketing 

legislation or the other things which are of vital importance to Canada and particularly to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that every real and lasting interest of Saskatchewan is weakened or endangered 

by changes of the nature of the Fulton-Favreau formula, and no vital interest of Saskatchewan is 

strengthened by these changes. I say that Saskatchewan would be seriously prejudiced by any changes of 

that nature, and accordingly I would invite the house to say that the proposed changes in the Constitution 

are unacceptable on that account. 

 

But they are unacceptable on other accounts. I say that Saskatchewan is not benefited but I say that 

Canada's larger interests are not benefited. The only conceivable benefit is the bit of pure symbolism of 

amending our Constitution without an act of the Imperial Parliament. Our true sovereignty will not be 

enlarged one grain and for this we are to set Canada on a course of ten little Canadas, for this is what the 

Favreau formula would do. 

 

For this we are to weaken the long range interests of Saskatchewan, of the prairies and of Canada. The 

change would be wrong. It is at the wrong time and in the wrong direction. It proceeds from a 

fundamentally wrong premise. 

 

Just how wrong it is and how uneasy many Canadians are feeling about it is I think best put by Charles 

Lynch in an article in the Ottawa Citizen when he said that: 

 

Many Canadians must have a feeling of unease when a minority federal government, newly in office 

and still shaky on its feet, engages ten provincial governments all strongly entrenched and ably led and 

comes out with an agreement on the Constitution that could make the provincial governments much 

stronger than they are. 

 

Naturally the provincial Premiers are happy about such an outcome and the federal government badly 

in need of some kudos would be happy about it. But the question remains, in the infighting behind 

closed doors did the concept of a strong federal government get a fair shake? Did the federal 

negotiators yield too much? Is repatriation of the Constitution with the new amending formula a step 

toward Balkanization with ten strong governments and a weak one at the centre? Provincial Premiers 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1018 

strong and able though they may be are provincial in outlook and cannot be expected to give priority 

to the national interests. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am very glad to say that since the time Mr. Lynch said this in October of 1964, 

many in Canada have had sober second thoughts and the idea that the Fulton-Favreau formula is 

unacceptable has gained a large group of allies. And in many ways, Mr. Speaker, a very unusual group 

of allies. One of the persons who is now no longer satisfied with the Fulton-Favreau formula is the Rt. 

Hon. John Diefenbaker who has called for a National Constitutional Conference between Ottawa and the 

provinces to hammer out a new formula. Another person who is not happy, notwithstanding the fact that 

he agreed to it is the Hon. John Lesage who in writing to Prime Minister Pearson said this about the 

Fulton-Favreau formula, and his words bear close attention: 

 

Many events have occurred since this formula was elaborated and it would not be proper to ignore 

them. Among them should be mentioned the countrywide debate which has taken place respecting the 

formula itself. 

 

And I digress by saying that ought to have come before the formula and not after it. 

 

The continued dialogue between Quebec and the rest of the country, a constant and sustained 

evolution towards a new relationship between Quebec, the other provinces, and the government of 

Canada, the progress of the studies and discussions undertaken by the Tax Structure Committee, the 

Royal Commission of Inquiry on Bilingualism and Biculturalism and our own Special Committee on 

the Constitution. 

 

Then he goes on to say: 

 

In the circumstances, 

 

and he reviews a number of other circumstances, 

 

the government of Quebec has decided to postpone indefinitely the consideration of the proposal for 

constitutional amendment. 

 

Well, need I say, Mr. Speaker, that if the government of Quebec is unwilling even to consider the 

Fulton-Favreau formula all sensible Canadians must reach the conclusion that it is unacceptable as a 

basis for further discussion. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the strangest ally amongst the ranks of the opponents of the Fulton-Favreau formula, 

is none other than the Hon. Guy Favreau, who has now abandoned the formula and has admitted that it 

is inadequate for Canada's needs. In a speech in Montreal, as quoted in the Montreal Star of Monday, 

January 24, Mr. Favreau was quoted as saying: 

 

That the time is not ripe for repatriation and sweeping reform of the British North America Act. 

 

I am surprised that he has now come to this realization after urging these very courses of action only a 

year ago. He goes on to say: 

 

Canada can do no better than carry on with the co-operative 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1019 

federalism which has worked so well over the past three years. 

 

To that I say "Amen", and I wish he would have taken that point of view last year. He goes on to say 

further: 

 

It is possible indeed that Canada may some day be obliged to revise from top to bottom its structures 

and its constitutional machinery but how and why and in what way? 

 

Very good questions, Mr. Speaker. Questions which he sought to answer with the Fulton-Favreau 

formula and which he answered very badly. I compliment him for having the good grace to 

acknowledge that he was wrong. He goes on to say further: 

 

We will be in a position to judge accurately the changes required only after a full stocktaking of the 

social, cultural and fiscal needs and priorities of Canada and the provinces. 

 

And to that I say 'Amen'. This stocktaking should not take place behind the closed doors of a conference 

of representatives of provincial governments but should take place throughout the length and breadth of 

Canada in public meetings and in public forums of all kinds. He further goes on to say: 

 

We are not in a position to judge the depth of the constitutional modifications which will impose 

themselves until we have sufficiently established the inventory of needs and social and cultural and 

fiscal priorities of Canada and the provinces. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a proper statement of our present position and that is a further refutation of the 

Fulton-Favreau formula. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now that it is clear that the Fulton-Favreau formula will do no service to Saskatchewan, 

will do no service to the broader needs of Canada, is unacceptable to the province of Quebec, is 

unacceptable to Mr. G. Favreau, and presumably to his cabinet colleagues; I think no one can have any 

other opinion than that the Fulton-Favreau formula is unacceptable as a basis for amending Canada's 

Constitution. That being the case, Mr. Speaker, I think that the various provincial legislatures of Canada 

should make their position clear in order that steps may be undertaken to evolve some method of 

arriving at an acceptable formula. 

 

The province of Quebec has started the ball rolling by saying that they will not consider the 

Fulton-Favreau formula. It must therefore, I think, be considered dead. We must seek a new way of 

arriving at a consensus. A useful first start would be for other governments to admit what is obviously 

the fact, that the Fulton-Favreau formula is unacceptable, — and having admitted this, to set out to find 

a new way of evolving a consensus. I think therefore, that it would be a useful move on the part of this 

legislature to record its view, which all must hold, that the Fulton-Favreau formula is passé and is no 

longer acceptable. And having recorded this, we should take the necessary steps to evolve a new way of 

obtaining a consensus of the views of Canadian people as to what their constitution should be. 

 

Since this seems the sensible and prudent course of action I would invite the assembly, Mr. Speaker, to 

express its approval 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1020 

of the patriation of the Constitution to Canada, to express its opinion that the Fulton-Favreau formula is 

now unacceptable and to express the opinion that widest possible public consultation and debate should 

take place so that we may seek an acceptable formula for amending the Constitution and patriating it to 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I must say that last year and again this year that I 

have anticipated with a great deal of pleasure the opportunity to speak in a debate such as this, dealing as 

it does with something that is perhaps far closer to the everyday life of people than most realize. I was 

most interested to listen last year, and to hear again this year the one speaker who has spoken to this 

resolution, the opinions that were expressed on this very vast and complex problem. But it did strike me, 

Mr. Speaker, that last year only those people who feel qualified through legal training seem to have the 

temerity to express opinions on this subject matter. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think we are a little out of order. The motion before the house was moved by the hon. 

member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), seconded by the hon. member form Hanley (Mr. Walker): 

 

That this Assembly: 

 

(1) Expresses its approval of the principle of providing for the amendment in Canada of the 

Constitution of Canada: 

 

(2) Expresses its opinion that the provisions in that respect contained in the White Paper issued by the 

Federal Government entitled "An Act to Provide for the Amendment in Canada of the Constitution of 

Canada" are unacceptable; and 

 

(3) Expresses the opinion that provision to amend the Constitution of Canada should not be finally 

determined without the widest possible public consultation and debate so as to permit the opinions of 

all interested groups and individuals to be solicited and obtained. 

 

The motion is in order, the debate continues on the motion. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — I trust, Mr. Speaker, that the opening remarks that I made were not too far out of 

order in that the motion had not been placed, but I was under the erroneous impression that it had been 

placed at the outset of the debate. 

 

As I was saying, I was rather disappointed to find that very few people seem to have the nerve, as it 

were, to take part in this debate. I would hope that this year with some matters that I am going to place 

before this assembly, they will spur some of our members into taking part and expressing their views on 

this matter that is of such vital concern to all of us. I agree with the member from Regina West (Mr. 

Blakeney) that we should have the right to establish our own Constitution as well as the right to make 

changes and amendments. But I must say that I have been struck, both last year and again in listening to 

his speech this afternoon, by the fact that much of the thought surrounding this so-called Fulton-Favreau 

formula, the repatriation of our Constitution, and so on, is couched in legal language that has very 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1021 

little warmth in it. It fails, in my opinion, to strike at the very emotions of Canadian people, and I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that until legislatures and governments and parliaments in this country start to stir 

the emotions of the people there will be no great desire on the part of anyone to make a move or to 

support a move for what we are trying to achieve. 

 

I disagree, I must say, with the member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) in that he intimated that the 

establishment of a new Constitution in our country would be little more than symbolic. I believe that a 

new Constitution could be something that might be sort of an indefinable, emotional anchor that would 

give Canadians for the first time a feeling of national purpose and national entity. This is something I 

think we are lacking. I, therefore, am going to take a rather different approach, to that which is normally 

taken by my learned and legal friends in this house, towards this question of the resolution, the White 

Paper that was tabled last year, and the question as a whole of repatriating our Constitution. 

 

I believe that we have to try to understand why there has not been wide support for the actions that were 

taken last year. I believe that we have to first of all discover the cause of our inability to arrive at 

agreement so that we can instil in our people a desire to preserve the entity of Canada. Unless some 

method is found to provide for our being masters in our own house, a continuing erosion of legislative 

process will ultimately lead to the shattering of our nation. In this way, the issue is not merely a legal 

one but, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, a very highly emotional one. We may well ask why there has been 

a retreat when we should have proceeded. The answer lies, I believe, in the lack of emotional desire in 

the hearts of Canadians to succeed. 

 

Now, last year when the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) introduced in this legislature his resolution 

dealing with a subject matter very similar to the resolution before us this afternoon, I had some 

comments to make in my opening remarks that were applicable at that time and which I feel are doubly 

so now. At that time I had the view that the new Liberal government of the day should have called a 

special fall session, as they had promised during the previous election campaign, for the express purpose 

of dealing with this very far-reaching and important question, prior to the Premier and the Attorney 

General attending the conference, — I believe these were the two gentlemen involved, — where 

tentative agreement was given. 

 

In my opinion, a separate session to deal exclusively with this subject matter would most certainly have 

been in order. I was, and I still am, of the opinion, that a matter that cannot be dealt with in the ordinary 

terms of debate should have received far more than the cursory attention given it by the new government 

and the new Premier. 

 

I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from what I had to say about this particular thing last year, I said: 

 

This is a matter of vital concern to every citizen in this province and the voice of all people through 

their elected representatives should have been heard. Instead we have the Premier, in effect, agreeing 

with this formula and then coming back to Saskatchewan asking us to sanction his action. 

 

I went on to say: 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1022 

This, in my opinion, is not in keeping with the inherent principles of democracy as I know them. 

However, it seems to be in keeping with the attitudes of governments both in Saskatchewan and in 

Ottawa, in that they tend to place the people of Canada in a position where they no longer have a 

choice. This has been true of many great issues of the last year or so. I refer to things such as the flag 

issue and now the Constitutional issue. Because of this reverse approach that has been taken on our 

behalf by the Premier and his government, the debate on this particular resolution takes on the tones of 

being a farce. It is obvious that the Saskatchewan government is committed to this course of action 

and little that we can say here will change more than, perhaps, a comma or the numbering of a clause. 

 

Now, those were my comments last year, and as we saw, we didn't even change a comma. That was the 

stand that I took a year ago, and events since that time have proved that I was correct, as were other hon. 

gentlemen in this house. A full scale debate on this matter by legislatures across this nation would have 

prevented our Saskatchewan government, as well as other governments in other provinces, from being 

placed in the ridiculous position of supporting a proposal that is unsound. I believe that there should 

have been a free vote taken at a session like this, a free vote by all members after they had had an 

opportunity to study the vast and complex implications of what was being proposed. 

 

I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that an intelligent vote was not cast in this legislature last year, for the 

simple reason that the government placed the proposal before us and the overwhelming majority of 

members on the government side of the house merely supported it because it was a government 

measure. I doubt, Mr. Speaker, if more than three or four of those members gave any consideration 

whatsoever to the meaning and the implications of the resolution dealing with the so-called repatriation 

of our Constitution. Because it was obvious to me from some of the remarks that were hurled across the 

chamber by some of the members opposite that they had no interest whatsoever in finding out just what 

was involved in such a move, but were merely interested in harassing anyone who had the audacity to 

oppose something that the All-Sainted Liberal government had proposed in its first session. That seemed 

to be the attitude. Now, we find that the so-called Fulton-Favreau formula has been shelved by the great 

champions of this idea, the national Liberal party. It is now embarrassing for them to even mention it 

because it might hurt the feelings of Premier Lesage. They have become in fact a victim of a deep terror, 

they are too fat to run and they are too scared to fight. The mounting problems of the Liberal party with 

Quebec are emblazoned on the front pages of our newspapers every day. Concessions have become the 

order of the day, and we have been moving over the last two and one half years at an express train speed 

on a program of appeasement to one province and that, in my opinion, for one reason and one reason 

only, a political advantage for the Liberal party. 

 

We have moved so far in this direction, Mr. Speaker, that the terms of a new Constitution, that, and I am 

sure all the members of this house most sincerely hope will be devised in the not too distant future, will 

have to make some very major concessions if it is to receive the approval of the province of Quebec. 

More and more the powers of the central government in Ottawa are being abrogated to this one province 

and I do not for one moment blame the province of Quebec for this. I do, however, blame a 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1023 

weak and vacillating Liberal party in power in Ottawa. 

 

I want to quote from an article that appeared in the Toronto Globe and Mail, a recent issue, where it 

deals with precisely this point that I am making: 

 

In the Commons recently Mr. Pearson was pressed for clarification about an amount of $17,350,000 

paid to Quebec and whether this had been turned over unconditionally, or was specifically for 

educational purposes. Mr. Pearson did not appear willing to trust himself to give a direct answer. 

Instead he read extracts from correspondence on the subject with Quebec, but he failed to deal 

satisfactorily with the point that had been raised. Was he waiting for Mr. Lesage to clarify it for him? 

Mr. Lesage as we have seen is only too happy to oblige. He says quite frankly that he reserves the 

right to spend university money on sewers if that appears as a greater provincial need. This philosophy 

means, of course, that we can abandon hope of establishing common standards across the country. If 

we are really prepared to accept a free-for-all among the provinces in such matters as education and 

health why should we bother to sustain the fiction of federal authority and the ethereal dream of 

national sovereignty. 

 

Those are the ideas and thoughts that I am trying to express with the rather poor words that I used a 

moment ago. 

 

I want to turn for a moment to the reason for Quebec's refusal to accept the so-called Fulton-Favreau 

formula. Again, Mr. Speaker, a year ago, I brought to the attention of this legislature the fact that the 

formula would create a balkanisation of provinces, either separately or jointly. This has now become 

understood and accepted across this nation. There was a question of powers of delegation, that I referred 

to, and also was outlined by the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) in the White Paper. Mr. 

Lesage has now stated that this is precisely the area on which he is unable to find acceptance for this 

formula. He speaks of the right of veto on the constitutional amendments, and although he concedes that 

this veto will have the effect of being a weapon in the hands of Quebec, he also realizes the fact that it 

can be used as a weapon against Quebec. 

 

This then, Mr. Speaker, is the crisis that we face. An emerging Quebec beginning to take its rightful 

place amongst its neighboring provinces in Canada, reiterating its ancient demands that were voiced in 

the days of Confederation, but now making them heard and felt in a very tangible economic and 

governmental fashion. This is what has happened. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that men of good will 

and understanding of the problems surrounding the maintenance of a united Canada will maintain a 

close check on the developments in Quebec so that continuing demands will not place Quebec in the 

status of a separate entity within the framework of Canada. 

 

Let me turn now for just a few moments to some of the underlying problems that I feel beset this nation 

and have led, I believe, to mutual distrusts and a great deal of unwillingness to co-operate in order to 

preserve our national entity as a great and united nation. I think that we have to get at some of the 

fundamental weaknesses that surround us before we can even start building a new Constitution, without 

talking about repatriating one. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1024 

This question of the problem, the so-called Quebec or French problem, is one that is not insurmountable. 

Scarcely a week goes by that another move is not made which helps to open the rift between Quebec and 

the balance of Canada. We have merely to read the press, to observe the very rapid movement of Quebec 

towards the status of a separate state within a state. The emergence of the people of that province, as I 

have said, into the equality of partnership with other provinces and other peoples in Canada has created 

an impetus that will be difficult to check and unfortunately, like a pendulum, is apt to swing far beyond 

what the original intent had been of those responsible for this reawakening. Where does the onus for this 

problem lie, Mr. Speaker? Squarely on the shoulders of the federal government. There must immediately 

be a cessation of the type of under-the-counter and separate deals that are being made with various 

provinces and a firm stand taken by the government of the day on matters of fiscal responsibility as well 

as on many other responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I reject out of hand the theory that Canada can survive either as two separate states or as a 

state within a state, nor can it survive as mentioned by my hon. friend from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) 

unless a strong central government is maintained. I think this is acceptable to all members in this house. 

A strong government who will place the future of our nation first rather than its own political advantage 

first. Unfortunately, I believe that this has not been the order of the day over the last several years. 

 

I just want to quote from another small article which appeared in the Winnipeg Tribune, that will 

perhaps have some bearing on this. It says: 

 

MPs were given a neat demonstration . . . 

 

I'm quoting now from the Winnipeg Tribune, an article that was reprinted in today's issue of the Leader 

Post. 

 

MPs were given a neat demonstration of the lengths to which officialdom will go to keep a cloak of 

secrecy over the activities of closed-door federal-provincial conferences. 

 

David Orlikow, member for Winnipeg North, asked the government for a list of the delegates who 

attended the so-called war on poverty conference called by Tom Kent who was pooh-bah in that field. 

Mr. Orlikow also asked for copies of the working papers, presented to the conference. 

 

The minister, Jean Marchand, said he had no objection to listing those present at the meeting. But he 

refused to provide copies of the working papers. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

It's queer that federal and provincial officials are provided with sets of papers about poverty while 

MPs are denied copies. But here is another warning to parliament that a new level of policy making 

and government is creeping in. If the Commons submits to being treated as being inferior to 

federal-provincial officials, then parliament is on its way to becoming a kind of amateur theatrical. 

 

I believe this very sentiment was expressed in the address of the member who just sat down when he 

maintains that we cannot, if I 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1025 

interpret his words correctly, survive if the ten governments of the provinces are stronger and more 

powerful than the central government in Ottawa. 

 

However, I want to make it absolutely clear that our problems of disagreement, and I am speaking now 

of the formula that we have under discussion, and the fact, that we have been unable to arrive at a 

conclusion that is acceptable to all, cannot be charged to one group of people, or one province, all on its 

own. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it would be wrong to suggest that our present impasse stems from the fact 

that the province of Quebec has so far rejected the proposal for the repatriation of our constitution. I 

don't think it would be fair to say, that that in sum total was the cause, or the main reason, why we 

haven't been able to proceed. I believe that there are, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, underlying 

currents that have spread across Canada, that perhaps are more basic than those which are most obvious, 

such as the Quebec problem. I am going to deal with these, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that these are 

the emotional parts of the issue that can have a broad appeal to Canadians everywhere and which will 

ultimately stir them to move and act in support of their elected members for the swift, and in the near 

future, adoption of a new Constitution for Canada. 

 

I have witnessed in this house, as I am sure other members have, the type of erosion of our very system 

of government, that in my opinion brings disrespect both to the system and to those participating in it. 

There can never be any great desire on the part of people to preserve those things which are necessary to 

maintain a nation if they do not first of all have a respect for them. A large part, Mr. Speaker, of the 

process that we wish to preserve centres on the type of government that we have in Canada. This is a 

system, as all members know, that we inherited from the British and which we as a young nation 

adopted and tempered to suit our needs. Now that we have attained maturity and adulthood we wish, like 

any young man or young lady ready to fact the world alone, to have the right to handle our own affairs 

as we see fit. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, in the layman's language is precisely what we are attempting to do when we search 

for ways to gain control of the means to amend our own Constitution. Now, there are those, and I am 

sure many members have heard them, that say that we have no Canadian identity, no pride in ourselves 

as a nation, no great sense of achievement and no great sense of history. I have heard all of these charges 

levelled and I am ashamed to say tremendous numbers of people accept them as fact. But I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that people who say those things touch a very vital nerve in the conscience of Canadians as a 

whole. If these charges are true, then we had better look to the reason and try to make a correction so 

that people everywhere in Canada can, as I say, join together in one great resolve and purpose, submerge 

their differences and stand together so that the things that are dear to us and which we wish to preserve 

and uphold may have a chance of survival. That, in essence, Mr. Speaker, I believe is what we are 

attempting to do. I believe, most firmly that unless we are successful in developing a Constitution of our 

own that will have an emotional appeal, that will have an impact on the people of this nation, then, I 

believe, we can look to the disintegration of our nation and the ultimate demise of Canada as a member 

nation of the Commonwealth or for that matter, as a nation that has been standing on its own for 30 or 

40 years. 

 

In order to do this, in order to bring this awakening, I believe that the elected representatives must 

themselves take the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1026 

first step to bring it about. Now, I hold a tremendous respect for those who are charged with the high 

office entrusted to them by the people, not only of our province but of our nation and I say that without 

reservation. Our system is built on the premise that there must be a government and there must be an 

opposition. Those who wish to take the trouble, and I am sure this is also common knowledge to 

members, to go back in history and study the relative importance of these two areas of government, will 

find that they are accorded a great degree of equality. This fact, however, Mr. Speaker, seems to have 

escaped the attention of many members of this house. I have attempted on all occasions, as far as I have 

been able, to accord to the Premier the courtesy and the respect that is his due for having been successful 

on two counts, first of all for having been chosen by his party to lead them, and secondly, having 

accomplished the first, succeeding to the chair of Premiership of Saskatchewan. This doesn't, of course, 

prevent me from differing with policies and statements that he makes but I am always well aware of the 

fact that he is the only one out of 950,000 people in Saskatchewan to hold this very high office. I trust 

that hon. members will always bear this in mind. Along with that, I must say, Mr. Speaker, I hold equal 

respect should be accorded to his first ministers because they too hold a unique position in the fabric of 

our parliamentary system, and to them, through their office, I always try to accord the respect and the 

courtesy that is their due. If I fail it is because of the spur of the moment and I apologize for my lack in 

that regard. 

 

The same, Mr. Speaker, can be said for the Leader of the Opposition. He is, after all, the number two 

man in the province, the one that has been chosen by his party and by the people as the leading 

contender, as the alternative to the Premier. I find it is extremely degrading to listen to some of the 

remarks that are made in this house regarding both the personality and the character of these very 

distinguished leaders of our government in our province. It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that some 

of the remarks such as some that were directed by my hon. friend across the way, the member from 

Athabasca, the other evening, showed total ignorance of the common decency of parliamentary 

procedure. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — I am relating this to this motion that is before us. 

 

His comments most certainly lacked any understanding of the necessity and in fact the desirability that 

men and women such as he must serve in the capacities in which they now serve if our parliamentary 

system is to survive. I believe that we have to create this respect in this house as well as in other 

parliaments in this nation, Mr. Speaker, as an example to the people of this country, so that they will 

have created in their hearts a desire to uphold this institution and through it this nation by the adoption 

of a new Constitution for our country. I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, that all of the legal tomes presented, 

that all of the words that can be spoken from a legal point of view, will do one particle of good until 

first, we as elected representatives of our people, awaken this desire in the hearts of Canadians and 

specifically in the hearts of the people of Saskatchewan, to encourage them to rise up and defend and try 

to hold together this nation that has existed for almost one hundred years. I am of the firm conviction, 

Mr. Speaker, that this cannot be done, that this nation cannot survive, unless we very shortly devise a 

new Constitution which spells out in the clearest possible terms the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1027 

areas of government, the areas of jurisdiction, both on the federal and provincial level. But as I have 

said, I am completely of the opinion that this will not come about until we make it our task to set an 

example to people in this nation that will cause them to believe that we do have a system that is 

worthwhile preserving. I haven't brought these matters, that I mentioned a few moments ago, Mr. 

Speaker, to the attention of the house in order to demean any single member but rather to point out one 

of the basic causes for our trouble in Canada, as I say the lack of respect for the institutions which we 

are attempting to preserve. I feel that it is exactly the same as in the case of law. If there is no respect for 

the law then it will not be observed nor will there be any great desire to preserve it. The right to stand as 

a nation and make our own decisions as an adult qualified nation will not come easy. A heartsearching 

process, I would like to call it, must first of all be undertaken before we can have the right to expect that 

our proposals will receive widespread acceptance. 

 

How can this be done when to a large extent these very institutions of which I speak have been 

discredited in the public eye and have been, in many cases, exposed to the farcical subjugation of 

political expediency? I need only to mention scandals in Ottawa, the abuse of the Senate, and a general 

disrespect that seems to be prevalent in our parliaments across this nation. Surely, Mr. Speaker, out of 

the mere handful of people who are sent to these parliaments by the 20,000,000 people of Canada, there 

are those who are willing to show a lead in building pride in our country, pride not only in our country 

but in the institutions of this nation. These representatives, I believe, should be more qualified than any 

other to set an example so that men and women everywhere can hold their heads high and be proud of 

the system that we have and proud of the fact that it dares to be different from that of our friendly and 

powerful nation to the south of us. Surely this difference, Mr. Speaker, is worth preserving, not simply 

because it is different, but because it is a system that has been tried over the centuries and found, as far 

as possible, to be excellent. I for one, Mr. Speaker, am proud and I hope all hon. members are as well, to 

uphold this system. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I have applied myself with, as I said at the outset, the 

very limited talents that I have to this very vast and very complex problem that is before us on the order 

paper this afternoon. 

 

I would hope that all hon. members would apply themselves with diligence to this so that whatever 

decisions are made in this house they will be based on a knowledge and an understanding of what we are 

trying to achieve, not merely a Yea or Nay vote based on the general stand of the party. 

 

The resolution before us, Mr. Speaker, in large measure meets with my approval. I do however have 

some reservations regarding the third section, in that it suggests that there should be a wide public 

consultation and debate by interested groups. I fear, Mr. Speaker, that his may be carrying idealism a 

little too far. I believe that on a subject as complex as this that the people of Canada look to their elected 

representatives both for guidance and understanding and I do not feel that we should in any way shirk 

our responsibility in this area. I would hope that the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) 

who has moved this resolution would consider giving some support to the proposal of providing for an 

amendment in the third section of his resolution. I haven't prepared a specific proposal but I would like 

to discuss this with him and other hon. members further outside of this house so that perhaps some 

mutual agreement could be arrived at, so that 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1028 

we could go from this house with some degree of unanimous consent and agreement. 

 

I also, like the national counterpart of my party, would like to see a National Confederation Conference 

called on this subject, somewhat similar to those that have been held in the past but with one major 

difference, there should be an opportunity for study as well as consultation on the collective suggestions 

that would be put forth at this National Conference, not only by the participants of the Conference but 

by members of all legislatures. This conference I would envisage would be composed of legislative 

committees representing all parties in each legislature who would be responsible to their parent 

legislature. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if good will prevailed and a non-political approach was used, it is 

not beyond the scope of the elected men and women of our Canadian parliaments to prepare and accept 

an entirely new Constitution for our nation, a Constitution in keeping with present-day developments 

and in keeping with the spirit of Confederation that exists in 1966. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as I said, several times throughout my comments on this resolution, we have two 

tasks before us, not only the task of devising the wording and the flexibility that was mentioned by the 

member from Regina West, in devising a new Constitution, but we have a much greater burden to carry 

as elected representatives, in setting an example, so that this nation can see that what we are attempting 

to do by the provision of this new Constitution is to preserve those things that are very dear to the hearts 

of all people and most certainly should receive the support of all people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: CANADIAN LABOUR (STANDARDS) CODE AND MINIMUM WAGE 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East) moved, seconded by Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): 

 

That this Assembly endorses the Canada Labour (Standards) Code enacted by the Parliament of 

Canada and urges the Government of Saskatchewan to take appropriate measures to establish 

conditions in Saskatchewan not less favourable than those provided in the Canada Labour (Standards) 

Code, and to give first priority to raising the minimum wage to $1.25 per hour. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the resolution before us calls upon this legislature to give endorsement to the 

Canada Labour (Standards) Code and to give first priority to raising the minimum wage of the province 

to $1.25 per hour. In the event that some members are not aware, the Canada Labour (Standards) Code 

was enacted by the Parliament of Canada last year and it took effect July 1st of 1965. The Code for the 

first time in the history of Canada establishes minimum and maximum labor standards: 

 

(1) It provides for a 40-hour work week with an eight hour day and restricts overtime to not more than 

eight hours per week except in extraordinary circumstances. 

 

(2) It ensures every worker two weeks' vacation with pay after one year of service with the same 

employer. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1029 

(3) It guarantees every worker eight statutory holidays with pay per year; and 

 

(4) It establishes a minimum wage of $1.25 per hour. 

 

The Canada Labour (Standards) Code covers only those workers who come under the jurisdiction of the 

Parliament of Canada. It is worth noting and worth emphasizing that the Parliament of Canada moved 

from no standards to what may be said a standard that is as good and in most cases better than those 

provided by most provinces. 

 

As is well known, the CCF government when it took office in 1944 moved swiftly and decisively in 

taking measures to provide security and establish minimum labor standards in the province. A host of 

new labor laws were enacted and had to be enacted since under the Old Liberal guard very few labor 

standards existed and, in most cases, were totally inadequate; the exploitation of the workers was the 

rule. 

 

The CCF introduced a law ensuring every worker eight statutory holidays with pay, a piece of 

legislation which even today is ahead of all other provinces in the Dominion. On taking office, the 

wicked Socialists, introduced the annual vacation with pay and gave every wage earner two weeks' 

annual vacation with pay after one year of service. What a horrible thing to do to the workers! In 1958 

they went one further. The Socialists provided workers with three weeks' annual vacation with pay after 

five years of service. The Liberals screamed blue ruin. Well, Sir, so far they have not repealed this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

The CCF administration introduced the Hours of Work Act. It provided for a 44-hour work week in 

cities and larger towns and a 48-hour work week in smaller centres. The new law provided one and 

one-half times overtime in excess of the 44 hours a week in the cities and 48 in the smaller communities. 

Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, when the Socialists took office, hours of work in Saskatchewan ranged from 

48 hours to 60 hours per week and in some cases workers had to work 72 hours a week without payment 

of overtime. Employers were not required to pay time and one-half for overtime, but merely straight 

time. The Hours of Work Act was a major departure from the medieval conditions that existed under the 

former Liberal administration. When hours were shortened and one and one-half times overtime pay was 

provided, Liberals said that the workers would get lazy. Well, Sir, they did not. They built thousands of 

miles of roads and highways, power and telephone lines, parks, bridges, mines, factories, buildings. 

They improved the health services and, in fact, worked harder. They saw a new future with a measure of 

security for themselves and their families. Except for extending the 44-hour week to more centres as the 

population grew, the Hours of Work Act has largely remained unchanged. The labor unions, which my 

friends opposite always refer to labor as "labor bosses", tried to persuade the government to shorten the 

hours. We were unable to persuade the government to reduce the hours of work to 44. I wish they had. 

Sir, that is something the Socialists left for the Liberals to do. Even though the Liberals did promise to 

reduce the hours of work during the last election campaign, they are not showing any signs of being in a 

hurry to take this measure. They certainly are not in the same rush as they are in giving away mineral 

and natural resources or crown corporations. The Premier's answer to shorter hours is "We are going to 

take our time about it" — 20 years. Well, Sir, they will not last that long. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1030 

The Canada Labour (Standards) Code provisions respecting hours of work are much superior to hours of 

work provisions applicable in this province and in other provinces. It provides for a universal 40-hour 

work week. I will at a future date discuss in more detail the need for hours of work reduction when the 

bill on this matter comes up for second reading, the one I have now introduced. Suffice it to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that in this age of automation we must move quickly with legal reduction in the hours of work. 

We should take immediate steps to match the hours of work reduction established by the Canada Labour 

(Standards) Code. 

 

I want to discuss the need now for the endorsement of the minimum wage provisions of the Canada 

Labour (Standards) Code, which are $1.25 per hour. I would urge the government to give this matter 

first priority. It is a matter which requires urgent and immediate attention. I want also to remind the 

members opposite that when the CCF took office in 1944, the minimum wages in Saskatchewan applied 

to only one-quarter of the Saskatchewan non-agricultural labour force. Minimum wages established by 

the former Liberal administration ranged from $6 to $14 per week, for which it was required that the 

person be experienced to receive that higher minimum. In fact it required that the $14 minimum wage 

would apply to workers with two years' experience on the same job. It is important to note that 

three-quarters of the workers had no minimum wage protection whatsoever. 

 

Well, Sir, the Socialist planners did take decisive action in respect of the minimum wage in 1944. They 

extended it throughout the entire province, made it apply to all workers and increased it sharply. By 

1964 the minimum wage had increased to $36.50 per week in the cities and to $34.50 in other areas and 

in some categories of employment the minimums were higher. The Socialist minimum wage applied 

equally to men and women. The Minimum Wage Act provided that no permanent employee could be 

laid off due to shortage of work or discharged without a week's notice or a week's pay in lieu of notice. 

 

There were many more labor laws for the protection and the benefit of wage earners enacted and 

improved upon by the CCF administration, just to cite a few examples: the Fair Employment Practices 

Act, Wages Recovery Act, the Trade Union Act; and Workmen's Compensation was sharply increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year the present government increased the minimum wage by $1.50 per week in some 

categories. I regret, however, that a number of categories got no increase in the minimum wage 

whatsoever. Whether it is in the field of labor or farm security, or in the field of health or welfare, or in 

development of our power or natural resources, or in the building of roads, we on this side of the house 

have endeavoured to improve these conditions sharply and endeavoured during the 20 years of 

administration to lead the provinces of our Canada. 

 

Since this government took office and revamped the Minimum Wage Board, this Board has met only on 

one occasion. So far it has held no public hearings. It had been the practice of the previous 

administration to hold public hearings at least once every two years. The last time the Minimum Wage 

Board held hearings was in November of 1963. I notice from the question put to the Minister of Labour 

the other day that at present there exists one vacancy on the minimum Wage Board. I would hope that it 

will be filled soon. I also express the hope and make a plea to the minister that in filling this vacancy he 

appoint a person to the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1031 

Board from a nomination of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, which is the central labour body in 

the province. I hope that this time he does not ignore the Federation as he did in 1964 on this important 

body. 

 

Over the last few years minimum wages, Mr. Speaker, in relation to average wages have slipped. Last 

year's inadequate increase, particularly since it was not universal, created even greater disparity. I know 

that organized labor support the view that minimum wages should never be set far below the average 

wages. The most recent available figures for the industrial composite wage, that is the Saskatchewan 

average wage, as of October, 1965, stood at $93.58 per week. Minimum wages in the cities on the other 

hand, with some exceptions, stood at $38 per week, and $2 below this in smaller centres. 

 

I would like to point out that in 1949 when the Consumers' Prince Index stood at $100, minimum wages 

in Saskatchewan were $21 per week. The average wage in the province then was $41.50 per week. 

Members of the legislature will notice that the minimum wage then was 50 1/2 per cent of the average 

wage. Today using the city minimum rate and comparing it with the average wage rate, you will notice 

the minimum wage is only 40.6 per cent of the average wage or almost 10 per cent below that of 1949. 

 

If the same ratio were to prevail now as in 1949, the minimum wage of Saskatchewan would be no less 

than $47.25 per week. Even if the minimum wage were increased to $47.25 per week it would not be 

good enough, Mr. Speaker, because of the constantly rising prices of consumer goods. I am sure that 

everyone here is aware of the most recent sharp increases in some of the basic commodities. The price 

of bread has gone up two cents per loaf in the last few days; milk prices are up; the price of beef in the 

city of Regina within the last two weeks has gone up by eight cents per pound. I notice, Mr. Speaker, 

that in last night's Leader Post the report on Consumer Prince Index increases are reported. The Price 

Index now is 142.1 as compared to 137.2 a year ago, an increase of almost 5 points. 

 

Undoubtedly, the members noticed the reports in the Leader Post last Tuesday; the headline on the third 

page said "Highest Food Prices indicated in Regina". In the event that some members did not see this 

report, I would like to quote a few sections from it. 

 

The Star Phoenix says a survey by a group of Saskatoon housewives indicates food prices are higher 

in Saskatchewan than in any province west of Quebec, and are generally higher in Regina. 

 

The group conducting this survey obtained prices from identical lists of brand name items in two 

leading supermarkets in Toronto, Ottawa, London, Winnipeg, Portage La Prairie, Prince Albert, North 

Battleford, Regina, Saskatoon, Calgary, Edmonton and Vancouver. The lists were completed 

independently by two persons in each of the cities and one was checked against the other for accuracy. 

The pricing was done on the same day in every city. 

 

Our of 60 items priced, Regina had the highest price for 40 of them and the lowest in none. 

 

The report then lists the numerous prices that were checked, they give the price comparison. It is 

interesting to note how far 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1032 

apart some of the prices are. For example, the survey shows detergent prices were generally higher in 

Saskatchewan where the prices on king size packages was as much as $1.95 compared with $1.79 

elsewhere. They also note that this did not include the four per cent sales tax which the provincial 

government will apply to soaps and detergents next month. For example, the price of baby foods was 74 

cents for six tins compared to Winnipeg and Calgary at 68 cents. The price of eggs in the city of Regina 

is five cents per dozen for grade A higher than in other centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that comparing the city by city prices, Vancouver, in the survey 

conducted, was highest on one item and lowest on 17 items; Edmonton highest in one item and lowest in 

11 items; Calgary, highest in two items, lowest in 10 items; Toronto, highest on 6 items, lowest in 23 

items. I am aware, Mr. Speaker, of some of the wage conditions that exist in the food industry. 

Significantly in the provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba, wages are much less than say for 

Vancouver and Calgary and Edmonton. Wages in Saskatchewan are approximately 33 per cent below 

the wages in Vancouver and are 20 cents to 25 cents per hour below Edmonton and Calgary. Yet when it 

comes down to prices we will find that in a majority of cases the prices in the cities of Edmonton, 

Calgary and Vancouver are much lower. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that probably the time has come 

for the government to make some examination into the whole question of food price structure in this city 

and in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one additional thing is that I know the workers will have an increase in the cost of travel as 

the result of the increase in gasoline. Therefore, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that it is not asking too much of 

the government to increase the minimum wage to at least $1.25 per hour. The government has received 

representations from the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour urging the government to increase the 

minimum wage to $1.50 per hour. I agree that this rate would not be out of keeping and would not be 

exorbitant in helping to provide a more decent standard of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these days we hear a good deal about the declaration of war on poverty. This party that I 

represent and my colleagues on this side of the house stand first and foremost in the fight for the 

removal of privation wherever it may exist. Many people, however, callously assume that poverty exists 

only among the social welfare families, those who have to survive on Old Age Pensions, and those who 

may be unemployed. The fact is that a great number of wage and salary earners are paid wages that do 

not provide for an adequate standard of living, and many are living either near poverty or in poverty 

even though they may be regularly employed. I submit that the present minimum wage falls in that 

category in relation to the present cost of living. Unfortunately, comprehensive data are not available on 

the need of average families and individuals in Saskatchewan to maintain themselves in an adequate 

standard of living. 

 

Mr. George Terfloth last fall speaking in Saskatoon at a Public Forum on the topic "How Much is 

Enough for a Family to Live On" is reported in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix as saying that a family of 

four requires an income of $412 per month to live "at the minimum level of decency and security". 

Professor Elias Tuma, an economist at the University of Saskatchewan and one of the members on the 

panel of that Forum, is reported in the press as saying that the estimated budget "of a $412 minimum 

monthly income was however, not radical at all and in some ways even conservative". 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1033 

Mr. Speaker, I had brought to my attention an article which reports on a survey conducted in the Metro 

Toronto. It reads this way: 

 

A survey conducted by the Social Planning Council of Metro Toronto shows that the average family of 

four in the area required at least $4,312 a year to maintain a minimum decent standard of living. The 

standard budget which excludes all luxuries, even a car, compares with actual average income of 

$4,531 in this area. To have this minimum, the wage earner would have to make $4,435 before income 

tax; and no payments to a pension plan are allowed in this amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will observe that the estimated budget of Mr. Terfloth and that of the Social 

Planning Council of Metro Toronto are close in comparison. If we are to eliminate poverty the first step, 

I suggest, in this direction is to ensure a decent wage standard for all wage earners, a wage which will 

guarantee every worker a decent income. In this respect I think that the first action should be taken in 

establishing a decent minimum wage which I suggest is $1.25. It is not an exorbitant rate at this time. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, and asking for the support of this resolution, I want to pay tribute to Mr. Stanley 

Knowles, Member of Parliament representing Winnipeg North Centre, for his many years of effort in the 

fight for the rights and protection of wage earners. No man has done more in the House of Commons to 

bring about the enactment of the Canada Labour (Standards) Code than did Mr. Knowles. Hon. Allan 

MacEachen, now Minister of Health and Welfare, and who was the Minister of Labour last year, when 

he introduced this legislation, acknowledged the efforts of Mr. Knowles in this connection. 

 

I urge your unanimous support for this resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this motion I would 

like to say at this point, the former CCF government . . . 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Had 20 years . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Yes, that is right, had 20 years to bring up this matter, a plea to raise the minimum 

wage to $1.25 an hour. When they were in the government they failed to recognize that prerogative. We 

found, when we took over, many inadequate provisions. The hon. member from Regina East (Mr. 

Smishek) said "The CCF when they took power moved swiftly and decidedly to establish a minimum 

wage" and so on and so forth. In fact the minimum wage provision in this province was established in 

1917. Before he starts making such statements in the house I suggest he should at least find out what the 

situation is. 

 

One of the inadequate situations that we found when we took over in this province was that may people 

in the construction industry were prematurely laid off. Time and again they had asked the government to 

establish provisions where these workers were concerned so that they were not laid off. That is the 

question 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1034 

of paying three per cent in lieu of holidays. This way it would not be an inducement for many of the 

contractors to lay the people off. The hon. member form Regina also mentioned that there is a vacancy 

in the Minimum Wage Board, and he suggests that we consult with the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour on this point. Again, it seems to be that he is not too well versed on what the minimum wage 

laws say. The minimum wage laws say that the Minimum Wage Board shall consist of a chairman and 

four persons, two of whom will be female. It doesn't say from what sector of segments of societies the 

come, but to put the hon. member's mind at rest, I have consulted with the Federation, or I am in the 

process of consulting with them. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — Insulting . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — That is right, insulting. Now they are in the opposition, it is an altogether different 

matter. The story goes, you know, what is good for Peter is not good for Paul or something to that effect. 

When they had these opportunities they didn't do anything about it. Well, we are acting on this and we 

are progressing in that direction, and we are progressing in this. 

 

Let's review the rates in Saskatchewan as compared to other provinces. For example, in the mining 

industry, the minimum in Saskatchewan after our last review is $1.15 per hour. What is it in 

Newfoundland, 70 cents, 85 cents, $1.05, I am speaking of Newfoundland. Nova Scotia, New 

Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Alberta — Let's review some of the others, pipe line industry, in the 

provinces of Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, 70 cents, $1.05, $1.00; for Prince Edward 

Island, 70 cents; Ontario, $1.25; it used to be $1.15. I just thought I would mention a few of these, I 

think you should know about it. 

 

We can see, Mr. Speaker, that we are moving ahead in this direction. I want to put on record the 

principles embodied in the resolution. The target of a minimum wage of $1.25 an hour is also the target 

of this government, the target of the people of Saskatchewan, and probably the people of Canada. This 

government, Mr. Speaker, has already taken steps in this direction this last year by passing an Order In 

Council recommending an increase which is now into effect. The question now is not whether or not the 

objective is desirable. I think everyone agrees that it is fair and desirable and I believe that it is desirable. 

The question as in other similar cases is when this objective can be reached and how it can be reached. 

Is it in order and proper, Mr. Speaker, to upset all schedules, all in one step as has been done by the 

Federal Labour Code. Since issuing the Code, or putting the Code into effect, they have been issuing 

hundreds upon hundreds of exemptions, or orders, and delaying orders. Now all these questions, Mr. 

Speaker, are constantly under review by the present government in Saskatchewan. How are we going in 

this direction? 

 

I indicated a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, that the minimum wages were raised last year; and it was 

announced in the Throne Speech debate, Mr. Speaker, by the Premier that the government is again ready 

to move when recommended by the Minimum Wage Board, which will, no doubt, be reasonably soon. 

Unfortunately, the resolution makes no reference to local circumstances, to some of the problems that 

could arise, I would remind the mover of the resolution that 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1035 

the government is fully conscious of the need of increases in minimum wage. While the CCF talk we 

act. We increased it last year. It is going to be increased this year, and where in your 20 years have you 

increased it two years in a row. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — We will act again this year. This last year the government realized that many young 

men and women in the 17 year age group should be qualified to receive the same wage as adults. This is 

another progressive step, this is progressive thinking. Many of our young people are in the work force 

but the former government did not realize that these young people should be allowed the same wage as 

adults. We brought that in last year. This is progress. The government is giving wage priority as was 

mentioned. This government, Mr. Speaker, believes in progress, the means of providing our working 

people with the dignity they deserve and have continued and will continue to work in this direction. 

 

I don't think I need to go very much further into the details, Mr. Speaker, except that we are acting 

where they just talked. With these few words, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to move the 

following amendment, seconded by the Minister of Public Works (Mr. J.W. Gardiner): 

 

That all the words after "this assembly" be deleted and the following words inserted thereon: 

 

This Assembly commends the government for endorsing the Canada Labour (Standards) Code enacted 

by the Parliament of Canada, and for the measures it is considering to establish conditions in 

Saskatchewan comparable to those provided in the Canada Labour (Standards) Code. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, with respect to the 

amendment being in order, Mr. Speaker, I am just suggesting to Your Honour that there is nothing here 

to suggest that the government has at any time endorsed the Canada Labour (Standards) Code. I suggest 

that the amendment is at variance with the intent of the motion, and that the amendment is not in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If I understand the point of order raised by the member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) 

correctly, he is submitting the argument that the amendment is out of order because, if I heard it 

correctly, and I might not have done, the government hasn't shown that they have endorsed the Canada 

Labour (Standards) Code. I don't think the point of order is well taken because that is a matter for 

debate. That is not for the chair to adjudicate; that is a matter for debate. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, as it is now 5:30 I wonder if you could hold it in 

abeyance until after the supper hour. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I thought I already did. I was getting around to ruling as to how the debate 

would continue on the matter however in order that the members might come back prepared for the 

debate after supper, but if you want to call it 5:30. I do now leave the chair until 7:30 this day. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1036 

The assembly recessed until 7:30 p.m. o'clock. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It seems to me that when the house recessed I was looking for a point of order 

somewhere, but I have forgotten which point it was. 

 

Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know whether you recall what I had to say at the time. I would be 

glad to repeat what I said at that time but I did rise to the point of order, and I would be glad to repeat 

again and supplement, indeed, what I said at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I recall very well the member from Moose Jaw rising on the point of order, but I 

thought somebody else was wanting to speak on the point of order too. 

 

Mr. Wood: — On the point of order I raised, I said I thought it was time we should adjourn and have 

the opportunity to give it a little further consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, you can congratulate yourself. You won the battle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — On the question of the relevancy of the motion, Citation 203 from Beauchesne states 

as follows: 

 

It is an imperative rule that every amendment must be relevant to the question for which the 

amendment is proposed. Every amendment proposed to be made either to a question or to a proposed 

amendment should be so framed that if agreed to by the house the question or amendment as amended 

would be intelligible and consistent with itself. 

 

The law on the relevancy of amendments is that if they are on the same subject matter with the original 

motion they are admissible, but not when foreign thereto. 

 

I find the amendment on the same subject matter as the motion and I find the amendment in order. 

However, I would draw your attention to page 414 of Erskine May: 

 

The object of an amendment may be either to modify a question in such a way as to increase its 

acceptability or to present to the house a different proposition as an alternative to the original question. 

 

The latter purpose may be effected by moving to omit all or most of those words of the question after 

the first word "that" and to substitute in their place other words of different import. In that case the 

debate that follows is not restricted to the amendment but includes the purpose both of the amendment 

and of the motion, both matters being under the consideration of the house as alternative propositions. 

 

I think hon. members will agree that these are alternative pro- 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1037 

positions. The debate will, therefore, proceed on the motion and the amendment concurrently. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate on 

this resolution. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: TELEVISION OUTLET IN SASKATCHEWAN 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition) moved, seconded by Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): 

 

That this Assembly: 

 

(1) Notes with concern that Saskatchewan continues to be the only Canadian province west of New 

Brunswick which is not served by at least one CBC-owned and operated television station. 

 

(2) Urges the Government of Canada and the Board of Broadcast Governors to authorize the CBC to 

proceed immediately with construction of a television outlet in Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the resolution which I propose to move in the very near future is one which 

should be a pleasant one to begin the evening with. It is, I would expect and hope, largely 

non-controversial. I admit that there may be some points in respect to the implementation of the 

resolution by the government of Canada and the CBC which might cause some little controversy within 

the province of Saskatchewan. However, we can leave that until later. 

 

The resolution as members will have noted, notes with concern that Saskatchewan continues to be the 

only Canadian province west of New Brunswick which is not served by at least one CBC-owned and 

operated television station. It secondly urges the government of Canada and the Board of Broadcast 

Governors to authorize the CBC to proceed immediately with construction of a television outlet in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, earlier today we listened to some discussion which in a sense dealt with the 

size and the shape of Canada's future. I refer, of course, to the discussion with respect to Canada's 

Constitution. All of us will be aware, however, that there are forces in addition to rules of law which 

help to define what kind of a nation we are and what kind of a nation we will be. A nation after all is 

more than a geographical area marked out by lines on a map, even when those lines or boundaries 

happen to be specific physical barriers, as in the case in some nations but not in the case of Canada. 

There are still forces which limit them and forces which extend the size and the shape of the real nation. 

What we are and what we will be in Canada is undoubtedly affected to some considerable extent by our 

geography. We do after all live next to a very large and very powerful nation. Our concerns with respect 

to this nation which we respect and with which we have lived in mutual benefit are not the concerns 

which some countries have with respect to attack by that nation. After some all, Mr. Speaker, we cured 

that a number of years ago. The last time the United States attacked us was in the war of 1812-14. We 

whipped them so soundly at that time that they haven't tried it since and I doubt if they will in the future. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1038 

But the very presence of that powerful and energetic, wealthy nation next to us has demanded some 

innovations in Canadian life and Canadian institutions which perhaps would not otherwise have been 

proceeded with. Some instances of this kind are in our Trans-Canada transportation developments, first 

in rail, later in air, still later in highway and in pipelines. These in part were Canadian devices, I think, to 

help shape, and certainly have helped to shape, something of the real size and shape of Canada's future. 

We have other influences because of our geography. Because of our geography we in fact as yet at least 

have no national newspaper, no paper which can appear at our breakfast table or at our dinner table, on 

the tables of everybody in the nation. Contrast this with the homeland of our Clerk, Mr. Speaker, in the 

United Kingdom where every day one can read the Times, or the Guardian, or the Observer. I am told 

one can even read the Daily Telegraph if one wants to. I have never been quite sure why one would. Our 

national magazines have difficulty. Maclean's has struggled and continues to do a good job and so have 

some others but all of us are aware of the problems there are of serving the whole Canadian people with 

information about all of Canada. Probably it was such facts as these plus a number of others which 

provided some of the inspiration which resulted in the setting up of the Canadian Broadcasting 

Commission (with respect to radio broadcasting at that time) as far back as 1929. 

 

I thought I might just read one or two of the statements arising out of that report and out of the findings 

of the subsequent Parliamentary Committee in 1932. It was out of these that the Canadian government 

acting on behalf of the public in Canada took public responsibility in the field of communication. Mr. 

Bennett, who was then the Prime Minister, in justifying this new role, made this rather important 

statement. He said: 

 

No other scheme than that of public ownership can assure to the people of this country without regard 

to class or place equal enjoyment of the benefits and pleasures of radio broadcasting. 

 

All of us know some of the history of the CBC since that time. It is interesting to note that in evaluating 

its work a few years later, the Royal Commission on National Development of the Arts, Letters and 

Sciences said this: "It has done much" and then added "much yet remains to be done". Since that time 

we have had the influence and the opportunity of television and some of the responsibility for this has 

been assumed by a Public Agency, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. We get the use of both radio 

and television increasing and thankfully so in our school system generally. I want to read from another 

author who may remain nameless at this time, Mr. Speaker, with respect to television: 

 

Television's power as a means of communicating ideas and influence is so tremendous as to be almost 

frightening. It seems essential that parliamentary government representative of the people should be 

vested with the responsibility of guaranteeing reasonable equitable access to the transmission and 

receipt of such an influence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am aware of the fact that we have never reached out and really grasped the full promise 

that the Aird report gave to Canada, but we have made some substantial steps. The resolution which I 

put before the house will, I think, make one more such step with respect to our province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Distribution of information and the distribution of informa- 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1039 

tion rapidly, accurately, responsibly and reflectively, free of obligation except to that function is one of 

the things that help to build a nation. I refer not just to news of day-to-day happenings but also to 

conditions throughout the country and to opinions of people in various parts of the country. But our 

national systems that use the airway have had other functions and have performed them in Canada and 

continue to perform. The encouragement of the various art forms, literature and drama, music and the 

graphic arts in a new country such as Canada and in a newer part of it such as Saskatchewan needs the 

encouragement which can come from these systems of communication. Certainly in a country like 

Canada the dialogue by means of which we get to know and understand each other in various parts of 

the country is tremendously important and its welfare is advanced when we have good systems of 

communication. 

 

The resolution which I have read contains a request which is of course not new. I thought it was one 

which should comment itself to the support of this legislature. I have some correspondence going back 

three or four years with respect to it. Recently, members will have noticed, endorsement of the idea was 

given by a group on the Saskatoon Campus of the University of Saskatchewan. I understand there is a 

meeting to form a group to discuss perhaps this and probably other matters with regard to national 

broadcasting sponsored by a group on the Regina Campus sometime this particular week. 

 

We have noticed in the press within the last few days a statement that Saskatchewan has, as I recall it, 

the largest number of people of any province in Canada without access to television. Now the resolution 

will not correct all of these things, Mr. Speaker, but I think it does have promise of some impact. It 

doesn't define location in the province. Obviously, I suppose, it would be at Regina or Saskatoon and 

this decision I am quite happy to leave to someone else to make. I would hope, and I am sure all the 

members of the legislature would hope that both of our major cities might be in a position to participate 

actively in what can happen with the development of a station in Saskatchewan. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is of the maturity and of the importance in every way to 

warrant a television outlet of the CBC to be located here. Our people and our institutions deserve the 

added service and opportunity which can come from it. I suppose we in this house would go so far as to 

say the rest of Canada deserves whatever we can give them as a result of the news of happenings and of 

our talent here in the province of Saskatchewan. For many years the Departments of Education in our 

province and other provinces together with the CBC and the private stations, have had an extremely 

effective school radio program, a program which is listened to by a great many adults as well. Television 

is making its beginning. It is more recent, it's more difficult obviously. I am sure too that all of us will 

agree that the use of television in the schools not only will grow and ought to grow, but must grow if we 

are to have the best kind of educational opportunities available to our students. 

 

There is some urgency I think on acting on this. My information is that there are not too many 

unallocated wave lengths left in the province of Saskatchewan. I think it is important that one of these 

wave lengths be allocated to the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1040 

Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I am happy to move, seconded by the hon. lady member for Regina 

(Mrs. Cooper) the resolution as it appears on the order paper. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, at this time I would ask leave of 

the assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION RE INCLUSION OF DRUGS IN MEDICAL CARE PLAN 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City) moved, seconded by Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): 

 

That in the light of the promise of the Government of Canada to implement a National Medical Care 

Plan by 1967 and to pay one-half of the cost of such a plan, this Assembly urges the Saskatchewan 

Government to give consideration to the immediate inclusion of drugs prescribed by physicians under 

the Saskatchewan Medical Care Plan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the resolution that I propose to move this evening is intended as a measure to 

remove the most outstanding deficiency that still remains in Saskatchewan's health program. It would, if 

implemented, have the effect of assuring that good health would be available to all Saskatchewan's 

citizens without the financial barrier that presently exists in the matter of drug benefits, which, I think 

many people recognize, are out of the reach of many of the low income families in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan people are fortunately unique, I believe, in that hospitalization and diagnostic serves and 

medical care are readily available to all citizens without regard to their financial station in the 

community. Having arrived at this point I think it can be logically argued then that the time has come to 

provide, through a public agency, prescription drugs for all of our people thus eliminating the major 

barrier which separates large numbers of our people from the benefits of full and complete health care. I 

am sure that many members are aware as I am of a good number of sick people who find it beyond their 

means to pay for prescription drugs which have been authorized by the doctor. For others I know drug 

costs represent a severe hardship for some of these people. I have been told by at least one doctor that he 

is certain that many of his patients fail to respond to the treatment which he has prescribed for them 

because he feels sure that they are unable to afford the cost of the drugs which he has prescribed. The 

high cost of drugs then, I believe must be regarded as a genuine deterrent that prevents the successful 

treatment of such people. 

 

The suggestion that is embodied in this resolution that prescription drugs be included as an insured 

service is offered, Mr. Speaker, in recognition of the fact that the cost of the commodity in question has 

reached rather exorbitant proportions. According to the Royal Commission on Health Services, 

Canadians collectively spent $201,000,000 on drugs in the year 1953. The report also showed that this 

figure had skyrocketed to a figure of $364,000,000 by 1961, or approximately $1,000,000 a day. This 

represents a 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1041 

per capita increase from $13.57 per capita in 1953 to a figure of $19.95 in 1961. 

 

In recognition of the high cost of drugs to individuals I suppose it would be less than fair and less than 

responsible on my part to ignore the fact that the provisions of drugs will indeed be a costly program. I 

believe that if the recommendations of the Hall Commission report are to be regarded as a necessary 

reality it will be incumbent upon the government to take the necessary steps to reduce the price of drugs 

to a realistic level. I trust, Mr. Speaker, that the house will recognize the relationship between the 

suggestion that drugs be included under the medical care insurance program and the need of 

simultaneous action to guarantee that the cost will not be out of reason in the supplying of prescription 

drugs. I believe it might be worthwhile then to give some consideration to the excessive costs as have 

been revealed by investigations both in Canada and the United States. 

 

The Commission in the United States headed by Senator Kefauver revealed one of the items which 

contributed greatly to the high cost of drugs was responsible at least in part to the frantic effort of the 

pharmaceutical manufacturers to create an artificial demand for their product. The Commission revealed 

further that the medical profession had been confused by the scores of new drugs on the market. Many 

of them are no more than a slight modification of an earlier drug and some combined antibiotics with 

antihistamines, hormones or vitamins. Some of the new products the Commission said appeared almost 

daily. They are not an improvement over old drugs and in some cases they were less effective. Lack of 

competition, excessive advertising, administered prices and high pressure sales techniques were 

regarded as the prime culprits in the conspiracy to charge the public what the traffic will bear at the 

expense of those who are ill. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that these people have little choice in the matter of 

drug purchases. They must either purchase the drugs that they need at excessive prices or do without 

them at their own peril. Examples have been shown in numerous cases where a similar product 

manufactured by two competing companies compare in price to the exact and precise penny, adding 

strength to the belief that a conspiracy exists to administer prices rather than allowing for the free play of 

so-called free competitive enterprise. 

 

Some months ago, Mr. Speaker, the Restrictive Trade Practices Commission reported to the federal 

government in Ottawa. It was revealed at that time that Canadians have the distinction of paying the 

highest price of any country in the world for their drugs. A number of examples were given which I 

think deserve to be read into the record, Mr. Speaker. One drug by the brand name of Folvite which in 

Canada cost 10.38 can be purchased in England for 53 cents. Another brand name drug, Belafeline, in 

Canada cost $2.00, in France the same prescription, the same quantity and quality could be purchased 

for 28 cents. Delta Cortril which in Canada costs $22.70, in England could be purchased for $4.10. 

Sparina Tabs, $5.25 in Canada, $1.04 in England; Amytal Tabs, in Canada $2.85, in England, 65 cents; 

Ginalgon ointment in Canada $3.40, in Germany 51 cents. 

 

Well, to come a little closer to home, Mr. Speaker, in July of 1961, the government of Saskatchewan 

submitted a brief to the Restrictive Trade Practices Commission. At that time the brief submitted by the 

Saskatchewan government made a number of recommendations including first of all (a) expanded 

inspection 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1042 

procedures to insure a high standard of product. (b) The establishment of a National Drug Research 

Laboratory. (c) Control over drug prices. (d) Methods to deal with high pressure promotion. (e) 

Adoption of generic name for drugs. (f) The elimination of the 11 per cent federal sale tax on drugs. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, after almost five years of hearings and investigations the Restrictive Trade Practices 

Commission reported and at that time they levelled criticism at the drug industry charging the drug 

industry with hustling their product on to overloaded doctors and then passing the additional costs of this 

hard-selling procedure on to the consumer. The report shows also that practising pharmacists in a 

number of cases had a practice of marking a code on prescriptions, a code that was known to the trade 

but not known to the layman, indicating that the merchandising practices are ranging close to price 

fixing in the opinion of the Restrictive Trade Practices Commission. 

 

One of the interesting facts I believe emerging from the report involves a proportion of advertising and 

promotional expenditures with respect to the cost of drugs in relation to the value of sales received. With 

the examination of 27 Canadian drug companies during the year 1959, the Commission showed an 

average of 24.92 per cent of net sales was accounted for by advertising and promotion costs. In one case 

the figure was as high as 51.55 per cent. Mr. Speaker, contrary to the impression which has been left by 

the drug industry in an attempt to justify high costs, research was low on the list of costs. Of these same 

27 firms that were investigated, 13 of them reported no research expenditures whatsoever during the 

year in question. Another five firms reported less than one per cent. The highest figure was 39 per cent 

for one firm. Among the recommendations of the Restrictive Trade Practices Commission were a 

number of those which were included in the brief which was submitted by the government of 

Saskatchewan in 1961. The Commission suggested that the entire question of selling methods of the 

drug industry should be examined with a view to placing the matter under the supervision of the Food 

and Drug Directorate of the federal government. Another recommendation involved the suggestion that 

the drug company should be required to print the generic or the chemical name on the label in equal size 

with the trade name. This practice they suggested would have the affect of providing the physician with 

the necessary information in order that he might quickly and easily select the least expensive of a 

number of equal products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe then when consideration is being given to including drug benefits under medical 

care, methods of controlling costs are indeed of cardinal importance especially to those of us in a 

legislative capacity. To accomplish this objective the Commission also contended that the abolition of 

patents would be an effective way of reducing the price of drugs in Canada. Other recommendations 

included (a) more stringent regulations to give reasonable assurance that all prescription drugs are safe 

to use and of good quality; (b) the staff of the Food and Drug Directorate should be enlarged 

considerably to ensure fair enforcement of regulations. The Commission also recommended changes to 

be made in the Food and Drug Regulations as follows: (a) that all premises in which drugs are 

manufactured should be subject to inspection by the Directorate; (b) new drug submissions should 

include detailed reports of tests made to establish therapeutic effectiveness as well as a present report of 

the tests on the safety of the drug; (c) the Food and Drug Directorate should be given the duty of 

inspecting and assaying samples from a sufficiently large number of batches of every prescription drug 

manufactured or imported to make certain that it meets the minimum 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1043 

standard of purity and therapeutic effectiveness; (d) that all advertising and promotional activity relating 

to drugs, including the distribution of samples, and the content of advertising literature be brought under 

the Food and Drug Directorate. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Hall Commission on health services has recommended a complete series of 

health benefits for all Canadians including drug benefits. The Hall Commission report also concludes 

that Canadians can well afford the complete health plan. I believe, Mr. Speaker, it can properly be 

concluded that we can ill afford to be without a complete health program for all our citizens. We, in 

Saskatchewan, are in a preferred position in that we have travelled a long way toward full and complete 

health benefits. With the expected financial participation by the federal government in our medical care 

plan our province will enjoy a contribution of 50 cents on the dollar or $12,000,000 to $14,000,000 

annually, which I suggest to you could not be used in a more worthwhile way than to provide drug 

benefits for all our Saskatchewan people. 

 

I think all members in this assembly will also recall the promise made by provincial Liberals prior to the 

general election of 1964, to the effect that drugs would be included under medical care. I expect, Mr. 

Speaker, that when this promise was given by our provincial Liberals that the undertaking was given 

considering that this was in the public interest. I expect also, Mr. Speaker, that it was regarded also as 

being financially within the grasp of our people. Over the past two decades, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

has provided leadership in many ways. The opportunity now presents itself to lead the way for the rest 

of North America in providing prescription drugs under medical care for all of our Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move this resolution, seconded by the lady member for Regina 

West (Mrs. Cooper). 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I am only going to speak very briefly on this 

motion. We on this side of the house I am sure, as all people who have taken any interest in the health 

problems in the province of Saskatchewan or anywhere in the Dominion of Canada, recognize that there 

are real problems and serious problems posed to may individuals, many families through the high cost of 

drugs. I don't say I would agree with all the things the hon. member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) said 

about the industry and what is happening, but certainly we all recognize that there are many serious 

problems in connection with this industry and with what is happening to the price of drugs, especially as 

they become more and more important in the treating of sickness, of all kinds of sickness, in our 

province. We recognize that there are not only problems in connection with prescribed drugs, drugs that 

are prescribed to individual families by physicians, but also drugs that are used in hospitals. We have a 

hospital plan now that does supply some drugs but many people are very surprised when they come out 

of hospital to find that they do have a drug bill to pay. The list grows longer but it's still far from 

complete. This is why, Mr. Speaker, we did include in our election platform the promise that we would 

implement a drug insurance program. I would point out to hon. members on both sides of the house that 

our program is a four-year program and in less than two years, or in about two years, we have 

implemented more than half of the promises that we made when we went to the electorate before the last 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1044 

provincial election. I can tell members opposite that they can tell the general public that before our 

four-year term is up we will have fulfilled all our promises, we will have implemented all of our 

program and indeed much more. One of these promises, of course, was that we would implement a drug 

insurance plan. 

 

As the matter now stands my department is studying, and has been studying for some time, the cost 

implications of such a program as well as the best method by which it would be introduces. When these 

studies are completed we will bring them before the Cabinet and they will be brought before this 

legislature, and I am sure a form of legislation will be introduced to the public of Saskatchewan. We are 

very hopeful, at least, that in the federal plan, when it is introduced, and we have been given assurance 

that this will take place July 1st, 1967, this will give us a great deal of financial help with our first 

medical care plan. As all members know, the costs of the medical care plan are rising. While we intend 

to go ahead with a drug insurance program whether we get cost-sharing of our medical care plan or not, 

still I think all members realize it will make the job and the financial burden a great deal easier. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I can assure the house that as soon as our studies are complete, as soon as we know where we 

are going, as soon as we have all the facts that we feel we musty have before we can take this very 

important step, a step that I think will not only bring a great deal of benefit to people in this province, 

but will also cost a great deal of money — I think we can ignore this at our risk — we will bring it to the 

legislature and we will implement the plan. We are convinced that we should have cost-sharing in our 

present medical care plan before we can go ahead with a drug program on a wide scale. That is why, Mr. 

Speaker, I am going to move an amendment to this resolution. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — You'll spoil it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, I think it will just make it practical. One of the problems of your resolution is that it 

is not very practical. For many years you promised a drug program before you came into office in 1944. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Twenty years, Dave. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I didn't say you had 20 years but you did have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will move, seconded by the hon. member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) that resolution 

number 17 be amended as follows: 

 

That the words from "That" in line one to the word "this" in line three be deleted, and that all the 

words after the word "assembly" in line three be deleted and the following words added: 

 

"congratulates the Government of Canada on its proposal to introduce a National Medical Care Plan 

by July 1, 1967, and to pay half the cost of such plan, and that in the light of this proposal this 

assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan give consideration to the introduction of 

a drug insurance program to commence as soon after the National Medical Care Plan is introduced as 

feasible." 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1045 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to have a chance to see the resolution as amended before 

addressing any remarks to it. I would therefore ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION RE ABOLITION OF THE SENATE 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City) moved, seconded by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North): 

 

That this assembly believes that, in order to implement the fundamental principle of democracy, the 

laws of Canada should be made by the elected representative of the people, and to this end the 

assembly urges the Government of Canada to take immediate steps to bring about the abolition of the 

Senate so that for the second century of our history the Parliament of Canada will consist of the Queen 

and the House of Commons. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am appealing to the Premier and the house leader in the hope that we will have a 

free vote on this important resolution. In the House of Commons on the 6th day of April, 1964, the 

Conservative party tried to prevent Mr. Knowles from introducing Bill C-88. The broadminded Liberals 

believe that a bill should be given first reading regardless of its merit but there was a division forced and 

we must give the Liberals in Ottawa credit for voting to give this bill first reading, the Knowles Bill. Of 

course, it never was given the second reading. And so I hope that since the Premier of Saskatchewan 

was an ally of mine some years ago in advocating the abolition of the Senate that he will be speaking in 

support of this resolution and that there will be a free vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one hundred years ago the wealthy in Canada and the privileged of Great Britain were able 

to provide in the BNA Act that parliament in Canada should consist of an elected House of Commons, 

an appointed Senate and the Queen. They did not consider the people in the colony capable of operating 

a democratic government. In the Norman Ward edition of the Government of Canada by Dawson, on 

page 38 there is an interesting note that when the bill was introduced in the House of Lords by the 

Colonial Secretary, it passed both Houses without arousing any great interest or enthusiasm. Sir John A. 

MacDonald, caustically observed that the bill was treated with no more concern that if it were a private 

bill uniting two or three English parishes. A spectator sitting in the gallery of the Commons noted that 

when the house passed on to the next bill, which dealt with the imposition of dog taxes, there was a 

perceptible brightening of the interest of the members in the business before them. The BNA Act 

received royal assent on March 29, was proclaimed on May 22nd, and came into effect on July 1st, 

1867. 

 

The achievements of Canadians during the ensuing ten decades should establish our right for the future 

to have the Parliament of Canada consist of the Queen and the House of Commons as suggested by this 

resolution. The descendants of those who were here in 1867 and those who have come from the four 

corners of the world have demonstrated that they . . . 

 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1046 

I would like to raise a point of order at this time. I think that the person who intends to propose this 

motion has spoken long enough to indicate the nature of the motion and it is on the Order Paper, and I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, that the motion as proposed is out of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — A member can raise a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, the point of order that I raise is that the proposed motion which is 

now being debated by the hon. member from Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) is out of order on the ground 

that the motion is a matter already appointed for consideration by the house. I have in mind particularly 

the motion that was debated earlier this day involving the amendment of the Constitution. I submit that 

the two resolutions cover very much the same ground and if I may be permitted I would like to point out 

why I raise this point of order. 

 

I wish to refer you at this time to May on Parliamentary Practice at page 403. It clearly says: 

 

That a motion must not anticipate a matter already appointed for consideration by the house, whether it 

be a bill or an adjourned debate upon a motion. 

 

I submit that there is at the moment before the house an adjourned debate upon a motion that covers 

very much the same ground as the motion that is proposed, and Mr. Speaker, to back up what I say I 

would like to refer to the motion in question. As the hon. member pointed out it is a motion and the 

effect, or the purpose of the motion is to urge the government of Canada to take immediate steps, I wish 

you to note this, to take immediate steps to bring about the abolition of the Senate, so that for the second 

century of our history the parliament of Canada will consist of the Queen and he House of Commons. 

Well, we have already heard enough from the hon. member to know that in order to effect this it would 

require an amendment to the Constitution. Mr. Speaker, going back to the motion before the house, that 

was debated this afternoon by the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) and I wish to direct 

your attention particularly to part two. It says: 

 

Expresses its opinion that the provisions in that respect contained in the White Paper issued by the 

federal government entitled "An Act to provide for the amendment in Canada of the Constitution of 

Canada" are unacceptable. 

 

Now, it refers to the White Paper and what does the White Paper say? The White Paper contains a 

number of provisions relating to the amendment to the Constitution and particularly at page 37 it says, 

and I direct your attention to page 37, Mr. Speaker, of the White Paper to which the resolution debated 

this afternoon has reference, it says: 

 

notwithstanding anything in the Constitution of Canada, the parliament of Canada may exclusively 

make laws for, from time to time, amending the Constitution of Canada in relation to the Executive 

Government of Canada, and the Senate and the House of Commons, except as regards 

 

and then it mentions (a), (b) and (c) which has no application, but (d) says: 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1047 

(d) The number of members by which the province is entitled to be represented in the Senate; 

 

(e) The resident qualification of Senators and the requirements of the Constitution of Canada for the 

summoning of persons to the Senate by the Governor General in the Queen's name; 

 

(f) The right of a province to a number of members in the House of Commons not less than the 

number of Senators representing such province. 

 

In other words, the very subject of amendment of the Constitution insofar as it relates to the Senate is 

covered by the White Paper which was before the house, and is before the house on the previous motion. 

So, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact the other motion definitely expresses these items that are 

not acceptable, and this is what the motion that we had before us this afternoon says, it is unacceptable. 

So, these provisions relating to the Constitution as provided for in the White Paper are unacceptable and, 

of course, right now we are dealing with a matter relating to members of the Senate. It would involve the 

abolition of the Senate. I submit that it covers precisely the same ground except that the one this 

afternoon is simply on a broader basis than the one that is being debated or that is being proposed now. 

 

But I think there is even a greater objection under part three of the motion that was debated this 

afternoon. It says: 

 

Expresses the opinion that provision to amend the Constitution of Canada should not be finally 

determined without the widest possible public consultation and debate so as to permit the opinions of 

all interested groups and individuals to be solicited and obtained. 

 

This is what we debated this afternoon. We heard the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) 

express all the benefits of this wide public consultation, we mustn't amend the Constitution without 

acquainting the people with the nature of the amendments, the purpose of the amendments and so on. 

Yet, on the same day, while these words are still reverberating in the assembly, we now get a motion 

which I submit is almost in direct contradiction, certainly an inconsistent one. In this one, because the 

opposition feels that it should be done now, they don't talk about public consultation or anything like 

that, it has to be to "take immediate steps" to bring about the abolition of the Senate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to conclude by pointing out that May does say at page 403: 

 

That stated generally the rule against anticipation is that a matter must not be anticipated if it contains 

a more effective form of proceeding than the proceedings by which it is thought to be anticipated, but 

it may be anticipated if it is contained in an equally or less effective form. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1048 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as long as this was a straight motion as against a motion, this was in order. But it 

seems to be quite clear from the earlier quotation I read that once the matter becomes an adjourned 

debate upon a motion, it then falls into a different category and that it falls within the provision of a 

motion that must not anticipate a matter already appointed for consideration by the house, whether it be 

a bill or an adjourned debate upon a motion. 

 

Earlier it points out at page 401: 

 

The rule may be fully stated as follows: No question or bill shall be offered in either house that is 

substantially the same as one on which judgment has already been expressed in the current session. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we proceed with this motion and if the adjourned motion is adopted we will then 

be debating or adopting a motion on a subject upon which the assembly shall have passed judgment. In 

other words, when the assembly shall have passed judgment on the first motion that was debated today it 

will at the same time have passed judgment upon the motion that is now before the house and I submit it 

is out of order. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — We didn't rule him out of the house, just out of order. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member has just gone for some more heavy 

artillery but, Mr. Speaker, if I ever get caught stealing chickens I want the hon. member for Shellbrook 

(Mr. Cuelenaere) to defend me . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — . . . because I am sure if I were guilty he could make me look good. 

Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that the motion moved by the hon. member for Regina West 

(Mr. Blakeney) this afternoon, is a motion in regard to the mechanical method of doing two things: one, 

the repatriation of our Constitution; and two, how it will be amended, not what amendments will be put 

into it. That is all, this is not the question at all, whereas the motion moved by the hon. member for 

Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) is a specific proposal in regard to our Constitution as it stands at the present 

time that certain action be taken now. His argument that it was about section three of the motion, by the 

member for Regina, should not be finally determined without the widest possible consultation and 

debate. Debate was exactly what we were going to have this afternoon on the question of the Senate 

except that the hon. member for Shellbrook (Mr. Cuelenaere) interrupted. We were going to have, I 

suppose, fairly wide debate on this question, so that this is going absolutely contrary to that. So I can't 

see, Mr. Speaker, that there is any foundation in his argument at all. They are two different subjects, 

entirely, and certainly the motion that is before the house now, in my opinion, is in order. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, it might be of interest to members to know that a 

similar point was raised in the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1049 

House of Commons when the Minister of Natural Resources was campaigning on April 4, 1964. Mr. 

Knowles speaking to the point of order said: 

 

The fact is that under section 91 (a) of the BNA Act, we have the right to amend our Constitution with 

respect to the matters which are exclusively federal. We have already done so with respect to the 

representation in the House of Commons. There are other bills on the Order Paper with respect to 

matters of representation and the qualifications required of a Senator, both the present government and 

the previous one have made such proposals. I suggest that with regard to the right of this Committee to 

introduce and deal with such a bill and send it to the other place there is no question whatever. And I 

feel advice I received from our parliamentary counsel is superior to the advice which has been given to 

Your Honour by the member for Edmonton-West. 

 

And since that day, Mr. Speaker, Chapter IV of last year's Federal Statutes deals with the retirement of 

members of the Senate. The BNA Act was amended and this is how simple it was. Amendments to the 

BNA Act, this is the Statute of Canada, 1965, part 1: 

 

(1) Section 29 of the BNA Act, 1867, is repealed and the following substituted therefore: 

 

29 (1) Subject to subsection (2) a Senator shall, subject to the provisions of this act, hold his place in 

the Senate for life. 

 

(2) A Senator who is summoned to the Senate after the coming into force of this subsection shall 

subject to this act, hold his place in the Senate until he obtains the age of 75 years. 

 

This was given the Royal Assent on the 2nd of June, 1965. It was established that the Parliament of 

Canada has the right to change the BNA Act. It is quite clear by the BNA Act it shall be lawful for the 

Queen, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of Commons to make laws for 

the peace, order and good government of Canada in relation to all matters not coming within the classes 

of subjects by this act assigned explicitly to the legislature of the province and for greater certainly but 

not so as to restrict the generality of the foregoing terms of this section hereby declare that 

notwithstanding anything in this act this exclusive legislative authority of the parliament of Canada 

extends to all matters coming within the classes of subjects hereunder enumerated. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I submit that we have established again and again that the House of Commons and the 

Senate can make the changes and I submit that it is quite in order for us to proceed with the resolution 

which is before the house. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think the hon. members will agree that this has raised somewhat of a complicated, 

knotty and extensive problem. I thank all hon. members that have given me their views and opinions. It 

appears that this breaks down into the question of priority and anticipation; it also appears that if one 

wants to make a reasonable adjudication of the matter, it is necessary to read at least that part of the 

White Paper referring to the Senate and also the British North America Act. I must plead guilty to not 

having read 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1050 

the British North America Act for some considerable time. 

 

I know that I am not alone and I appreciate the hon. member's sentiments. Therefore, I would crave the 

indulgence of the house to read the BNA Act. If my memory serves me correctly it is not such an 

extensive document, not as extensive as the White Paper. I presume I will perhaps have to read that 

though I thought I might be able to avoid it. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — It is quite a small volume, just forty-five pages really. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Forty-five pages. Well, thank you. If members will bear with me I will do my very 

best to bring in a ruling on this matter by Tuesday night, the next Private Members' day. Better than that 

I don't think I can very well do. 

 

I should say that the question arises, if this is to be done, as to the position the motion will have between 

now and then. I would say that the motion would stand, that it would retain its present position on the 

paper; that is, it wouldn't go to the bottom of the list. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that will be acceptable 

if Your Honour can assure us there won't be any more Senators appointed between now and then. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I am afraid I can't make commitments for that authority over which I have no 

control. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Maybe the Premier would make a statement on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — He might if he was here. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Obviously he has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION RE PORT OF CHURCHILL 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution of Mr. F.K. Radloff (Nipawin): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to undertake technological investigation at the 

Port of Churchill, with a view to extending the season during which traffic may move in the Port, 

enlarging docking and warehouse facilities, and providing more adequate customs and rail service, and 

further that this Assembly urge the Canadian Wheat Board and the Government of Canada to make 

more use of the Port of Churchill for the export of prairie grain. 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, the mover and the seconder made exception- 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1051 

ally good speeches when this resolution was before the house and I had an opportunity to make some 

comments at the time. I had planned on mentioning that the building of this railway did make it possible 

to open up a very important area in northern Manitoba and northern Saskatchewan. I think that since 

there is agreement regarding the content in this resolution I am concluding my remarks in the hope that 

we might get this resolution to the proper authorities in Ottawa at as early a date as possible. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION RE SHORTAGE OF BOXCARS, ETC. AND GUARANTEE OF PRICES FOR FARM 

PRODUCTS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution of Mr. L.M. Larson (Pelly): 

 

That this Assembly, believing the precarious economic condition of agriculture demands immediate 

action, urges the Federal Government to take immediate steps to: (1) ensure Canadian railways make 

available immediately enough boxcars, locomotives and other equipment to transport Saskatchewan 

grain to terminal elevators to meet Canada's export commitments; and (2) guarantee adequate 

minimum prices for all major farm products now. 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I am not in complete agreement with the first line 

when it suggests that farm conditions are precarious. I know that there are many of us that know there 

are some farmers in Canada today that are probably in a precarious state, but I don't think this is the 

general condition of farmers across this country. I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that all rural members, in 

fact, all members representing rural people certainly believe that the federal government has a 

responsibility to the farmers of this country to help in the sale of grain. We believe that the federal 

government's responsibility is to see to it that the Canadian railroads do everything in their power to 

move grain so that we will not lose any profitable grain sales. I think that the first part of the resolution I 

must agree with. All members representing farm people will agree with this. However, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that most of us will hesitate when we read the whole resolution; the second part of the resolution 

suggests guaranteeing adequate minimum prices for all major farm products now. I think most of us 

realize that most of the wealth in western Canada, particularly this province of Saskatchewan, is derived 

from the sale of wheat. Wheat, of course, is a product that we produce here to sell outside of Canada. It 

is very easy for the people who sit to your left and who have never had the responsibility, Mr. Speaker, 

of running the business of this country, to suggest the second part of this resolution. I suppose they 

realize it will be a good many decades before they might have this particular responsibility of 

guaranteeing adequate minimum prices for all major farm products now. 

 

I recall not too long ago where a government friendly to the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) 

came up with a sort of a farm policy that was supposed to guarantee minimum prices for major farm 

products and, of course, this included many farm products. They passed what was known as The 

Agricultural Prices Stabilization Act or something to that effect. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn't 

too effective. I think that we all realize that farm prices in the main are determined by the buoyancy of 

the economy of our country. When jobs are provided by the economic climate that governments provide 

in the country, labor has money 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1052 

to buy more of the necessities of life; they can buy more milk and meat and cheese and butter and 

everything else that is produced on the farm. Particularly, Mr. Speaker, when the economy is buoyant; 

working people, when their wages are higher, can buy more of the goods than when our economy is in a 

slump and they are not able to buy. We notice that meat prices, for example, improved when there is full 

employment in the country. Another thing that I might mention here, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that over 

the past 25 or 30 years, maybe 25 or 30 years ago we might have needed to look at the second part of 

this resolution more than we do today, but in the past 25 or 30 years we have had social legislation 

passed almost entirely by Liberal federal governments that sort of cushioned the shock of an economic 

recession so that the buying power of the people of Canada was better. Of course, when we talk of the 

social legislation that we have had in this country over the past 25 years, we have had some small 

guarantee, more than we had before, to give to the farmers a better return for most of their farm products 

that are sold in this country. 

 

Old Age Pensioners, who 30 years ago didn't qualify for an old age pension with a means test, found it 

pretty hard to buy anything other than the bare necessities of life to keep body and soul together. The 

same was the case with working people before we had unemployment insurance in this country; people 

didn't have the buying power to buy the goods that are produced by farmers. 

 

Our greatest source of income, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, particularly in this province, was derived 

from wheat. Wheat is something that is not sold to any degree in this country. When we consider the 

total amount of wheat that is produced and the total amount that is sold, there is a very small percentage 

of it sold in this country, so the economy of this country doesn't necessarily set the price of wheat. Of 

course, farmers in Saskatchewan depend to a great extent on the amount of wheat we sell and the price 

we sell it at. While there is a market in the importing countries of the world and a good market and lots 

of demand, naturally farmers in western Canada who are producing wheat are going to do better because 

of the policies, Mr. Speaker, that have been instituted by the government of Canada in the past couple of 

years and very aggressive sales policies that have produced much over average sales in the last two 

years. I think on a resolution last year I dealt with the figures comparing the wheat sales of '63 and '64 

up until the time of the 1965 session as compared with the previous five or six years. I don't intend to 

repeat these figures today, Mr. Speaker, but they are even better today after the 1965-66 crop-year 

started last fall, because of our increased sales to Russia and China. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, because of these dynamic sales policies that were started by our friend who is now the 

Minister of Finance, the hon. Mitchell Sharp, and because we are able to sell more wheat — and I 

noticed just recently that we are able to sell it at a little bit better price — I am going to move an 

amendment to the motion. I move, seconded by the member for Elrose (Mr. Leith): 

 

That all the words after (2) in line 6 be deleted and the following words added: 

 

"and continues an aggressive sales policy thereby assuring farmers a ready market and adequate 

returns for export wheat". 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1053 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some comment, impromptu, on this 

most backward and ridiculous amendment made by the hon. member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher). He is 

going backwards. A year ago he, at least, came a little farther. He favored $2 a bushel for wheat. Now he 

has reversed himself completely. Whereas the resolution part (2) says guaranteed minimum prices for all 

major farm products, now he is telling the house that if we have continued good sales of wheat abroad 

this will not only support the price of wheat but it will also support the price of other farm products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record conclusively proves, particularly over the past years when we had these huge 

sales, that this has not been the case. We experienced a year ago as high as a 17 cents a bushel decrease 

in the price of wheat and it hasn't been made up yet. As a result of that the final payment on last year's 

pool just closed out indicates that on the average the farmers were 10 cents a bushel short. In spite of 

what the hon. member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) says that these huge sales are going to raise the price 

of wheat, it hasn't even done that, Mr. Speaker. May I suggest to you, Sir, and to the hon. member that 

farm costs have been increasingly going up each year. Those costs are not fixed, they go up. Farmers 

costs are not fixed, they go up. He isn't aware of the fact that Saskatchewan, because of inadequate 

income to the dairy industry, is now importing dairy products into the province. This, I think, is a 

disgrace, and it is a reflection on the lack of policies at Ottawa that should properly stabilize farm prices 

at a level commensurate with production costs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he suggests too, that because of different social legislation that the farm economy 

will be buoyed up. We have been getting increasing amounts of social legislation which is all good and 

fine but it hasn't done anything for the prices of farm commodities. The records bear me out despite the 

hon. member's pitiful effort at trying to find a means of dodging out of a simple straightforward request 

of guaranteed adequate minimum prices for all major farm products now. Mr. Speaker, I say now with 

great emphasis and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that you will not suggest to me that I shouldn't talk quite so 

loud because I can make my point just as well, but may I suggest that this applies equally to the Premier 

who can shout a lot louder than I can over less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts are the agricultural industry is in a precarious position. This is borne out by 

Canada's War on Poverty. A great deal of this poverty is found in rural areas as demonstrated by the fact 

that it was necessary to have ARDA assistance for small farmers, which I, by the way, say is not the 

answer to the problem of the small farmer. I said over and over again in this house and elsewhere that in 

order to improve farm income farm prices must be maintained in fixed relationship to farm costs. I say 

again, and repeat, that this can only be accomplished by the national government fixing farm prices. It is 

their responsibility. We have seen an exodus of some 50,000 farmers out of Saskatchewan. That is why 

our population is, or has decreased, Mr. Premier, and for no other reason. It began during the war years 

and continued increasingly in the post-war period, and the process, Mr. Speaker, has not ended yet. 

 

Then the hon. member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) stands up and says the situation is not serious, it is 

not precarious. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1054 

Everything is going to be honey because of social legislation. By the way, Mr. Speaker, if this is correct, 

the hon. members opposite should certainly support the resolution on the Order Paper for a $100 a 

month pension to Old Age Pensioners. This will help farm prices too. The hon. member for Yorkton 

should particularly support that resolution. 

 

The facts are the agricultural industry is in more than a serious situation. It has more than reached a 

crisis stage. I think that it has gone now beyond the point of no return unless something very drastic is 

done. And this resolution very mildly suggests, Mr. Speaker, that the farmer have some guarantee of 

minimum prices for all major farm products now. This resolution, part (2), doesn't even satisfy my 

demands. I don't talk about minimum farm prices. I talk about fixed farm prices in relationship to farm 

costs. Mr. Speaker, I have been so stunned and amazed by the hon. member's position that I must of 

necessity adjourn this debate and like yourself, Mr. Speaker, read the White Paper and a few other 

papers and come back perhaps with more substantial arguments and see if I can't convince these people 

on the other side of the house that there is really an agricultural crisis and that they should, in fact, 

support this resolution. Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION RE AMENDING THE SCHOOL ACT RE MENTALLY HANDICAPPED 

CHILDREN 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution of Mr. A.M. Nicholson 

(Saskatoon): 

 

That this Assembly believes that every child has the right to develop his potentials to the maximum, 

and recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan give consideration to amending the School 

Act and other legislation if necessary, to make mandatory the education of all educable and trainable 

mentally handicapped children, and to recognize in its grant structure the additional costs of such 

education. 

 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that school systems should 

provide educational opportunities for all educable and trainable students. By this I mean that school 

boards should provide schooling for all children capable of benefiting from programs offered presently 

and those which may be developed in the future. I also believe that school systems can be expected to 

expand and expend as much money on behalf of retarded children as upon other children. However, all 

of us are aware that it does cost more to educate a retarded child than it does to educate a normal 

individual. We know also that for the past few years school systems have been expanding their services 

for these children. The Department of Education has sought to foster the development of special 

education programs and facilities by working closely with school boards and administrators and by 

providing grant incentives. How successful these policies have proven to be can be demonstrated from 

the figures taken from the Department of Education annual report as follows: for example, in the year 

1959-60, 12 school boards were involved in operating classes for educable retarded while by 1964-65 

the number of boards so involved increased to 20. The number of teachers engaged in classrooms for the 

educable increased during this period from 39 to 68; for the trainable in 1959-60 eight 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1055 

school boards were operating classes, while by 1964-65, 21 school boards were involved. For the same 

years respectively the number of teachers working with the trainable increased from 23 to 51. The 

number of children being served has increased during the 1962-1963 year to 850 educable and 330 

trainable children in classrooms in the province. By 1964-65 the figures were 998 educable and 450 

trainable. 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — No honourable member in the house should pass between the Speaker 

and the member speaking while he is speaking. 

 

Mr. Trapp: — Thank you, Sir. These figures represent an approximate 17 per cent increase in the 

number of educable children served in special classes over a two year period. Likewise for the trainable 

in the same period of time there was approximately a 40 per cent increase. Some of the factors 

governing the number of classrooms operating and the rate at which such services are extended relate to 

teacher supply and the training available. These in turn are reflections of the more global problem of 

obtaining teachers and teacher-trainees in sufficient number to fill all classrooms in the province. This 

shortage causes school boards to give primary emphasis to obtaining regular teachers and boards to give 

primary emphasis to obtaining regular teachers and minimizes the availability of teachers trained in 

specialities, such as mentally retarded. Canadian universities have not yet found it possible to offer 

complete sequences of courses in the various specialities and in the various areas of special education. 

Consequently the supply of qualified teachers of retarded children is very limited. 

 

In the Department of Education we are giving consideration to a policy in which the excess cost of 

special education would be shared with school boards. This will be communicated to boards as soon as 

policies are finalized. It should be understood that school boards are faced with increasing pressure to 

provide more and more services: guidance services, vocational technical programs, kindergarten 

classrooms, special classes for the mentally and physically handicapped and the like. Boards have to 

determine priorities and must have some flexibility in decision-making. Concerning the resolution, I 

fully support the philosophical view that every child has the right to develop his potential to the 

maximum. At the same time, in view of the fact that school boards are faced with the needs to provide 

specialized services of various kinds and that the supply of trained teachers for the mentally 

handicapped is very limited at the present time, I cannot support the suggestion of mandatory legislation 

at this time. May I point out also that the resolution is restrictive in that it gives no consideration to other 

kinds of handicaps: the physically handicapped, the hard-of-hearing, the partially sighted, those with 

speech impediments, crippled, emotionally disturbed and those who are hospitalized. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I share with the hon. Minister of Education's sentiment as far 

as the desirability of making such a program universal throughout Saskatchewan, but I too have 

reservations about the way that the resolution is worded. I do know that in the two school units with 

which I am familiar, one of them the Rosetown School Unit, operates a school room for the training of 

exceptional children. These happen to be children that are a little slower than the other children. They 

are not exceptional in the fact that they are brighter but in the fact that they are 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1056 

physically or mentally handicapped so that they don't fit into the ordinary school system. 

 

On the other hand, the Estin-Elrose School Unit does not operate a schoolroom for this purpose. They 

would like very much to do so but they find that it is wildly impractical for them to gather all the 

children from the far corners of the constituency into one schoolroom. This school unit is about the size 

of a provincial constituency and to actually transport these children to one place for training, to transport 

them to a place where they might have to be boarded over the week is impractical. Some of them indeed 

do make arrangements to board them in Saskatoon and in Rosetown where they can get this exceptional 

training. 

 

I have checked the word mandatory in the resolution. I believe that our school units are doing as good a 

job as they can to move in the direction of giving training for mentally retarded, physically retarded, and 

educable children and I am going to move the following amendment to the resolution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I move, seconded by the member for Kelvington (Mr. B.H. Bjarnason) that the resolution be amended as 

follows: 

 

That all the words after "Saskatchewan" in line 3 be deleted and the following words added: 

 

"encourage school boards, through grant structure, to accept the responsibility of providing an 

appropriate education for exceptional children". 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, since the mover and the seconder have made an 

amendment to the original motion, I would like to see the amendment as it is presented to this house and 

I would like some time to study it. I see that this amendment changes the concept of the amended 

resolution as it appeared on the Order Paper so I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION: CORRESPONDENCE RE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS FOR INDIANS 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. W.J. Berezowsky 

(Cumberland): 

 

That an humble Address (No. 2) be presented to His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor praying that His 

Honour will cause to be laid before the Assembly: 

 

All correspondence exchanged between the government of Saskatchewan and the minister of 

Citizenship and Immigration for Canada concerning a memorandum of agreement respecting 

community development programs for Indians. 

 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, this was a motion I 

adjourned because before consenting to it I felt that because it involved the Minister of Citizenship and 

Immigration for Canada that I would like to find out whether they would object. Now, I have spoken to 

the hon. members and I believe they have agreed to withdraw the motion. Is that correct? 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1057 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — With the permission of the house, I would like to withdraw 

the motion. 

 

Motion withdrawn. 

 

MOTION RE FREIGHT RATES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution moved by Mr. G.G. Leith 

(Elrose): 

 

That this Assembly urges the government of Canada to take whatever action is required, to adjust the 

discriminatory freight rates, which presently exist against many industries in the Prairie region. 

 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, when I rise I like to be on 

firm ground. As was the case early this evening I feel on pretty firm ground in rising to support the 

motion now before the assembly. 

 

When I adjourned the debate a few days ago I stated that I expected to deal with the resolution with 

particular regard to the discriminatory freight rates which presently exist as they affect the shipment of 

pulp from the prairie region. The mover and the seconder and the others who have spoken have already 

deplored in a general way the discrimination and the inequities which exist in the freight rate structure 

against many industries in the prairie region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some ten years ago I had occasion to represent lumber producers at a hearing which lasted 

a week before the Board of Transport Commissioners at Ottawa. The purpose of the hearing was to 

examine freight rates in the movement of wood products throughout Canada. It was a most interesting 

and eye-opening experience to say the least. I was struck by the conglomeration of rates and the variety 

of special arrangements that prevailed, depending in each case on the point of origin and the point of 

destination. The hearing by common consent showed that there was neither rhyme, reason nor logic in 

the rates that were being charged. They depended on several factors: competition, alternative routes, 

special arrangements, regional rates, special concessions, etc. Mileage or distance of haul in some cases 

appeared to be one of the least important among the various factors taken into consideration as far as the 

movement of lumber and wood products is concerned. I am sure that that condition exists in the 

transportation of many other commodities. In all cases relating to the shipment of wood products it 

works to the disadvantage of the prairie regions and particularly to Saskatchewan. 

 

Of late, Mr. Speaker, and I mean within the last six months, I have had occasion to look into the rate 

structure insofar as it affects the transportation of pulp. Last November, the Minister of Public Health 

(Mr. Steuart), representatives of Parsons and Whittemore and I had occasion on behalf of the province 

and on behalf of the Prince Albert Pulp Mill Company to make representations to the President of the 

CNR, the federal Minister of Transport, and the Chairman of the Board of Transport Commissioners. 

The rate structure relating to the shipment of pulp from Saskatchewan is an example of the 

discrimination and the unsatisfactory condition which presently exist against certain industries in the 

prairie region. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1058 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the situation? The new mill at full production, and I am referring to the 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill, will produce 250,000 tons of pulp and will generate transportation charges at 

existing rate levels of about $5,000,000 from outbound pulp alone and about $1,000,000 to $3,000,000 

on inbound cargo. The inbound cargo would depend largely on how much is trucked in and to what 

extent the railroad is used. Rail will be used exclusively on outbound cargo. In this instance we are 

therefore discussing a matter of importance to both the economy of Saskatchewan and the economy of 

the railroad. It should be pointed out here that one of the decided advantages which Saskatchewan offers 

in the production of pulp is that the distance to major market areas in Midwestern United States is about 

400 to 1,000 miles less than the distance from mills in Alberta and British Columbia. In other words, we 

are that much closer to this important market but present freight rate structures practically completely 

destroy that advantage. Our main market on the North American continent for pulp is located in five 

main areas, namely, the Minnesota area, the Wisconsin and Illinois areas, and the Michigan and Ohio 

areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is at least 400 miles closer to all these markets than the Hinton mill in 

Alberta and Prince Albert is about 500 miles closer to all these market areas than the Castlegar mill in 

British Columbia yet the pulp rates from Prince Albert were fixed by the railways under the existing 

freight rate structure at exactly the same rate from Hinton and Castlegar namely, $15.80 per ton. Here is 

another situation. Prince Albert is over 1,100 miles closer to these same markets than Port Alberni, 

British Columbia. In practically all cases, Port Alberni is about twice the distance. Yet the differential in 

shipping cost in some cases is as low as 80 cents. 

 

You can ship, Mr. Speaker, pulp from Port Alberni to the Minnesota market, a distance of 2,074 miles 

for $16.60. The rate for shipping the same product from Prince Albert to the same market, a distance of 

only 834 miles was $15.80 per ton or only 80 cents differential. 

 

A concession was given by the railroads by reducing the rate to $15 but that still leaves a differential of 

only $1.60 per ton. Now, Mr. Speaker, how does Saskatchewan come out when it comes to competing 

with western Ontario mills? The situation is a little better but not much. Although Prince Albert is only 

300 rail miles further from the Minnesota market than the Dryden-Fort William area, the freight rate for 

the shipment of pulp from Prince Albert to the Minnesota area was $5.50 more, $10.30 from there and 

$15.80 from Prince Albert, and still $4.70 more after the concession. Although Prince Albert is only 220 

miles further to the Wisconsin area the freight rate differential is $3.00 more from Prince Albert than it 

is from the Dryden-Fort William area. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as you can see they appear to have us coming and going. We are placed at a 

disadvantage competition-wise from the B.C. mills and we are placed at a disadvantage 

competition-wise from the western Ontario mills. We find ourselves squeezed in the middle. Now, why 

does this exist? The reason is that the rates proposed by the railroad, under the present rate structure for 

the new mill at Prince Albert, is based on what is known as the western grouping. For freight purposes 

on pulp shipment, Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, is treated as though it were located in British Columbia; 

so is Hinton, Alberta, but Hinton suffers less because it is situated on the B.C.-Alberta boundary. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1059 

As a result of being in that western group we bear exactly the same freight rate as Hinton, Alberta and 

Castlegar, B.C. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if mileage and mileage alone was taken into consideration, plus the terminal cost of $1.00 

per ton which is always fixed no matter what the distance is, freight rates from Prince Albert to the 

Minnesota area should be 33.6 per cent less than the Hinton-Castlegar rate and our rates would be about 

27 to 32 per cent less to the more eastern market areas. Rates based on mileage would of course be the 

most desirable situation insofar as the Prince Albert mill is concerned. Pulp rates in the southern United 

States generally reflect mileage differences. Pulp rates in eastern Canada are greatly influenced by water 

competition. In contrast pulp rates from western Canada, including western Ontario and the western 

U.S.A. are based on broad, geographic grouping, the stated purpose of which is to permit equality of 

opportunity for mills in different areas to compete in the common U.S. market. 

 

The railroads tell us that the system has been firmly established and that it would be difficult to change 

now. Well, Mr. Speaker, I submit that, if the system is bad, if it discriminates unduly against a particular 

section of the country, it should be changed now before it becomes firmer and more crystallized than it 

is. But if we can't change the system, if we must live with the establishment, then I submit, let's change 

the grouping. Why should we be grouped with British Columbia? Why not create a new group or why 

not group Saskatchewan with western Ontario? Why should we be grouped with an area where wood 

conditions are competition-wise entirely different and 500 to 1,000 miles away? Why not group us with 

western Ontario where the wood conditions are more similar and only 300 to 400 miles away? 

 

If we were grouped with Ontario it would result in freight reduction in some instances of 20 per cent and 

this would make a tremendous difference to the pulp industry in Saskatchewan. In the Prince Albert area 

the first pulp mill in Saskatchewan is sufficiently economically sound that it could proceed on the 

expectation that further freight rate concessions could be negotiated. But, Mr. Speaker, firstly, the 

discrimination, the inequity and the injustice still stand and this government has given its undertaken to 

the Prince Albert Mill to do everything in its power to remedy or at least alleviate the situation. 

Secondly, the continuation of the present rate structure could very well make the difference between 

having a second pulp mill in Saskatchewan where the economics of a mill may be less favourable. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the government proposed to leave no stone unturned in pointing out the 

discrimination, the unfairness, the inequities, the injustice of the existing freight rate structure which 

presently exists against many industries in the prairie region and particularly insofar as it effects the 

production from pulp mills, now of such importance to this province. The passage of this motion will 

greatly strengthen the hands of the government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while fully supporting the motion, I would like with the leave of the assembly to 

move an amendment only by way of an addition. I have moved the adjournment but with leave of the 

assembly I would simply like to amend the motion by making an addition to the effect and without 

limiting the generality of the foregoing. May I have leave of the assembly? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? Agreed. 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1060 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — The motion is moved by myself and seconded by Mr. McIsaac (Minister of 

Municipal Affairs), that the proposed resolution be amended by adding to the resolution the following 

words: 

 

and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, with particular attention to adjusting the freight 

rates on the movement of pulp from Saskatchewan. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words on this. I didn't want 

to speak just on the amendment so I waited until the amendment was dealt with so I can speak on the 

whole motion. 

 

It is many years since we found out the story about freight rates which the Minister of Natural Resources 

(Mr. Cuelenaere) has been on the wrong end of the deal in regard to freight rates in this respect ever 

since Saskatchewan began. I would like to point out to the house that while we were in the government 

of Saskatchewan we maintained a branch and made representations almost to no end to the federal 

government and the Board of Transport Commissioners trying to get some justice for the province of 

Saskatchewan and to prevent things from getting worse. You will find in the library certain volumes that 

were prepared by that Committee on Transportation of which Dean Cronkite was the head. These little 

volumes contain some extremely interesting railroad history. 

 

Now that the resolution is before the house, recognizing the situation in the province of Saskatchewan 

we cannot do other than hope that the government will be successful in getting some of these injustices 

remedied. It is with that in view that we support this resolution as it now stands. I don't think I need to 

say any more on this question. Certainly Saskatchewan deserves at long last to get some justice in the 

matter of freight rates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, this is certainly a resolution that everyone in the house can 

support because everyone in this house and the people before them have experienced the discrimination 

of freight rates against this province, not only in regard to agricultural products but many other products, 

particularly in such cultural products but many other products, particularly in such products as would 

lend themselves to the development of our natural resources and the establishment of industry in this 

province. As the hon. member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) has pointed out, for years the government 

has been making representations to the federal government to make some adjustments in this regard. 

None have been forthcoming but I was especially therefore interested in the amendment moved by the 

hon. member for Prince Albert (Mr. Cuelenaere) because at last he put his finger on the one reason why 

we were unable to get a pulp mill in Saskatchewan and the reason too, Mr. Speaker, why a mill in 

Saskatchewan had to receive such heavy subsidization. In the same breath, may I say, that we in 

Saskatchewan and western Canada have been for too many years subsidizing the establishment of 

industries in the east. May I say to the Premier who tells us now that the establishment of industries in 

this province, even though we have to subsidize them heavily, is going to bring increased revenues to 

the province as it ought to, may we look at the province of Ontario where they 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1061 

have had all these benefits and decreased taxes has not occurred. We are doubly handicapped because 

we have to subsidize these industries and guarantee them out of our own financial resources in this 

province. 

 

Now, the other point that I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, is this. I think one of the principal reasons that 

we haven't equitable freight rates in Canada, fair to all parts of Canada, is because we failed to 

nationalize our major transportation system, our railroads. Had this been done it would not have been 

difficult at all to have freight rates right across this country that would not discriminate. I feel keenly on 

this, Mr. Speaker, and I am in good company, many people who are members of the party opposite, 

members of the Conservative party too, who now realize that we ought to nationalize our rail 

transportation system. This is not a wild Socialist idea at all. It is a principle, I believe, that if put into 

practice will contribute more to the unification of Canada than anything else. As a matter of fact, I am of 

the opinion, Mr. Speaker, that it's not biculturalism, bilingualism, or racism or anything else that's 

tearing this country apart. I think it is the economic discrimination that has taken place in Canada: 

discrimination against the Maritimes; discrimination against the prairie areas, particularly, that has 

prevented them from developing along with the rest of Canada. May I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is not 

only the responsibility, not only with urgency but as a necessity, that the national government take steps 

that will unite Canada and keep it together as a viable confederation of provinces. I feel very keenly on 

this particular point. This resolution merely indicates that if these discriminations are continued we too 

in this province will have great resentment and cause for asking the national government for more and 

more help in other fields of activity, more help to carry on our administration in this province. 

 

Now, for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I certainly wholeheartedly support the resolution as I know 

everyone else will in the house. I hope that our hon. friends opposite will at least be generous enough to 

go along perhaps not immediately, but I would hope a little more rapidly than the Liberal party moves 

on the principle that our entire rail transportation system ought to be nationalized, not only in the public 

interest, not only to the benefit of all of Canada but in the interest of national unity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION RE PRIVATE PENSION PLANS 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution moved by Mr. W.G. Davies 

(Moose Jaw City): 

 

That this assembly urges the government of Saskatchewan to consider, as soon as possible the 

introduction of legislation and the adoption of any other necessary ways and means by which the 

interests and the welfare of employees affected by private pension plans can be fairly and reasonably 

protected; and that consideration be given specifically to changes that would provide that in the event 

of the termination of the employment of an employee, the amount of money to his credit in a private 

pension plan or like benefit, be vested in him through a deferred pension, or transferred to his credit in 

another plan, 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1062 

including one operating in a concern in which he subsequently accepted new employment, to the end 

that reward for service rendered and the principle of pension portability may be recognized and 

secured. 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned this debate the other night I 

was discussing the Canada Pension Plan and the impact that this might have on portability related to 

private pensions operating in Canada. 

 

I feel that one major reason for supporting the Canada Pension Plan is the fact that it should, to a 

considerable degree, speed up portability related to private pension plans. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, 

there is a lot of misunderstanding in the private pension field and I would like to deal with this in 

relation to portability and vesting because I feel we need a great deal of education across this country to 

enable us to get a clear understanding of what pensions could achieve with improved portability and 

increased vesting. 

 

All too often we hear when discussing the Canada Pension Plan in relation to private pension plans that 

we should be discussing whether the contributions be decked or integrated. Quite frankly we hear very 

little about a third course which is much more important, in my opinion. If you talk about decking, for 

example, if a contribution of five per cent were made by an employee and his employer of his behalf and 

you simply decked in relation to the Canada Pension Plan, in addition to that five per cent contribution 

you would make the contribution required under the Canada Pension Plan. Integration is what I would 

term the government is doing in relation to a goodly number of the superannuation plans under its 

supervision. In instances such as this is the contribution rates were five per cent, they simply take that 

five per cent and take out of it the required contributions to the Canada Pension Plan with the remainder 

left in the private pension plan. I would oppose this approach from the standpoint that this is not realistic 

for more than one reason. If we look at social security in the United States in its early stages after 1937, 

we will discover that their social security plan did not increase benefits in the initial years but did 

increase contributions. If you find yourself in this position in relation to private pension plans you will 

simply have the contributions going to the private plans reduced without any over-all end-result change 

in terms of pensions realized to the people when they reach pensionable age. 

 

I would suggest a third method, which is preferable, is to take cognisance of the fact that contributions 

must be made to the Canada Pension Plan and on this basis make some reduction in terms of 

contributions from employees and employers to private pension plans. Mr. Speaker, my regular 

occupation is associated with the administration of pensions and I have taken the time and trouble to 

make a survey of 1,140 trusted pension plans in Canada in the last year. I find that most of these pension 

plans are using an integration approach. Quite frankly I think most of the employees concerned and most 

of the employers concerned do not really realize what they are doing. I think they will find in time that 

they will have to make adjustment in this regard. 

 

I would liker to give you one or two examples, Mr. Speaker, to illustrate to this house the point I am 

trying to get across. Let's assume we take an individual who is on a $5,000 per year annual salary. As I 

said the other night, I think this is a two- 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1063 

sided coin. If that individual has four per cent deducted from his $5,000 per year salary and matched 

with a like sum from his employer, he is actually contributing $200 a year and his employer is 

contributing $200 a year to his pension. On this basis, I contend that that individual should agree with 

his employer that his income is not $5,000 a year but $5,200 a year, $5,000 of which is paid to him now 

less the deduction which he sets aside as his own responsibility in relation to pension, and the other $200 

in the form of a deferred wage. Canadian income tax law supports this view. It contends that the 

employer can withhold the contributions that he makes in terms of an income tax approved pension fund 

and deduct this amount before he arrives at his income tax liability for any given year. 

 

Now, if the employee accepts this and the employer accepts it, it is only reasonable to conclude that this 

has reasonable validity provided that $200 does in fact become the property of that employee. What is 

happening in pension plans generally is that this does not occur. I will give you an illustration. I was 

called in for some consultation work in relation to a pension plan of the city of Saskatoon last fall. I 

don't know whether members realize it or not but I imagine perhaps it's the same in the city of Regina. In 

many of these cities there are numerous pension plans related to various different departments of city 

employees, such as fire department, police department, etc. I think without divulging any confidences I 

can say, without naming this particular group, that there were about 120 employees involved. I want you 

to take particular note of the situation in this particular situation. This occurred in the last four to five 

months. Mind you the plan had been in effect for a considerable length of time but I am completely 

convinced the employees concerned did not understand it. I am also convinced that the employer in this 

case, the city of Saskatoon, did not have a reasonable grasp of the situation as it existed. In this instance, 

let's take again the example of an employee on a $5,000 annual income. His contributions would be 

$200 to his income tax approved pension plan. His employer would contribute a like sum of $200. Let's 

assume that this individual when he began employment with the employer, and became eligible to make 

contributions was, for example, 25 years of age. Let's assume now that he makes these payments for 25 

years and we're leaving them standard simply to make the example more clearly available to all of us. So 

in that 25 year period this individual would make contributions of $5,000. His employer would make 

like contributions of $5,000. If that individual died or if he moved away from that occupation, his estate 

could withdraw or he could withdraw $5,000 from that plan. In other words, the $200 per year that he 

put in for 25 years. He would not withdraw one single cent of earnings on his own money, not even bank 

rate interest. In addition his employer's contributions would not be exigible to him but would be utilized 

in future months by the employer to reduce future remittances to the plan. Now, quite frankly the federal 

income tax law says that it's illegal for any employer to take back out of any income tax approved 

pension plan funds contributed on behalf of an employee by an employer. Really this is what happens. I 

know they can argue that they stay within the law. They can say we did not take the money back but in 

effect they accomplish exactly the same thing by simply reducing future remittances by the amount 

which was not exigible to the to the departing employee. 

 

There's a real problem here which we cannot ignore. It is true that the contributions made by an 

employer on behalf of an employee in an income tax approved pension fund should be used 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1064 

for pensions. If you increased portability and make the vesting occur earlier, which I think should occur, 

you must make reasonable provision to ensure that the money is used for the purposes intended; that is, 

purchase of pensions. How can this be accomplished? Quite frankly it can't be accomplished solely by 

individual private pension plans. You can make some progress in this regard but you have very grave 

difficulty related to the pension industry in total simply because you can lead the field to some degree 

but you can not lead it too far. This is another reason why I contend that the Ontario Pension Benefits 

Act makes a good deal of sense. Mr. Speaker, I don't know whether anyone on the government side will 

support this statement but I think it is true to say, — I'm not positive about this, perhaps the Minister of 

Labour could advise us in this respect, — that there was representation from Saskatchewan to a pension 

conference in eastern Canada, and I don't know the exact date, but some time six or seven or eight 

months ago, where I believe there was reasonable agreement that there should be a uniform approach in 

relation to private pensions. 

 

What does the Ontario Pension Benefits Act do in relation to portability? It simply does this. It says that 

once an individual has been in a pension plan until he has attained age 45 years and assuming that he has 

at least ten years of participation, 75 per cent of the contributions made and the earnings accrued thereto 

after January 1, 1965, must be used for the purchase of pensions, if this individual terminates his 

employment prior to normal retirement. In other words, he is not a retirement, he is not going on pension 

at that particular time. This is particularly important because of the great mobility of labor, and we see in 

our particular pension society a tremendous amount of movement every year. It ranges generally from 

15 to 20 per cent of the total participants in the fund. This is general throughout Canada. 

 

What I am saying here is simply this and perhaps I can illustrate it with an additional example. Let us 

assume we had an individual who had accumulated say $8,000 in employee-employer contributions and 

accrued earnings up to December 31, 1964. Let's assume that this individual in a period of time after 

January 1, 1965, — and it might be into the future another three or four or five or six years, — let's 

assume that individual accumulated $20,000. He is now perhaps 51, 52, 53 years of age. He is not able 

to be pensioned because he is simply not in the pensionable age bracket but for some reason or other he 

moves from this particular job. He may have moved voluntarily. He may even be forced to move 

involuntarily. He may lose his job. What would his situation be? He could legally withdraw the $8,000 

accumulated up to December 31, 1964 in cash. He could legally withdraw one-quarter of the $20,000 

accumulated in contributions and accrued earnings after January 1, 1965 but the remaining $15,000 in 

this particular instance, would have to go to purchase a pension for him at pensionable age, normal 

pension age considered to be age 65. 

 

It is most important, I think, Mr. Speaker, that we make this kind of approach, that we get some kind of 

uniformity in this type of legislation, first of all to ensure that we increase the portability and the vesting 

provision. This is in line with the Income Tax Act. This makes a good deal of sense in terms of the fact 

that the employer's contribution should in fact be treated for what it is, a deferred wage. However, as I 

said before, it cannot possibly be a deferred wage if the employer keeps it should the employee 

terminate his employment. I am not arguing that the 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1065 

employer hasn't got a logical argument with respect to the fact that he wants to ensure that the money he 

puts up is, in fact, used for the purpose intended, that is pensions. But I would contend that first of all we 

must accept the fact that that contribution is a deferred wage. We must therefore increase portability and 

vesting of the employer's contributions and accrued earnings on behalf of that employee. Once this is 

accomplished we must take some steps to ensure that the money is used for the purposes intended, 

otherwise you defeat the intent of pensions entirely. 

 

If I may illustrate again, I'll give another example to press home my point. If, for example, we stick with 

this person at $5,000 per year income, and I'll use an example out of our own pension society. This 

individual would under current regulations be contributing four per cent of his salary, $200 a year. His 

employer would match it, $200 a year and this money would become vested in that employee on a 

graduated scale, much more rapidly than it does in terms of the pension industry generally. It would then 

be available to this individual if he should terminate employment and he would take it with him. We 

would recommend, of course, that he take it in terms of transfer, presumably to another income tax 

approved pension plan with his new employer. If that cannot be arranged then it would be transferred, if 

he so desired, to a registered retirement savings plan in his own name. In both cases no tax would apply. 

It is very annoying, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, to run into situations where we have persons who leave 

the employ of an employer member of our society. I can think of an instance right now of a man who 

had over $10,000 available to him last year, all the employer and the employee's contributions, and 

wished to transfer it to his new employer who had an income tax approved pension plan. Unfortunately, 

his new employer's administrator of pensions would not accept the money out of our plan. This is a real 

tragedy, not only for the employee but it is utterly ridiculous in terms of pension administration. 

Nevertheless these situations do arise. If this individual had been able to take his pension money in 

terms of transfer to another income tax approved fund, he would have been relieved on income tax 

liability and he would improve his final pension appreciably because the accumulative effect of the 

earnings on those $10,000 from his present age which is in the range of 48 until he reached normal 

retirement would be appreciable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point I am attempting to get across here is that you only accomplish this if you get 

portability. But as I said before it's a two-sided coin. We must take reasonable steps to ensure that the 

money is used for the purpose intended. I contend that the Ontario Pension Benefits Act does this. Mind 

you, it does it on an evolutionary basis, on a rather gradual and slow process. If it could have been made 

retroactive it might have been preferable but this isn't generally acceptable in the pension industry 

because rules and regulations applying up to any particular time generally must be protected in relation 

to pensions because they are classified as contracts. Then it is reasonable to say that we should, and I 

urge upon the government to take this approach that we should use uniform legislation comparable to 

the Ontario Pension Benefits Act. I would appreciate comments from some of the government members 

to the effect that someone did attend this pension conference because I feel reasonably certain, although 

I haven't got the article with me, that I did read about this. As I recall it British Columbia, Alberta, 

Manitoba, Ontario and Nova Scotia had in general agreed with this approach. I am also of the opinion 

that if we get uniformity in 



 

March 10, 1966 

 

 

1066 

this regard we will get final results in terms of pensions which will meet the needs of Canadians. Mr. 

Speaker, could I call it 10 o'clock p.m. and adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned 

 

The assembly adjourned at 10:00 o'clock p.m. 


