



















































Hansard: February 23, 1966


427 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session – Fifteenth Legislature 

12th day 

 

Wednesday, February 23, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. Gordon B. Grant (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would 

like to draw your attention and the attention of the house to a group in the Speaker’s gallery. They are a 

grade 12 class from St. John Bosco High School, consisting of some 25 students. They are accompanied 

by Mother Catherine. This is her fourth trip here, I believe, with this class and she wants to express her 

appreciation for the opportunity of having them in attendance. This school has been in existence since 

1937 and, while occupying temporary quarters on College Avenue, it is one of the schools that will be 

housed in the new Miller Composite School when the same is complete. I know the members of the 

house join with me in welcoming this group of grade 12 students and we sincerely trust they enjoy their 

stay here this afternoon. 

 

CORRECTION OF NEWSPAPER REPORT 
 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I have a copy of the 

Saskatoon Star Phoenix of Tuesday, February 22nd, in which reference has been made to a statement 

presumably made by me in this legislature in the proceedings of this house on Monday. Now, some of 

the report given is correct. There is a statement that is attributed to me which is also reported in the 

Leader Post and I was given to understand that a report was given over the CBC newscast Tuesday 

morning, to the effect that I was supposed to have said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Mr. Michayluk said reporters had told him the only information they could get was through the 

Premier’s office. 

 

Now, I have with me, Mr. Speaker, the transcript of what I said in this house on Monday, and nowhere 

in the transcript are found the words as were reported in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix and the Leader 

Post. The statement was attributed to me and I did not make these remarks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. H.D. Link (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to take 

this opportunity to welcome to the legislature, a group of 85 students from Brunskill School in 

Saskatoon. These students are in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they are accompanied by their 

principal, and teachers, Mr. Landers, Miss Hope, and Mr. Pierce. I am particularly pleased, Mr. Speaker, 

to welcome these students because in this group is one of my four sons. I am particularly pleased to see 

this group here today. I am sure all the 



 

February 23, 1966 

 

 

428 

members of this house will join with me in wishing them a pleasant stay in Regina, and a very safe 

journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H. Baker (Regina East): — I certainly, Mr. Speaker, want to join with the hon. Mr. Grant, in 

welcoming the students in the Speaker’s gallery from St. John Bosco High, the high school which is 

about two blocks from where I live. I want to extend a very warm welcome to these students and to the 

members of the staff. I am very pleased that Mr. Grant has greeted them as well. I am hoping after 

tonight that this will be my constituency where I will be running, and I am extending a welcome to the 

hon. Mr. Grant to come down and run there too . . . 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — . . . and I want to wish them a pleasant and fruitful stay this afternoon. 

 

STATEMENT RE RATES A.A.I.A. 
 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Social Welfare): — Saskatchewan in 1965 has experienced another sharp 

increase in the automobile accident rate. This fact has proved most costly to the Automobile Accident 

Insurance Fund. The deficit for the current year, 1965-66, is estimated at $890,000, which will reduce 

reserves to below $1,000,000. The previous government initiated and we have followed a policy of 

maintaining the reserve fund at no lower than $2,000,000; consequently, the accident rate sets the 

insurance rate. In order to maintain the fund at a safe level and to overcome the deficit, it will be 

necessary to increase premium rates on some classes of vehicles. The alternative would be a heavy 

direct subsidy from the taxpayer, or a discontinuance of A.A.I.A. Neither of these alternatives is 

acceptable to the government. It is important to recognize that there are three major reasons for the 

heavy demand on the fund. First the accident rate has increased sharply in the past year; the number of 

claims has increased 13.5 per cent; the dollar value of the claims has increased 12.4 per cent. Secondly 

there has been a sharp rise in the cost of automobile repairs brought about chiefly by higher rates for 

garage labor. Thirdly there appears to be a trend towards higher awards by the courts for personal 

injuries. These factors are not unique in Saskatchewan; they have caused private insurance companies in 

other provinces to raise their rates from 15 to 25 per cent. 

 

The present plan up to now has charged no extra premium to accident-prone drivers. We feel that in 

keeping the fund solvent our government must begin to make some differential. Drivers under 25 years 

of age last year were involved in almost double the number of accidents of other drivers; therefore, an 

additional premium of $2 will be charged for drivers under 25 years of age, over and above the basic 

premium for whatever category of permit they hold. Similarly the drivers owning colored licenses have 

an accident involvement rate three times that of other drivers. Included in this category are a great many 

who have been convicted of drunken or impaired driving. These people have contributed in a major way 

to this extremely high accident rate. Accordingly, premiums for holders of colored licenses will be 

doubled. On commercial vehicles the loss ration has been exceptionally high. In 



 

February 23, 1966 

 

 

 

429 

the coming year most classes of commercial vehicles will, therefore, pay premiums approximately 15 

per cent above the present rates. 

 

Even with these changes the premiums on private passenger vehicles must also be increased, thus, in the 

coming year increases on private passenger vehicles will be introduced which vary from a minimum of 

$1 to a maximum of $7. Rates in the new schedule will vary from $11 for models older than 1951 to $67 

for the long wheel base late model luxury vehicles. The single exception will be on antique cars where a 

new reduced rate of $5 has been introduced. Fortunately, our experience with farm trucks has been most 

satisfactory, and so no increase in the rates will be made for farm trucks in the next license year. 

 

Finally, persons of 25 years and over holding a white license will have no premium increase; it is our 

hope that these premium adjustments in both vehicle and drivers licenses, coupled with a far greater 

degree of care and skill on the part of motorists, will correct the trend of operating deficits in A.A.I.A. 

 

However, I must emphasize again, as with all insurance companies, our premium rate is tied directly to 

the accident rate. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Will you tell us when you discovered that these were 

going to be the new rates for 1966. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT RE ERROR IN VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS 
 

Mr. A. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to call the 

attention of the house to what, I believe, is a slight error in the Votes and Proceedings, and in the 

―Blues‖ as well. I note that under government orders on page 2 is reported that the debate on bill no. 17 

was adjourned by me. I think this a typographical error. I think it was Mr. Brockelbank who adjourned 

that debate. I noticed it in yesterday’s Blues but didn’t have an opportunity to correct, in view of air time 

and one thing and another. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I will take it under advisement forthwith. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I am informed that 

there are two more classes here which I am sure we would all like to welcome. A class from Wascana 

School, I am sorry I don’t know the name of the teacher, and also one from the Harrow de Groot School. 

I am sure you would like to join with me in also welcoming these students and hoping they enjoy this 

day here and in thanking the teachers for bringing them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1966 

 

 

430 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would 

like to draw the attention of the government to information carried in the news last night and today, with 

respect to an increase in the price of bread. The increase has been announced, I believe, up to two cents 

which is approximately 12 per cent. In view of other items rapidly increasing in the cost of living, I ask 

the government if it proposes or is willing to make any inquiry as to whether these increases are 

justifiable. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to think that one over. I’ll give the 

hon. Leader of the Opposition an answer tomorrow. 

 

QUESTION RE MANPOWER REPORT 
 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to again ask 

what is happening in respect of the manpower survey report that the Premier indicated the other day, 

when I asked a question whether he would give us the information, whether that report has been 

completed and whether it will be tabled in the house. I wonder whether we can hear from the Premier as 

to what is taking place in respect of tabling that report. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Progress is being made in that respect. One of the 

answers on the order paper some time ago has indicated the partial report on the number of people who 

were employed, 48 hour or 40 hour week. It is indicated in the answer to that particular question that the 

study is continuing in that respect. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Before Orders of the Day, I would like to move, seconded by 

the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That this assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of Mr. Harry Gibbs, former member of 

this assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he has made to this 

community, his constituency and to this province. Mr. Gibbs who died on Friday last, the 18th of 

February, was a member of this assembly from 1944 to 1956. He was born in 1893, of two English 

parents, and educated in Lancashire, England. He came to Canada at the age of 17 and served for three 

and a half years with the Canadian Expeditionary Force in the First World War. He was by trade a 

boilermaker in the employment of the CPR. Before becoming a member of this assembly he had been 

an alderman of the city of Swift Current, from 1935 to 1944. In recording its own deep sense of loss 

and bereavement, this assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with members of the bereaved 

family. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, there are a 



 

February 23, 1966 

 

 

 

431 

number of us on this side of the house who sat in the legislature with the late Mr. Gibbs, and a number 

of us who knew him outside of the house as well. It is correct to say that none of us who knew him will 

ever forget him. As the minister said in his message at his funeral the other day, ―Harry Gibbs was a big 

man, not only physically, but in other ways as well‖. He was a man of great vigor, he was a man of great 

energy, and everything he did he did with all the vigor and energy which he possessed. I am sure that if 

there is one word more than any other which expresses what Harry Gibbs was it would be the word 

―fighter‖. He was a fighter on behalf of those whom he believed were suffering any hardship, or any 

injustice, which could be remedied. He was a fighter for those things which he saw to be good and 

useful in life. As I said a minute ago, he pursued all these things with very great vigor indeed. 

 

Perhaps there were sides to the late Mr. Gibbs which a number of people were not too well aware of. He 

was, in addition to the kind of vigorous, energetic person I have been talking about, in many ways a 

gentle kind of a person. It was a pleasure to walk through his garden with Harry Gibbs as he appreciated 

what he had helped to grow there. He was an artist, had won prizes for his work and was very good at 

representing the scenery of our countryside. He was a man who loved beauty. He was a sports man in 

his earlier days, particularly in the boxing ring; he continued his interest in athletic activities and interest 

in youth throughout his career. May I join with the Premier in expressing our very real regrets to Mrs. 

Gibbs and to members of the family. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would very much like to rise at this time and join 

others in paying tribute to Harry Gibbs and in expressing sympathy for his wife and family. As a former 

member of the legislature, representing the city of Swift Current, I have known Harry Gibbs for many 

years. If I might also allude to the words that were used by the minister in Mr. Gibbs’ funeral service the 

other day in Moose Jaw, I couldn’t help but think that the text he used was quite apt in regard to Mr. 

Gibbs. The text taken from Philippians, ―Whatsoever things are true‖ — these words especially seem to 

apply particularly to Harry — ―Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever 

things are just‖. 

 

Harry was a very outspoken champion of the underdog. It was well known that he had prepared to say 

what he felt had to be said irrespective of the consequences upon any and all occasions. His speeches in 

the house and elsewhere were a joy to listen to because of his flashing wit and his untrammelled 

earnestness. Harry had a great sense of humor. I observed it at different times first-hand, and have heard 

many stories of some of the things he had done in the house to deflate egotistical individuals on either 

side of the house. 

 

He was a great singer. To hear Harry sing in his broad or rich Lancashire accent was really a joy and 

was an experience to be well remembered. 

 

The minister also went on to say, ―Whatsoever things are lovely‖, and as Mr. Lloyd has pointed out, 

Harry definitely had in his disposition a great recognition and a feeling for those things which were 

lovely. He had a rough exterior, but Harry had a heart of gold and an appreciation of the finer things of 

life. He loved his flowers and was a consistent winner in horticultural displays in the city of Swift 

Current. His paintings 



 

February 23, 1966 

 

 

432 

were good; they were excellent and well worthy of being hung in some of our best galleries. He also was 

a pigeon fancier. When I was up to see him in the hospital, not long ago, his face lit up with enthusiasm 

when he was telling about some of the homers that he had had, how they had come in and the way in 

which they had won certain tests. He showed a real fellowship for these birds. 

 

Possibly my words may sound rather strange, and possibly a little hypocritical, because after all I was 

the member who displaced Harry as the representative of our party in Swift Current. But looking back, I 

have to say that I am increasingly convinced that Harry’s detractors have exaggerated and failed to give 

him the credit to which he was due. Harry was a real man, and Saskatchewan has lost a really colorful 

individual, a talented citizen who has stood up and been counted for the under-privileged, a stalwart 

champion. We will not soon again see the like of Harry Gibbs. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add briefly to what has already been said 

by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and the member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood). I knew 

Harry Gibbs for almost 25 years, and there are a few things perhaps that I could tell the house that they 

should know about him. 

 

He learned the hard way; he was a half-timer in the Lancashire cotton mills when he was only 12 years 

of age. He was educated at public and at night schools. He won a scholarship and a bursary on one 

occasion at the Royal Arts School, but he couldn’t take advantage of this because of economic 

conditions in his home at the time. As the Premier said, he came to Canada in 1917. He worked for quite 

awhile at Moose Jaw, until 1928 as a matter of fact, as a boilermaker before transferring to Swift Current 

where he worked at his trade until his retirement. 

 

I think it could be said he was associated actively with progressive movements all his life. His father 

was an active British Labor Party worker. He joined a trade union very early in life himself, and he was 

a member of the CCF party when it first became organized. The other speakers, I think, have told us 

about his public life, and of course, he served an apprenticeship on the Swift Current Council for a 

period of 10 years before becoming a member of this house. The member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) 

has told us about his pursuits as a pigeon fancier and as a horticulturist. Perhaps what may not be 

generally known is that during the Second World War, he donated some of his racing pigeons to the 

RCAF for World War work. 

 

During his twelve years in the legislature as has been suggested, he was known for a forthright, 

downright, style of speaking, which was always spiced with that Lancashire accent. Yet I think it is true 

to say that, while he never backed away from any issue in which he felt chiefly concerned, he was 

greatly liked and respected by his fellow MLAs on both sides of the house. The Swift Current paper 

some years ago, perhaps, summed up Harry Gibbs and gave the general opinion of the people in the area 

about him when they said, and I will just quote briefly: 

 

That the City of Rochdale, Lancashire, not only produced the co-op movement, it produced Harry 

Gibbs. True to the tradition of his birthplace, Harry has been a fighting 



 

February 23, 1966 

 

 

 

433 

co-operator all his life. In addition, he has been a loyal trade unionist, a vigorous spokesman for 

farmers, and in general, a crusader for the public welfare. 

 

Now, these words, I think, are as good a tribute as any one could give to a person who during his life 

helped to build many of the fine social programs which we know today in Saskatchewan. I think Harry 

Gibbs will be long remembered for these good works as well as for a lovable and a rich personality. I 

know that everybody in this house would want to join in a message of deep sympathy to his wife, her 

two children, both married by the way, and to other members of the family. 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, wish to say a few words in paying tribute to Harry 

Gibbs. Harry Gibbs and I were very close for some good reason, perhaps it was because I was attracted 

by his very frank and genuine honesty. Harry Gibbs will be long remembered by those who knew him 

for his wholesome, straightforward honesty. He was a big man, with a big heart, who scrupulously 

shunned pretense and hypocrisy. His jovial and friendly nature endeared him to his many friends and to 

all who knew him. Harry Gibbs’ humanitarian conscience gave him the stimulus for a keen sense of 

justice which he strongly propounded in his own distinctive Lancashire tradition. Significantly he was 

born and grew up in Rochdale, England, a place which, incidentally, gave birth to the co-operative 

movement. From a humble beginning in Rochdale, the principle of co-operative self-help and economic 

democracy has spread throughout the world. 

 

Harry Gibbs also carried with him the message of social justice through economic democracy 

throughout his life. Harry served his country well, as has already been mentioned, during World War I. 

He also served his adopted country Canada equally well by honest labor in his chosen field. His 

contribution to his own community is well known. He served as an Alderman for the City of Swift 

Current and was a most colourful and dedicated member of this legislature. 

 

I have the honor, Mr. Speaker, to share with others in this legislature our expression of sincere sympathy 

to Mrs. Gibbs, his family, relatives and many friends of our deep regrets at his passing. 

 

Mr. Gordon Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — I want to say just a very brief word to supplement the 

words of my colleagues and those of the Premier, in tribute to the late Harry Gibbs, a former member for 

Swift Current. 

 

I had the good fortune to know Harry Gibbs for a good many years. I met him for the first time in 1943, 

the year that I myself began railroading and it was a relationship and a friendship which endured over 

the years when I was privileged last Monday, Mr. Speaker, to be one of the six who carried Harry to his 

final resting place. 

 

Harry Gibbs was a large, gruff, and outspoken man; he was also an honest, tender and a talented person. 

The art work which Harry did so well has made its mark across Saskatchewan. In a good many 

Saskatchewan homes are oil paintings done by Harry Gibbs and hanging in their living rooms. 

 

He continued his interest in art work right up until his death, and he has in his home a canvas which is 

yet unfinished 



 

February 23, 1966 

 

 

434 

as a result of his untimely death. 

 

He was a man of purpose and conviction, Mr. Speaker, who was a democratic Socialist and an ardent 

trade unionist. He was a man who believed that the good things in life should be shared by all men. I 

consider it an honor, Mr. Speaker, to have been a friend of Harry Gibbs, and I join with other members 

in this assembly who mourn his passing and who offer their sincere regrets to his family and to his many 

friends. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier) moved, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased member, be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we proceed, might I ask the co-operation of the house, and this assembly. We 

have quite a large group of students in the gallery today, and I am sure everybody is happy to see them 

here, and everybody wishes them welcome. But could I ask members that when they are introducing 

students that they do so before Orders of the Day because it seems to be that first we have the students, 

then a statement by someone, a point of privilege, and then other students welcomed. If members would 

give this their regard, I will do my best to see that everybody has the opportunity to say whatever they 

wish to say 

 

I ask the co-operation of . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, may I make this observation in connection with the 

welcome to students, by almost everyone in the house. It takes a great deal of time, and it has been 

demonstrated over and over that there is almost a political pitch thrown to young people who come here 

to observe this legislature. They are not a part of the legislature but are visitors in the gallery, and I think 

it is rather inappropriate that members sitting in the assembly direct remarks directly to them. For the 

consideration of all the members I would suggest that we consider whether or not it wouldn’t be 

advisable for the Speaker, himself, to extend a welcome to all the students as a matter of routine each 

day. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, that is a matter for the house to decide. We can give that some consideration, but 

in the meantime I would kindly ask the co-operation of the house that, if they are going to welcome 

students, they do it as soon as I call Orders of the Day because some of the students may wish to leave 

early and do wait to be introduced. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:29 o’clock p.m. 

 


