



















































Hansard: April 04, 1966


 

 

1691 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

41st Day 

 

Monday, April 4, 1966. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o‟clock a.m., 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTION RE INCENTIVE GRANTS 
 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, in the 

session on Education Estimates the other evening, the minister was going to make available information 

regarding the distribution of the incentive, so-called incentive grants. May we ask as to when we may 

expect to receive this? 

 

Hon. G. J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — I think I gave the total grants to everybody and some 

explanation. What further did you wish, Sir? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The minister very clearly indicated that he would distribute some information with 

regard to the basis of return, the amount of the incentive grants. These have not, I believe, as yet been 

made available. I was just wondering when we may expect them. 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I‟ll look into that. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Will this also include the amount of dollars that each unit and district will receive from 

this $3,000,000 incentive grant? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I‟ll look into this. 

 

QUESTION RE SEED GRAIN SUPPLY 
 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, and now that the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) is here, I would like to ask him if the government will 

implement the Seed Grain Supply Act for the benefit of those farmers and municipalities in the north 

where the seed situation is very bad. 

 

Hon. D. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — After the question was raised the other day by the 

member in the legislature, I contacted all my department officials. They realize the situation in the 

northeast part of the province and are doing everything possible to see that seed is supplied to the people 

in that area. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, one of the main things is the question of credit, money to 

buy it. That is through the Seed Grain Supply Act where the government can guarantee the 

municipalities‟ accounts and then the municipalities can make advances. What about this? This is going 

to be an important one, I think. 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1692 

Mr. McFarlane: — I‟ll discuss that with my colleagues and make them aware of it. The government 

policy will be announced in due course. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I wish to thank the Minister of Agriculture. That is a much more polite 

answer than I got from the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) on Saturday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before the committee rose, I was rising on a point in regard to the procedure of the 

house. I pointed out that on Saturday the Leader of the House was good enough to tell us that we would 

first take the Labour Bill and then the Pulp Mill Bill, and then Committee of Supply. Now, I think 

everyone realizes the Labour Bill would take a few hours, so that we didn‟t expect the Pulp Mill Bill to 

come until this afternoon at the earliest point of time. I understand the Premier said he wanted to take the 

Pulp Mill Bill now. I wonder if we could take some other work and leave the Pulp Mill Bill until after 

lunch? 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — That is fine, we can take some second readings, Water 

Resources, and we can do some other second readings. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public works) moved second reading of Bill No. 94, An Act to 

amend The Water Resources Commission Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to move second reading on Bill No. 94, An Act to amend The Water 

Resources Commission Act, I would like to first of all give the house a resume of the intentions and 

purposes of the amendments that are proposed to the Water Resources Commission Act. The 

expenditures on water development in Saskatchewan are increasing dramatically. In 1958, the province 

government expenditures on water development for all purposes was in the order of $3,000,000. By 

1961 the annual expenditure had increased to $18,000,000 and to $26,000,000 in 1962. In the 

foreseeable future expenditures can be expected to continue at this or a higher level. Not only are 

provincial expenditures on water development rising, but the character of the development work is 

changing. In the past water development was of a single or dual-purpose nature. in the future many of 

the projects will be very large multi-purpose projects. 

 

In 1964 the legislature approved a bill to establish the Water Resources Commission and that 

commission was establishment on December 1st, 1964. This new agency was given an overall advisory 

consultative co-ordination and planning function relating to our provincial water resources. The act 

provides that the commission would be responsible for undertaking and co-ordinating studies leading to 

comprehensive plans for the development and use of our water resources. After investigation by a team 

of specialists under commission auspices and approval by the government to proceed with the 

development of a multi-purpose project, the detailed planning and development work is co-ordinated by 

the commission. 

 

Because the commission has the responsibility to administer the use of the provincial water resources 

under The Water Rights 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1693 

Act, the Ground Water Conservation Act and The Water Power Act, it is in a position to know what the 

overall water requirements are, or are likely to be, in any part of the province. In many cases, the 

individual needs for water can be satisfied most economically by a common or multi-purpose 

development. 

 

Other responsibilities given the new agency were: reservoir land use control because land use adjacent 

to reservoirs cannot be separated from proper water management; general supervision and control over 

all matters concerning pollution of water because the use of water for dilution of effluent is becoming a 

major use of our available water; and an advisory role regarding inter-provincial and international water 

matters. 

 

Let us see what the commission has to say about our water situation in its first report which was tabled 

in the legislature earlier this session: 

 

In recent years the province of Saskatchewan has been faced with very large expenditures on 

projects to conserve and utilize our water resources. Greater industrialization, a continuing trend 

toward urbanization, a strong demand for water-based recreation outlets, and the urgent need to 

stabilize our agricultural production through irrigation of farmlands will necessitate even greater 

public expenditure on water resource development in the future. 

 

Industrialization demands an ample supply of suitable water which some parts of the province do 

not possess at this time. Water is required in large quantities for both hydro and thermal power 

production purposes to supply the growing demands on our provincial power system. 

 

Some Saskatchewan communities are facing great difficulty in finding an adequate source of water 

to meet the dual requirements of modern municipal distribution systems and an expanding 

population. Increasingly personal incomes and greater leisure time have greatly intensified the 

demand for new and improved water bodies for recreation use. 

 

The growth in our provincial population with its associated increase in demand for meat, 

vegetables and other specialty crops is creating a local market for such commodities. This market 

can be supplied by Saskatchewan farmers if there is full utilization of potentially irrigable lands. 

Yields of common field and forage crops can be greatly increased by irrigation and the application 

of water to land will make possible the production of specialized crops as well. Secondly, 

processing industries associated with specialty crop production can be developed to provide 

employment opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Multi-use water supply schemes offer great advantages over single purpose projects. The cost of 

water for each individual use is less and the multi-purpose approach gives greater flexibility in 

meeting unforeseen future demands for any purposes. 

 

The establishment of this commission in Saskatchewan is based on the conviction that there is a 

growing need for 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1694 

 a more comprehensive approach to water planning and development. This conviction was based on 

a number of factors: 

 

(1) the rapidly increasing demand for water for all purposes; 
(2) actual or pending deficiencies in water supplies in some areas; and 
(3) the complexity of the problem of meeting these demands because of conflicts between 

alternative uses in certain basins and the scale and cost of development projects. 

 

One of the first studies undertaken by the commission was that concerning the future water needs in a 

broad area south and east of Saskatoon extending as far east as the Quill lakes. The centre of activity for 

the booming potash industry lies in this general area. Three companies, Allan Potash, Noranda Mines 

and Alwinsal, are sinking mine shafts in the area now and many other companies are engaged in an 

active exploration program in the area. With this boom has come a greatly increased demand for water 

not only to meet the large requirement of the potash plants but also to meet the long-standing water 

problems of towns and villages. These towns and villages are already feeling the pressures of a 

population explosion associated with the potash development. To compound the problem it is an area 

with a deficiency of surface water and uncertain ground water supplies. 

 

Early in 1965, the commission undertook a preliminary examination of the overall problem and of the 

feasibility of alternative methods of supplying future water requirements in the area. This preliminary 

study concluded that as many as eight potash companies could be in operation in the area by early 

1970s, and perhaps as many as a dozen will proceed with the development by the year 2000. About 20 

towns and villages might be interested in a project that would supply them with good quality water. 

Furthermore, this preliminary study indicated that 10,000 to 15,000 acres of irrigation could be 

developed in the area and good potential existed for wildlife and recreation development if plentiful 

supplies of water could be provided. 

 

In May of 1965, the commission held a three-day public hearing in Humboldt to determine if there was 

local interest in a multi-purpose project. Strong support for such a plan was voiced by local communities 

and agricultural and recreational groups. 

 

During the summer of last year, the commission assembled a task force of specialists from the 

government agencies and outside consulting firms. This task force examined in detail the engineering 

and economy feasibility of a joint water supply program for this area. By fall, the commission had the 

reports of this study group and recommended to the government that an early start be made on design 

and construction of a multi-purpose water supply project using the south Saskatchewan reservoir as a 

source of water and distributing it to users in the area by means of canals, reservoirs and pipelines. this 

recommendation was considered by the government and Premier Thatcher announced this government‟s 

intention to proceed with the project in December, 1965. 

 

The project involves an extension of the canal system which serves the Outlook-Broderick irrigation 

project, north and east and from a reservoir at Broderick to Brightwater to Beaver Creek, north to a 

54,000-acre-foot reservoir in the Blackstrap Valley near Dundurn, eastward to a 2,200-acre-foot 

reservoir near Bradwell 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1695 

a 10,000-acre-foot reservoir near Zelma and terminating in Little Manitou Lake. This can-reservoir 

complex will supply water for over 10,000 acres of irrigable land enroute, in addition to supplying the 

base for a splendid recreational reservoir in the Blackstrap Valley and for restoring the falling water 

level in Little Manitou Lake. 

 

From the holding reservoirs at Bradwell and Zelma, water can be pumped through integrated pipeline 

systems to ultimately serve as many as 20 towns and villages and the potash industries that will develop 

in the area. Present plans call for detailed pre-construction surveys on the canal-reservoir component in 

1966, and possibly some construction work this fall. This phase of the system will be completed in 1967, 

and fully operational in 1968. The pipeline components will be added as required. It is estimated that 

over $10,000,000 will be required to construct the canal-reservoir component and to complete pipelines 

to initial industrial and municipal users by 1970. 

 

This project is but the first of many possible multi-purpose water supply projects that may be required 

because of Saskatchewan‟s economic expansion. The commission will be examining this year to smaller 

but similar project to supply individual, urban and agricultural water requirements in the area west of 

Saskatoon. Numerous requests have been received from organizations and communities in other parts of 

the province for similar studies and these will be examined by the commission as quickly as their staff 

resources permit. 

 

The decision to proceed with construction of the Saskatoon-Southeast project made it necessary for this 

government to consider various forms of administrative organization to undertake the work. The 

construction of this and similar projects requires the expenditure of large sums of public money and their 

future operation will involve meeting the day-to-day problems associated with the supply and sale of 

water to a large number of consumers each with particular needs for water. Day-to-day decisions are 

required during the construction and operational phases. 

 

As a temporary measure, the government established the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board in January 

of this year. This board, established by Order in Council under the authority of the Crown Corporations 

Act, has been given the responsibility for the design, construction, operation and maintenance of 

multi-purpose water supply projects. This includes the responsibility for negotiating water supply 

agreements with potential water users. The budge for 1965-67 provides for the advance or loan of 

$1,000,000 for these purposes. It is the government‟s intention that these projects will be expected to 

repay the money advanced with interest over a period of 20-25 years. 

 

The amendments to the Commission Act proposed in this bill provide for the permanent establishment 

of the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board as a corporation to design, construct, operate and maintain 

water control and supply works for the supply of water to any user including municipalities and 

industries. The bill provides that the board can appoint such staff as required for this purpose. It is this 

government‟s intention to utilize as fully as possible the existing technical and other resources in other 

government agencies and in the private sector. The staff of the board will concentrate on co-ordinating 

the work of government and non-government consultants and the board, of course, will have the 

responsibility for final approval of plans and construction work. 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1696 

The board will operate with funds loaned by the Provincial Treasurer from monies appropriated by the 

legislature. In addition, the Provincial Treasurer, with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor in 

council, may raise such additional sums by way of loan to advance to the board for temporary purposes 

provided, the aggregate of the monies raised in this fashion do not exceed $10,000,000. If such advances 

for temporary purposes are made, they are repayable within one year out of the next year‟s appropriation 

by the legislature for this purpose. The board will submit a report to the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

on its operations for the preceding year including audited financial statements and the report will be laid 

before the legislature at the session next following the completion of the fiscal year. 

 

The other amendments proposed for the Water Resources Commission Act are intended to give the 

commission certain additional authority over the use of our water resources. In some cases, all or part of 

this additional authority is required to allow the board to undertake water supply activity. In these cases 

the Lieutenant governor in Council may transfer such powers granted to the commission under this or 

any other act as are necessary for the carrying out of the basic purposes of the board, namely, the design, 

construction, operation, and maintenance of water control and supply works. 

 

These additional powers include the power to undertake such works and to enter into agreements for the 

design and construction of such works, for the financing of the works, for the supply of water from such 

works, for the acquisition of lands or rights or interest in lands for the construction of such works, and 

for the disposition of lands no longer required. 

 

As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, Saskatchewan is into a new era in the field of water 

management. We are faced with changing costs for water. It is fair to say that we have almost 

completely utilized the cheap water in southern Saskatchewan, that is the water most readily available in 

nearby streams and lakes. Now we are faced with much larger expenditures — hence more costly water 

— to augment the available supply in this part of the province. There are two avenues being explored to 

avoid or delay the costly importation of water. 

 

First, the commission is developing a system of pollution-control regulations. The dilution of effluent 

being dumped into our streams is one of our major uses of water. It is hoped that the commission can, 

with the co-operation of Saskatchewan people and organizations, encourage better treatment of effluent 

and substantially reduce the amount of water required for dilution. 

 

The second step that can be taken to make more water available locally is to improve the efficiency of 

use of water. It is essential that we keep much closer account of the use being made of water already 

allocated. 

 

Provision is made in the bill, therefore, for the commission to cancel or alter water rights in cases where 

the commission and the holder of a water right have agreed or where the water right was granted on a 

temporary basis or subject to conditions that have not been fulfilled. The bill also provides for the 

cancellation or alteration of water rights where the commission is satisfied that the person holding the 

right no longer requires that right. In such cases the person may demand a public hearing. If the 

commission continues to believe that the right should be cancelled, the person has the further right to 

appeal to the 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1697 

cabinet. 

 

The bill also provides that the commission may fix fees or charges for the right, privilege or authority to 

use water. The existing Water Resources Commission Act provides that the commission with the 

approval of the Lieutenant Governor in Council may make charges for the right to use water from 

reservoirs created as a result of the construction of water control works. It is now apparent that in many 

streams in the province the supply of water is not adequate to meet all requirements. The only way that 

additional water can be provided in these streams is through the construction of expensive systems of 

inter-basin diversion. In the case of inter-provincial streams, like the Saskatchewan, we may well be 

faced in the future with the prospect of sharing the costs of inter-basin diversion in other provinces in 

order to ensure adequate supplies for our needs in Saskatchewan. It is the government‟s firm belief that a 

portion of the costs of such developments should be borne by those who will benefit from the assured 

supply of water. It is the intention that any charges made will be fair and equitable, but, if any person is 

dissatisfied with the scale of charges made by the commission, he is granted the right of appeal to the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

In summary, the government is faced with the necessity of spending large sums of money to meet the 

greatly expanded water needs of our booming economy. To provide the machinery to design, build and 

operate multi-purpose water supply projects to meet these needs, this bill establishes a Water Supply 

Board to do this work. Additional powers are requested in the bill to allow the commission to maintain a 

tighter control over the use of water resources. 

 

While the details of the proposed amendments will be examined in committee, it is the government‟s 

view that they represent logical steps in the evolution of a system of proper water management in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I would be leave of the Assembly to move second reading of this bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. I. C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Before the minister sits down, Mr. Speaker, could I ask him some 

questions. I hope I am not interfering with his rights to close the debate. 

 

I would ask him first of all whether the service of water being provided to the water users or consumers 

are on an agreed basis by agreement? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, I suppose eventually there will be an agreement. The charges will, of course, be 

set by the board, the charges for water, and, of course, if a community makes an agreement with the 

board or an industry makes an agreement with the board for the use of water at that rate, well, of course, 

it would be by agreement. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — There is no provision here then for any compulsion in regard to the consumers taking 

water at the rate stated by the commission. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Well, there is compulsion, 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1698 

or they wouldn‟t be able to get this water any other place except from the commission. The commission 

will be the sole supplier of water from these sources, but there will be no compulsion on a person 

actually taking it if they don‟t want to take it, or the municipality either. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — This is a bit different approach, I take it, than is the case with a designated irrigation 

area. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the member has a definite line of questions, he is welcome to ask them in 

committee. 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in the session of 1964 when I had the 

responsibility and, indeed, the pleasure of introducing into the legislature the fairly extensive and very 

important basic legislation with respect to developing and use of water resources, it seems to me that the 

proposals which the minister has put before us this morning represent agreement in principle with the 

basic act at that time. They represent a kind of development which many of us have been expecting and 

hoping and realizing is completely necessary. 

 

I think that for much too long too many people have underrated the importance of this resource of water. 

Too many people, perhaps, have not pushed the public responsibility with respect to it, such as the 

minister indicated this morning is gong to be necessary in the future. On the whole, it appears to me at 

this moment, Mr. Speaker, that the proposals are ones that ought to be welcomed and supported. 

However, we saw the bill only in the last part of last week, perhaps as late as Saturday, or Friday. The 

minister has added a considerable amount of information this morning. It would be my wish to examine 

somewhat further the remarks made this morning and on that basis I would like to beg leave of the 

Assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw attention to the fact that seated 

in the east gallery is one of the school groups from Saskatoon. They are from Christ the King School and 

separate schools in the city of Saskatoon and they are lead today by their teachers, Mr. Troupin, Mr. 

Wild and Mr. Crezinski. I know that you would like me on your behalf and on behalf of the members 

assembled to welcome them to the Assembly and wish them a very good day here. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

WELCOME TO MR. GERARD 
 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, I cannot help but say a few words. There is a 

gentleman in the gallery, Mr. Pierre Gerard whose age is 77. I can safely say that his attendance in this 

legislature for the last five years by far exceeds the attendance of any members of the house. Just for 

example, last year he walked up and down these steps, a total of 9,360 steps which I think is a very 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1699 

commendable job for Mr. Gerard. I think this house should join me in thanking him for such faithful 

attendance at this legislature. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, who is the Minister of Industry and Commerce? 


Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Grant is. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Thank you. I wondered if there had been a cabinet shuffle. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who is the member from Kelsey? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — The old Kelsey or the new one? 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

SECOND READING 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the hon. J. M. Cuelenaere 

(Minister of Natural Resources), Bill No. 90 — An Act to assist the Prince Albert Pulp Company in 

establishing a Pulp Mill in Saskatchewan, be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, this bill deals with the financial assistance which is 

to be made available with respect to the proposed construction of a pulp mill at Prince Albert. I want to 

comment on the remarks of the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere). 

 

Let me say first, Mr. Speaker, that I welcome the construction in Saskatchewan of a pulp mill. It has 

long been recognized that Saskatchewan had a quantity of timber that could best be converted to 

economic use by the construction of a pulp mill or a pulp and paper mill. I would have like to have seen 

a paper mill but a pulp mill is a real addition. It was recognized that there were difficulties, principally 

marketing difficulties, and that there would come a time when the consumption of pulp in North 

America would warrant the use of Saskatchewan wood. We welcome the indications that that time has 

arrived. I congratulate the government on the vigour with which they worked for the establishment of a 

pulp mill in Saskatchewan. I have had the opportunity to scan the many legal documents involved. I 

can‟t claim to have read them in detail; such a review would involve many hours of intense study. in my 

remarks on the Budget Debate I made reference to the proposed pulp mill and I outlined a number of 

queries which I had. It will be recalled, Mr. Speaker, that this was before the agreements were available 

to us. 

 

The Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) dealt with the matters which I had raised, or at least 

some of them. Let me deal with a question which I raised in the Budget Debate. Mr. Speaker, I hasten to 

advise you that I am not going over that ground again, but only over the ground which the Minister of 

Natural Resources covered in his introductory remarks on second 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1700 

reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I first said that I would want to be shown the studies by independent consultants, which 

studies showed that the particular project was feasible. The minister advised that a study by a Parsons 

and Whittemore affiliates had indicated that the project was feasible. With that I‟m unimpressed. I 

would have been amazed if the persons who had in sight a $50,000,000 building contract would not 

have been able to show the project feasible. I believe the government should have turned over the 

Parsons and Whittemore study to an independent consultant for a comprehensive study. So far as I can 

see they have not done that. The two-page letter with the attachments from another consulting firm on 

the west coast cannot be classed as a feasibility study or even a check or a verification of a feasibility 

study. It doesn‟t even pretend to be that. On the basis of the information given to the house, the only 

comprehensive feasibility study which has been made as to the economic soundness of this project is the 

one done by the sponsor-contractor. I think that this is pretty poor practice on the part of the There are 

many first class consulting firms that could have been engaged to check out the Parsons and Whittemore 

report and this should have been done. I don‟t for a moment say that reliance should not have been 

placed on the Parsons and Whittemore report and this should have been done. I don‟t for a moment say 

that reliance should not have been placed on the parsons and Whittemore report as a start, as a point of 

departure. But from that point the government should have engaged a first class consultant, and I could 

name many, who should have checked out this report point by point. Not to do so is a gamble. I don‟t 

say that the gamble will lose but I say that to the extent that the government hasn‟t checked information 

that they could have checked, the gamble is unnecessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I asked about the freight rate hurdle. The answer was that a minor reduction has been 

achieved but the major hurdle still remains. This problem is a serious one unless it is solved, and unless 

it is solved any mill in Saskatchewan will be severely penalized. The minister says that even with the 

relatively high freight rate structure which now exists, the mill is viable. I hope he is right but I was 

certainly disturbed to hear that this major hurdle had not been overcome. 

 

I asked them whether the sponsors had committed themselves to go ahead with the project in a fixed 

time, and the minister advised that Parsons and Whittemore were committed to go ahead with the pulp 

mill venture. But as I read the contracts, Parsons and Whittemore is obligated to go ahead; but their 

obligation runs in favour of the Prince Albert Pulp Company and not in favour of the government. If 

they don‟t go ahead with the project the only person who can quarrel is the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company. That‟s right. See if you can find a commitment in any contract with the government that says 

that Parsons and Whittemore or the Prince Albert Pulp Mill promises to build this mill in any particular 

period of time. You will find two references to it. One by Parsons and Whittemore in their contract with 

the Prince Albert Pulp Company which can only be enforced by the Prince Albert Pulp Company which 

is controlled by Parsons and Whittemore — I don‟t think that covenant is worth much — and one in the 

forest license agreement, the penalty for breach of which is that they don‟t get the agreement if they 

don‟t build a mill. But this is not a very great penalty. I can‟t see where Parsons and Whittemore or the 

P.A. Pulp Company has given any undertaking to the province, any undertaking by which they will lose 

anything, if they don‟t fulfil, to go ahead in any particular period of time. 

 

As I say, perhaps I have missed it in the maze of contracts. 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1701 

of which there are eight or nine. Certainly it‟s not in the Master Agreement and that is where I would 

expect to find it. the Master Agreement, so-called, contains virtually no covenants on the part of the P.A. 

Pulp Company or Parsons and Whittemore. I invite anyone to read over that Master Agreement; just 

check the covenants one by one and see who is promising what. The only single covenant in there which 

binds the sponsors is that if the mill is built the persons who build the mill will see that the arrangements 

in the mill with respect to pollution are the same as in most other pulp mills. Other than that there are no 

covenants by the sponsors. 

 

Now, it is true if you want to go through an involved process we find that Parsons and Whittemore have 

an agreement with the P.A. Pulp Company. This agreement is mortgaged to the government, and that 

therefore the agreement is part of the mortgage premises. And if the government forecloses its mortgage, 

presumably it would get a claim against Parsons and Whittemore but it wouldn‟t get this until it had to 

foreclose. It wouldn‟t get this until P.A. Pulp Company was in effect bankrupt, and at this point the 

covenant is not much good. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not suggesting that there should necessarily have been stringent covenants to go 

ahead. I am suggesting that as a minimum the government should have got a promise from P.A. Pulp 

Company that, if the notes were guaranteed, P.A. Pulp would go ahead with the construction of a mill by 

a given date. Not Parsons and Whittemore to P.A. Pulp, but P.A. Pulp to the government. The 

government is guaranteeing the notes of P.A. Pulp, and P.A. Pulp should have promised the government 

that, in exchange for that guarantee, they would go ahead with the mill at some fixed time, not 

necessarily a closely defined time but within three years or four years or whatever would be a fair 

leeway. But if such a promise is there, Mr. Speaker, I have been unable to find it. 

 

The fourth question I asked concerned the approximate dollar amount of the government‟s 

commitments. Mr. Speaker, they are substantial. There is a guarantee of $50,000,000. There are shares 

to be purchased by the government for $1,500,000. There are shares which are apparently also to be 

purchased by the government of an additional $1,500,000 worth of shares as a compensation for its 

guarantee, but the agreements filed the other day suggested that the government was going to have to put 

up $1,500,000 in cash for these shares. I don‟t know whether it will be able to recoup this $1,500,000 at 

some other time. I wish that the minister would clear up this point when he closes the debate. The point I 

am now raising, Mr. Speaker, in case I haven‟t made myself clear, is with respect to the $1,500,000 

worth of shares which the government was to get as compensation for the guarantee but as it now 

appears the government may have to pay for. This appears to be the effect of the amendments which are 

negotiated as of a date in February but which as I understand are not yet executed. Again I may be 

misconstruing this and I will ask that the minister deal with this in closing the debate, if he wouldn‟t 

mind. 

 

There are other commitments, a gas pipeline, roads, a bridge. With these no one can have any real 

quarrel because if any major industry comes in you would certainly put a gas pipeline in. You‟d be 

prepared to build a road of a couple or three or four miles, and a bridge. No quarrel there. The 

commitment to build 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1702 

20 miles of main road a year or 200 miles every ten years is a considerable commitment, which will 

involve the expenditure of public funds of, I would guess, a minimum of $500,000 a year. This is a 

considerable concession since I suspect it will mean that P.A. Pulp Company will get a substantial 

portion of their logging roads built as public roads. I realize that these are main all-purpose roads but 

200 miles in that general area every ten years strikes me as quite a number. I think that what will be built 

will be a grid of main roads whose prime function will be forest extraction, accordingly the prime 

beneficiary of which will be P.A. Pulp Company. There are additional commitments with respect to gas 

supply and gas price. There are further possible commitments on the part of the Crown with respect to 

losses in logging operations. The terms upon which the company will be permitted to buy the logging 

operation of the Saskatchewan Timber Board are very favourable, a rate of interest which is well under 

six per cent. Certainly any time you can get money at under six per cent now you have got yourself a 

deal. 

 

There are a number of minor concessions. They can be illustrated by one which I will instance. There is 

a provision for loss equalization on the logging operations for the period from 1967 to 1971. At the end 

of that period if there is a profit the Timber Board is to pay the company. If there is a loss the company 

is to pay the Timber Board 50 per cent of the profit or loss in each case. The difference is that the 

Timber Board has to pay its 50 per cent to the company in 20 days. The company to pay its 50 per cent 

to the Timber Board in 20 years at no interest and doesn‟t have to pay in any year that its profit isn‟t ten 

per cent. I am not suggesting this is going to be a large sum of money, but the inequitable nature of the 

loss equalization clause suggests the tone of many of the concessions which were made throughout the 

agreements. Generally speaking there are a large number of financial concessions to the company; many 

of them relatively minor in size but all aggregating many millions of dollars. The question which arises 

is not as to whether these concessions should have been granted. It may well be that they were necessary 

in order to get the mill. The question which does arise is whether the government should have received a 

greater equity participation in exchange. Certainly the nature of the „s commitments put the government 

in a position, not of mortgagee, but of equity participant. If this company doesn‟t succeed the 

government is going to lose a substantial sum of money. Its mortgage will not protect it — not fully, 

only partially. Therefore it is taking the equity risk and should have got a substantial piece of equity 

profit. I say that the government appears to have done not too well in the bargaining. 

 

The next question which I posed was this. Can the sponsors make a substantial profit on the construction 

of the mill as opposed to its operation? Here too I think the government has been as I would term it, lax. 

The minimum that they should have done was to hire a first class consulting firm to review in detail the 

Parsons and Whittemore feasibility study. They have obtained a letter from a consultant who I assume is 

competent; I have no reason to believe otherwise. But there is no suggestion that he gave the Parsons 

and Whittemore feasibility study a full review. A look at the letter would indicate that he didn‟t have the 

full report before him. Certainly that is what I take out of the letter. 

 

I don‟t know what a competent firm of consultants would say, if they had considered the whole Parsons 

and Whittemore feasibility study, about the price that that mill could be built for. I am 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1703 

not saying that Parsons and Whittemore are going to make a killing on this mill but I am saying that the 

government can‟t say yes or no. They have a two-page letter with some comparisons, gross comparisons 

in the sense that there is no evidence that the person who gave his letter of opinion had studied the 

Parsons and Whittemore feasibility study in detail. He said he had seen the flow charts, he had seen the 

list of machinery and it looks standard. I don‟t know whether the person who gave the opinion had ever 

been to Prince Albert. Perhaps he has but he doesn‟t indicate that he has ever been to Prince Albert. It‟s 

pretty hard to give an opinion on how much a mill would cost to be built on a given site, if you haven‟t 

made a thorough study of the area. I don‟t know what such a consultant would say after a full study and 

we‟ll never know. We‟ll never know because the government chose to gamble. The gamble may pay off 

but I suggest it‟s an unnecessary gamble. 

 

Now, this whole deal has enough risk in it and enough perfectly legitimate risk — I‟m not complaining 

about that — without adding to it, and the government should have cut down its risk by getting the full 

facts from an independent source. This it does not have. It doesn‟t have those full facts and I, therefore, 

suggest it is taking an unnecessary gamble. The possibility that the sponsors can make a large part of 

their $7,000,000 equity participation could have bee negatived by such a study. It has not been. The 

possibility remains that the sponsor‟s real risk is negligible compared with the size of the operation and 

the participation by the government. 

 

There has been a further recent change that I don‟t thoroughly understand, and that is that the company 

is to become a public company. Am I to understand from this that the sponsors will be able to sell off 

their shares? If so, it raises the possibility of the sponsors being able to sell out and get out regardless of 

the economic prospects of the venture. Maybe they can get out with a profit even if the mill doesn‟t turn 

a wheel. We will seek further information on this change in committee. We will also ask what this 

change from a private company to a public company does to the government buy-sell agreement, 

because I find it very difficult to see how a buy-sell agreement could operate if these shares are public in 

the sense that they are listed on any stock exchange. 

 

The next question I raised is whether any municipality has to give concessions to the mill and why. Mr. 

Speaker, we have covered that subject in another debate and I don‟t propose to refer to it further. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, from the observations which I have made it is clear that in my view the 

government has not done a sufficiently rigorous job of obtaining independent information before it took 

the very real and perhaps very proper gamble to back this venture. Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to 

the broad principle of the bill, the guaranteeing of financial support for a pulp mill. 

 

I approve of the construction of a pulp mill in northern Saskatchewan. It will be a real benefit to the 

province. And I approve too of the provincial government giving appropriate financial assistance. I want 

to say that I am not one of these benighted private enterprisers who believe that the so-called free market 

can be depended upon to provide capital for economically sound ventures. I know that some members 

opposite may fall into that category. Certainly many of them used to. I remember when 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1704 

the government of Saskatchewan began the program of guaranteeing money to support industry. I cam 

remember the bitter opposition of the doctrinaire Liberals. I remember one of them commenting that if 

it‟s a good idea why won‟t the private markets provide the funds. Well, in those days the Liberals 

opposite government interference, as they called it, in the free money market. The free money market is 

another myth which the Liberals and the other private enterprisers have foisted upon the public, but even 

they have abandoned the idea. It doesn‟t exist now. It didn‟t exist then. And so I won‟t be raising any 

doctrinaire objections on that score. There may be many objections to the idea, but I am not worried 

about the fact that it makes nonsense of the discredited and worn out theories of the private enterprisers. 

 

Now, these same doctrinaire souls objected to the next big guarantee; to the steel mill. “Approaching a 

scandal”, I believe were the words of the member from Morse (Mr. Thatcher). Well, let me say this, that 

the arrangements we had with the steel mill were far tighter, required far more guarantees of 

performance from the sponsors than these pulp mill arrangements do, and required far fewer side 

concessions from the Crown. So if the steel mill arrangements were approaching a scandal, I ask you to 

choose your own adjective for these pulp mill arrangements. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, be that as it may, I find myself in agreement with the principle of the bill. I have 

been in agreement with this principle for ten years and I welcome the support, somewhat belated 

support, but nevertheless the support of the Liberal party to this principle. Some of them, as I say, are 

recent converts but we shouldn‟t turn them out on that account. 

 

The venture involves large risks of capital of the people of Saskatchewan. As I have already noted I am 

far from convinced that the Crown has taken reasonable steps to minimize the risks. I hope that the 

minister will offer more evidence to prove that the government did its own studies and is convinced 

from independent sources on all aspects of the feasibility of this project. I hope he can show that he is 

not relying on the feasibility studies put forward by the promoters. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we know how desperately the government needs this pulp mill. We know that they 

have made wild claims about the increase in manufacturing. We know that the figures keep proving 

them mistaken. The figures which are put forward about the great increase in manufacturing keep 

getting rebutted by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics in a most inconvenient way. The government must 

find something to shout about. We know that for two successive years the investment in manufacturing 

has actually gone down from the 1963-64 period. We know about the heavy water fiasco. We know that 

other people outside of Saskatchewan are beginning to see through the screen of ballyhoo, and I can‟t 

illustrate that more succinctly than to quote the remarks of the Alberta Minister of Industries, the hon. 

Mr. Patrick as quoted in the Calgary Herald of February 26th, 1966. The report says this: 

 

Confidential discussions are being held with a number of firms and a possible new manufacturing 

complex which would include a heavy water plant in Alberta, the Minister of Industry, Mr. Russel 

Patrick, told the legislature Friday. He said he could give no details except that any new industry 

would not involve the import of raw materials. Alberta would not subsidize industry, he said. Even 

without subsidization we are getting 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1705 

more than Saskatchewan and Manitoba combined. He said there are constant reports of plants 

coming to Saskatchewan but usually they don‟t materialize. 

 

Even he has seen through the screen of publicity which the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) substitutes for 

economic development. But we on this side of the house want to see industry come. We have no 

objection to co-operation between industry and government. We welcome the development. We will 

have many questions to ask in committee about the particular arrangements between the Crown and the 

P.A. Pulp Company and Parsons and Whittemore. But in principle we welcome the development and 

welcome it most heartily. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I find myself in support of the bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the members to the fact that the mover of the motion is 

about to close the debate and if anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. The attention to the fact 

that the mover of the motion is about to close the debate. If anyone wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Hon. J. M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that I am going 

to be very long in closing the debate. I must say from the outset that I was very pleased (Mr. Blakeney) 

was in agreement with the general principles of the bill, and that he, too, and I presume that he is 

speaking on behalf of the opposition, welcomes the coming of the pulp mill to Saskatchewan. We are 

very pleased to hear that. 

 

The hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) brought up certain matters, namely a number of 

questions that he had raised earlier in the house relating to the studies and other matters that were 

contained in the agreements. The first point of what might be termed criticism was why would the 

government not turn over the feasibility study to an independent fir. He accused the government of 

being lax in that regard. Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to point out firstly that Parsons and Whittemore have 

within their own institution, within their own corporate set-up, a branch which specializes in feasibility 

studies of pulp mills, not only for themselves but for countries, for other companies. I am informed that 

they have made feasibility studies involving a large number of mills. Some of these studies have been 

made on the other side of the Iron Curtain. They have built mills in Russia and other countries at the 

request of the government. They have gone to those countries and made feasibility studies. They made a 

feasibility study in Greece; they made one or several in Asia, in Vietnam and in other countries. They 

have made a number of feasibility studies in the United States. According to all the reports that we have 

been able to obtain every single mill that they recommended and went on with construction has turned 

out to be successful. Now to begin with that‟s a pretty fair recommendation. We felt that a company 

such as that, one that was organized and equipped in themselves to make a complete and thorough 

feasibility study, was one that we could rely on to a fairly great degree. But nevertheless, and before I go 

on to another point I should say that this company is now operating a number of mills in which they are 

not interested under contract with governments and companies and they are operating mills in which 

they have made an investment following their own feasibility study. In the case of the Belgian mill, in 

the case of the French mill, they made a feasibility study and because they felt that the construction of 

the mil was sufficiently feasible that when they were invited to make a contribution to participate in the 

equity money, in the equity of the mill, they accepted the invitation 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1706 

and went in. 

 

Now, when they came to Saskatchewan, they came in as many other companies had in the past to make 

a feasibility study. Their report was a very good report. They were enthusiastic about the prospects of a 

pulp mill in Saskatchewan. They were willing to risk their own capital to the tune of $7,000,000. The 

opposition made the suggestion that because Parsons and Whittemore are going to construct the mill, it 

may be that they are going to make a certain amount of profit on the construction of the mill. 

Nevertheless they were willing to take that profit, when they could have been building mills elsewhere, 

and they are prepared to place not only the profit but possibly a substantial contribution of their own 

money into the construction of this mill. This company is prepared to place their reputation at stake in 

the construction of this mill and in the operation of the mill. They are prepared to commit themselves for 

a minimum period of 20 years from 1969 to operate the mill. The nature of the reputation of Parsons and 

Whittemore is indicated in some of the loan agreements. It is a condition of the loan agreements which 

Parsons and Whittemore are prepared to sign that the mill must be operated under the general 

supervision of Parsons and Whittemore. The people who loan these amounts of money to the Prince 

Albert Pulp Company know Parsons and Whittemore; they know them by reputation; they know their 

ability to operate this type of industry. Because of that they insist that as an added guarantee the money 

which is loaned will be repaid. They demand that Parsons and Whittemore take an active part in the 

operation and the management of the mill. In the light of all this one would have thought that with all 

this background of reputation this would have been sufficient. I suggest that when we deal with industry 

one of the important things is that we deal with reputable people; people who have experience in the 

building and in the operation of the mill. This is one of the important factors and probably one of the 

most important factors of all. I think that any time a bank makes a loan it feels that the moral risk is what 

is the real important factor in the validity of the loan or in deciding whether the loan should be made. 

Here we have reasons to believe that our own enquiries, from statements that were made, from 

information that we were able to obtain, from bankers, financiers, industrialists, not only in Canada and 

not only in the United States but in Europe as well, that we have such a firm. We were able to obtain 

only the very best of recommendations for this company that was coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

While we felt encouraged and while you would think that that was all we needed, the government, far 

from being lax as is suggested by the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), nevertheless took 

the added precautions to engage these services of an independent consultant. Before that independent 

consultant was engaged every step was taken to make sure that it was a competent firm, a firm that had 

been involved in pulp mill construction and in pulp mill consulting work for a long period of time. The 

entire plans for the construction of this mill, all the specifications, the agreements were placed at the 

disposal of this consultant. He spent a considerable amount of time checking into the specifications and 

into the project generally and he came out with a strong recommendation both as to the ability of the 

mill to produce and also that the cost of the mill to the Prince Albert Pulp Mill Company was a 

reasonable one. I believe that if there had been any suggestion on his part — his report, his advice has 

been tabled — that this mill might have been — on a per unit basis, somewhat costly, had there been any 

suggestion on his part that there was a danger of inferior construction or an 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1707 

inadequate mill that could not produce the quantity of kraft pulp that it was designed to produce, if there 

had ever been any of these suggestions it was our intention to look into the matter more closely and 

probably further. But I think the report is very clear that the mill as it is designed will produce the 

quantify and quality of the pulp that it is intended to produce, and secondly, that the cost is lower than 

the average on a per daily ton than other mills that are being constructed in British Columbia and 

elsewhere in Canada and the United States. In other words, it was felt that, because the cost per daily ton 

was something, on an average, of $12,000 below the average cost of the mills that are being constructed 

in British Columbia, this mill was being constructed at a reasonable cost and in all likelihood the 

contract price for the construction of the mill was a reasonable one. 

 

Now I am not going to deal at any length with the question of freight rates. I mentioned them in my 

address originally. As I pointed out I agreed it is an important factor but it must be borne in mind that 

the feasibility study was based upon the freight rate as it existed at the time the feasibility study was 

made. Since then the concession we have been able to obtain is not a very large one but it still amounts 

to approximately 5 per cent and this is going to help the company to some extent. I am fairly convinced 

that the government must take steps along with the Prince Albert Company to make further 

representation for further concessions. But Parsons and Whittemore are quite prepared to proceed with 

the construction of this mill and are going to proceed on the basis of the presently negotiated freight 

rates. As I said before we are quite satisfied that the mill is viable under the present structure. 

 

Now there is some question in the mind of the hon. member (Mr. Blakeney) as to whether or not this 

mill is going to be proceeded with at the time that is fixed. I think that possibly I can better deal with this 

in committee. I am quite satisfied that this company is going to honour the terms of the agreement that 

was entered into between the Prince Albert Pulp Company and themselves, Parsons and Whittemore, 

and the Provincial Treasurer, whereby they committed themselves to a fixed schedule. I can now tell the 

members of the house that to my knowledge steps have been taken to order machinery. Substantial 

expenses have been committed. I feel quote satisfied that there is no question but that the construction of 

the mill is going to be proceeded with. They are committed to take these steps and I am quite satisfied 

that they are going to do so. But I do want to point out that the guarantee agreement makes certain 

provisions for the construction of the mill and under what terms and that there is no guarantee to be 

given by the province unless the construction of the mill is proceeded with, and, secondly, that the 

agreement with the trustees clearly shows that the trustees will not advance money unless the mill is 

proceeded with. I am quite satisfied that there is sufficient safeguards in the several agreements that 

have been signed to protect the province in the event that the mill is not proceeded with. Certainly the 

loans are going to be made on a progressive stage. Only a portion of the loans are to be made originally 

and of course further amounts will be advanced as the mill progresses. The final amount of the loan will 

not be made until the mill has been completed, properly tested and in operation. 

 

Now certain statements were made with respect to the share capital. It is true that the province has made 

one contribution towards the purchase of shares, but it must be borne in mind that Parsons and 

Whittemore have also made a very substantial payment of 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1708 

70 per cent. Right now as it stands within 30 days after the signing of the agreement, or at one stage, 

Parsons and Whittemore made a contribution which in proportion to the contribution of the province 

was 70 per cent to 15 per cent on the part of the province as a cash contribution. Parsons and 

Whittemore put up the cash for their first proportionate payment. The government paid 15 per cent of 

the first contribution and the other 15 per cent comes out of the amount that is paid to the province as 

consideration for the loan. Well, the hon. member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) made some 

reference to the recent amendment whereby the payment of the $1,500,000 was going to be made 

immediately, that is to say, it was going to be retained by the company. I think that the employee doesn‟t 

really make any difference. The original agreement provided that the shares were going to be allocated 

to the government on a certain schedule, 15 per cent for payment in cash, 15 per cent for the 

consideration for the loan. Under the new arrangements — and it is strictly a bookkeeping arrangement 

— the $1,500,000 will be paid to the government but the government will immediately return it to the 

Prince Albert Pulp Company. In effect there is really no change. It just works out on the same basis; it is 

strictly a matter of the difference in bookkeeping and for some good reasons. 

 

I think some reference was made to the fact that this was a public company. I think the hon. member 

(Mr. Blakeney) expressed some fear and wanted to know why. Parsons and Whittemore and the 

government were quite satisfied to keep it as a private company. This was the original intent. The 

reasons for transferring it to a public company are purely technical reasons. It appears that, because there 

was a canvas or an offer for the loan money in New York, the solicitors feared that this may have 

amounted to a public offering of debentures or the loan money. I think it would be noted in the 

agreement, the loan agreement, that there are quite a number of pension funds which are contributing 

towards this $50,000,000 in Canadian money and there was some fear that this was going to amount to a 

public offering. It, therefore, became necessary to convert it to a public company. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

should point out that this does not affect the terms of the shareholders‟ agreement. Whether this is a 

private company or a public company the shareholders‟ agreement is still binding. The shares are not 

going to be put on the market for sale. The terms of the agreement that neither party can sell without 

offering them to the other party on a first refusal basis still applies, and the contract not to dispose of 

shares except to immediate subsidiaries still applies. There is no intention of changing the terms of the 

agreement in respect to the holding of shares. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that I am going to deal at any length now with the question of the loss 

equalization clause. The hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) pointed to the clause in the 

Acquisition Agreement whereby the 50 per cent loss that may be sustained in the cord wood operations 

would be spread over a period of 20 years and was not subject to interest. That is correct. I should point 

out, however, Mr. Speaker, that at first the company came to Saskatchewan and requested wood at the 

price in the neighbourhood of $17. They made that request based upon the publicity that was put out in 

1960 and 1961 by the Department of Industry. I referred to that publicity, that brochure that was put out 

where it assured, where it invited people to come to Saskatchewan to construct a pulp mill on the basis 

that wood could be produced at $17 a cord. This placed the present government at some disadvantage. 

There was a statement that in 1961 wood could be supplied at $17 a cord, there were commitments made 

to companies. It was indicated by the Premier and by 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1709 

myself in another debate where the former government had offered to supply wood at that price. Well 

now we are able to negotiate an increase in that price to $18.50 plus the escalation clause of 10 per cent. 

On top of that we were able to negotiate the loss equalization and the terms quoted by the hon. member 

were the best that we were able to obtain. I will admit that in that regard I would have like to obtain an 

agreement that would have required payment earlier or, alternatively, interest on the loan, but this was 

the best that we could do until 1971. But it must be borne in mind that in 1971 under the Acquisition 

Agreement the Pulp Company will take over the entire operation and if there is a loss — we hope that 

there isn‟t a loss — that 50 per cent of it will be recovered. 

 

Now I think that I can now conclude my remarks and leave other details to the discussion of the bill in 

committee. I think that there are a number of questions that can be answered at that time although as far 

as my notes would indicate I have tried to cover most of the points that have been raised by the hon. 

member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). He did say, however, in conclusion that “we know how 

desperately the government needs this mill”. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you there is no doubt that 

we want it, but I don‟t think that we need it nearly as much as the previous government needed it. I think 

that the previous government had made promises, made announcements that led people to believe that a 

pulp mill was coming, and on at least two occasions the matter just fell flat and that is the last we heard 

of it. Well, we were never in that position. As far as this government is concerned it had only pledged 

itself to exert all its effort to bring industry to Saskatchewan. We have made no commitments on the 

question of a pulp mill and were very careful, Mr. Speaker, not to make an announcement of a pulp mill 

until a set of agreements had been signed, had been completed and the mill was virtually assured. I think 

that right now the mill is committed for Saskatchewan. While the agreement may not be in every respect 

perfect, we must bear in mind that is a result of months and weeks of negotiations. It required give and 

take on both sides. Certainly when the agreement was signed it was a long ways from the original offer 

of Parsons and Whittemore. They came a long way towards meeting us; we had to take some steps 

toward meeting their requests. But I think that we finally got a mill on a fair and equitable basis, on a 

basis that would first of all ensure a mill for Saskatchewan. Secondly, that it will ensure a mill that will 

be viable, practical and would be feasible. There was no point in us demanding terms from the mill that 

would be exorbitant and that they could not carry out. We thought that we should enter into an 

agreement that would provide a mill which would be a good mill, and a good industry for the province 

and would bring about the employment which we feel is required for the area. 

 

Now, I gather from the remarks of the hon. member that they are going to support the bill. Second 

reading has been moved and I must say that I appreciate the fact that they are going to give it support on 

second reading and pass it in principle. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I wonder if he would confirm my understanding of his remarks that the consultants 

engaged by the government did not review the full Parsons and Whittemore feasibility study and did not 

visit Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — I think I can probably answer this. They certainly made a full review of the 

feasibility study. I have no knowledge as to what steps they took towards visiting Prince Albert. 



 

April 4, 1966 

 

1710 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 50 

 

Thatcher MacDonald Blakeney 

Howes Gallagher Davies 

McFarlane Breker Thibault 

Cameron Leith Whelan 

Steuart Radloff Nicholson 

Heald Romuld Dewhurst 

Gardiner (Melville) Weatherald Berezowsky 

Guy MacLennan Michayluk 

Merchant (Mrs.) Larochelle Smishek 

Loken Hooker Link 

MacDougall Coupland Broten 

Grant Gardner (Moosomin) Larson 

Coderre Lloyd Robbins 

Bjarnason Cooper (Mrs.) Pepper 

Trapp Wood Brockelbank (Saskatoon) 

Cuelenaere Nollet Pederson 

McIsaac Brockelbank (Kelsey)  

 

NAYS — Nil 

 

On the motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart, the Assembly adjourned at 10 o‟clock p.m. 


