



















































Hansard: March 25, 1966


1503 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

34th Day 

 

Friday, March 25, 1966. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. J. E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw your attention and the 

attention of the Assembly to a fine group of students situated in the east gallery from Saskatoon city. 

They are from the Howard Cole School, and I believe they are accompanied by Mr. Huselak. I hope that 

we will have the opportunity here to ignite an appreciation for the democratic system and that they may 

carry that appreciation for the length of their lifetime. I wish them a pleasant journey home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. I. A. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to 

welcome a group of students located in the Speaker’s gallery, from the Outram School. They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Audrey Scobie. Now Outram is in the constituency of 

Souris-Estevan where a good deal of the money in the province is made, and I urge the government to 

spend more of it in that constituency. We welcome these students here today and hope they have a safe 

journey home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. W. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, seated in the Speaker’s gallery are a group of grade 

eight students from the Haultain School. They are accompanied by their school principal, Mr. 

Thompson. I would like on your behalf and on behalf of the Assembly to extend a warm welcome to the 

students and to express the hope that their stay here this afternoon will be both informative and 

educational. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. F. K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, and members of the legislature, I would like to bring to 

your attention a fine group of students from the Carrot River School. I might point out that this is one of 

the first groups of students to visit the legislature from Nipawin constituency, and from the Nipawin 

larger school unit. On behalf of all the members I would like to extend a welcome to these students. 

They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Wiems, and bus driver, Cornelius Enns, and they have been 

sponsored by the Carrot River Rotary Club and by the school. I think it is a very wonderful opportunity 

for these students to have the chance to come to Regina and become acquainted with the institution of 

the provincial government. I do, on behalf of all the members here, welcome these students and wish 

them a very safe and a pleasant journey home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 



 

March 25, 1966 

 
1504 

Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina East): — I want to also extend a very warm welcome to the students from 

the Haultain School in the Regina East constituency who are here, as was mentioned by the other hon. 

member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek). Mr. Thompson is their principal. Haultain School has a very 

significant name, and it is a very significant school district, and I also extend a very warm welcome to 

all the others here on behalf of the city. I hope they will also have a pleasant stay and gain much from 

the deliberations here today. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. H. A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention a fine group of 

students from the Winston High School from Watrous. The Chamber of Commerce, and rightly so, says 

it is the potash geographical centre of Saskatchewan. If you just look at a map, you will find they are 

very close to being right on the nose. These students are accompanied by Mr. Adams, Mr. Berkstrom 

and Rev. Dueck. I am sure that you will join me in hoping they have a very educational afternoon and 

have a fine trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I want on your behalf and on behalf of all hon. 

members to extend a greeting to a group of students who are in the east gallery, a group of some 38 

students from the Regent Park School in the northern part of Regina. They are grade five students who 

are here with their teacher, Mrs. Hill, and with two students of the College of Education who are 

engaged in practice teaching, Miss Knebusch and Miss Hallam. I know that all of us will want to extend 

a warm welcome to them, and to express the hope that they enjoy themselves and receive some benefit 

from our deliberations this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

On the motion of the hon. Mr. Steuart, the Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


