



















































Hansard: February 09, 1966


13 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session – Fifteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Wednesday, February 9, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:20 o’clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTION RE AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE ACT RATES 
 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I wonder if I might put 

a question to the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt)? In view of the press reports purporting to state 

the new rates under the Automobile Accident Insurance Act, I wonder if the minister could advise the 

house when the new rates under that act will be announced? 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, the new rates will be announced in due 

course. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — After February 16th, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Before Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to draw attention to some trappers up there from the great metropolis of Prince Albert in 

North Saskatchewan, who are down in the south country acquainting the people here with the wonders 

of northern Saskatchewan, and particularly the Prince Albert Winter Festival. There was a little warm-up 

out here in the gallery, I understand, and this is just a warm-up for the real winter festival that will take 

place February 13th to 19th. All members, especially members of the opposition, are invited to go up 

there at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE DEATH OF SPEAKER OF THE BRITISH HOUSE OF 

COMMONS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — members were shocked and saddened, I am sure, to learn of the sudden tragic death of 

the Speaker of the British House of Commons, Sir Harry Foster. Immediately upon receipt of the sad 

news I thought that the assembly would wish me to express, on behalf of our legislature, our very 

sincere condolence and sympathy. This I did and received the following reply: 

 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

14 

Thank you for your letter of 7th September referring to the tragic death of our Speaker. The members 

of the House of Commons and the Speaker’s family greatly appreciate the kind message from yourself 

and the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, and notice of it will be taken formally as soon as the 

house meets, and recorded permanently in the Commons Journals. 

 

With kindest regards. 

 

Yours sincerely 

 

Barnett Cocks 

Clerk of the House of Commons. 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

Mr. C. P. MacDonald moved, seconded by the member from Last Mountain, (Mr. D. G. MacLennan): 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE ROBERT LEITH HANBIDGE, Lieutenant-Governor of 

the Province of Saskatchewan, 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the province of 

Saskatchewan, in session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, after the pageant and ceremony of yesterday, I would like to take this opportunity 

of expressing a welcome to all the members and particularly to two or three. First of all, perhaps, to the 

Leader of the Opposition, who had the misfortune to miss most of the last session, even though we 

perhaps don’t agree with his politics, we are looking forward to the opportunity of exchanging debate. 

Second, to the new member from Moosomin (Mr. E. J. Gardner). I have had the privilege of working 

with Mr. Gardner and I certainly have enjoyed the opportunity. I think that he will add much with his 

keen mind and ability to this house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — And third, to the member from Canora. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, even though 

they couldn’t beat him on the hustings, I can assure you that the member from Canora (Mr. Romuld) 

will be here for a long time to come. I know that all of those who read the minutes of the last house will 

know that certainly his humor and his wit and his contribution to the public debate of this house were 

not only appreciated but enjoyed by all the members. I think that in looking ahead that we can count on 

more of the same type of thing from the member from Canora. Therefore, with out any worry the 

member from Canora (Mr. Romuld) will be with us for a long time to come. We also look forward to 

adding a new member to this side of the house of February 16th. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

15 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — Of course, I refer to the coming by-election in the constituency of Bengough; 

and you never can tell, Mr. Speaker, we may even add one from the constituency of Pelly in the next 

few days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my thesis in moving the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne is that free 

responsible enterprise has shown in Saskatchewan its recognizable force to lift the social, economic and 

cultural life of Saskatchewan to unparalleled heights. Change is the order of the day – transformations: 

Industrially, socially, economically, in the northern forests, in the farmlands of the south, in the cities 

and towns. The man who can visit only a small part of Saskatchewan lives in a province where there are 

more people, more jobs, more wealth, more mines, more industries, more oil wells, more economic 

activity than we dared believe a few short months ago. 

 

Why the change, Mr. Speaker? Because Saskatchewan 1966 is an evolving dynamism of free 

competitive enterprise. The economic boom taking place in Saskatchewan today has vindicated the 

essential theme that the human dignity of the individual, subject to the discipline of organized society, 

can best stimulate economic expansion, that this expansion can best serve the majority of our people. 

 

This Speech from the Throne is a document that projects three basic ideas: 

 

1. Saskatchewan under a Liberal government is entering a period of exciting growth and 
development. 

 

2. The amazing expansion today emphasizes the complete failure of the NDP Socialist party to keep 
Saskatchewan moving in the face of the great economic tide of Canada’s post-war years. 

 

3. The dividends of this growth are being passed on to the Saskatchewan people in quantities 
unimagined two years previously. 

 

Saskatchewan today is a living example that it is possible to throw off the Socialist yoke. The NDP 

evolved a complete set of rules for Saskatchewan. They claimed this plan would enable its people to 

achieve a heaven on earth. To this end they harnessed the people of Saskatchewan for 20 years. 

 

Many of our people were lured by the magic tune of socialism as played by the pied-piper Douglas. 

Whither he led them they did not know for Tommy himself did not know. He worked out a Socialist 

state which he thought would destroy free enterprise in Saskatchewan. Having failed, his theories leave 

nothing on which his followers can build. They have no shoes to wear, no boxes to pack them in, no 

woolen mittens to wear in the winter. He even went south of the border to guarantee the insurance of his 

flute. His followers still dance to the tune that Tommy played. Like the Piper of Hamelin he and his 

theories have gone over the hills and far away to a place from which he will never return. Those that 

remain are the real conservatives of today because they cling to a system that history has by-passed 20 

years ago. 

 

Perhaps that is why the member for Arm River sits in their midst and so often renders them support. 

First let me say that none will deny that Saskatchewan has made progress over the past 20 years. But 

let’s lay it on the line, let’s face the facts, the hard facts of experience. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

16 

Despite its progress, Saskatchewan fell far behind the rest of Canada, we were the tortoise, 

Saskatchewan was the retarded child of the Canadian economy. The years that followed the Second 

World War brought an upsurge that affected almost every aspect of Canadian national life. There was a 

spectacular expansion of our economy – not only in the levels of production, but also in the scope and 

diversity of national resources. Economic growth was matched by a new and striking increase in 

Canada’s population. Saskatchewan failed to keep pace. The cause, Mr. Speaker, was obvious; we could 

neither attract industry nor develop our resources to provide the jobs to keep our people at home. 

 

Let us look at the northern half of our province as a prime example. The northern half of Saskatchewan 

is a land of vast un-peopled spaces, a vast region of Pre-Cambrian rocks eroded by the glacial action of 

millions of years, an area of Saskatchewan that is a vast treasure-house of natural resources. In 1964 it 

was still all but a wasteland, its resources sill untapped, its vast pulp potential hardly scratched, its 

minerals undeveloped, its people, mainly our native population, dependent on government handouts for 

a major portion of its payroll. 

 

Why has Saskatchewan never had a Kitimat, a Prince George, a Rainbow Lake, a Thompson Lake, a 

Flin Flon, a Sudbury, an Ungava? We have the same resources and the same potential. For 20 years we 

heard excuses that ranged from transportation, freight, rates, geography, power or any acceptable excuse 

the Socialist could offer. No longer will mere cleverism with collective dogmatism carry appeal with the 

people of Saskatchewan. In less than two years, Socialism has been destroyed by the actions of this 

government. 

 

Take the pulp and paper industry as a leading example. It leads all other industries in Canada. It now 

supplies over 50 per cent of the world’s newsprint. Its total production rose from $528,000,000 in 1946 

to more than $2,000,000 in 1965. It led all other industries in Canada, including wheat, in total 

production value. Saskatchewan has more than one-third of its area covered with timber. Yet we did not 

produce one page of newsprint. Our lumber industry declined in 1964 from 29,000,000 cubic feet in 

1944 to 22,000,000 cubic feet. It was almost non-existent. 

 

Exciting developments have taken place in our northern forests, developments that will have 

far-reaching effects on the whole economy of our north and the province as a whole. Four new major 

lumber operations have been attracted to Saskatchewan. Simpsons Timber Company; MacMillan 

Bloedel and Powell River Limited; Primrose Forest Products; and the Prince Albert Pulp and Paper 

Company. The climax of this development has been the $65,000,000 pulp mill. Saskatchewan has long 

awaited this vital industry. When these new timber complexes begin production, coupled with existing 

lumber operations, we will cut an estimated 50,000,000 cubic feet. Think of what this will do for the city 

of Prince Albert, the native people of the north, and the provincial economy as a whole. Exciting events 

are also occurring in mineral development. The results have been just as startling. Socialism had all but 

destroyed our mining industry. Less than one per cent of all money spent in Canada on mining 

exploration was spent in this province. Prospecting has all but ceased. You can’t build mines unless you 

locate the ore. 

 

The story or our incentive program is now history but the results continue to unfold. Already three new 

base metal mines have established in Saskatchewan, the first in our history to 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

17 

locate entirely in Saskatchewan. Anglo Rouyn Mining Company at Lac La Ronge: Rottenstone Mining 

Limited near La Ronge; and the joint venture of Share Mines and Oils Limited and Western Nuclear at 

Hanson Lake. The north is bursting, take a trip to Lac La Ronge and witness the economic revolution 

now taking place. 

 

Exciting development has also occurred in the potash industry. Economists predict that in a very few 

years only wheat will surpass potash in total product value. Production will reach an estimated 

12,000,000 tons by 1970. Already $500,000,000 of actual and committed capital has come to 

Saskatchewan. Three mines are now in production and five under construction. Exciting expansion also 

has occurred in the oil fields. There is no doubt 1965 witnessed Saskatchewan’s greatest year in the oil 

industry: record production, record investment, record exploration, record revenues, records in every 

sector of the economy. 

 

Exciting growth has also occurred in the field of business and secondary industry. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Don’t forget heavy water. 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the member from North Battleford reminds me of a 

ship. He makes the most noise when he is in a fog. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — Exciting growth has also occurred in the field of business and secondary 

industry. The economic climate generated in Saskatchewan has brought an unending flow of individuals, 

smaller companies, and secondary industries establishing in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s per capita 

investment has jumped from $846 in 1963 to an estimated $952 in 1965, an increase of over 12 per cent. 

 

We have a long way to go before we catch up to the rest of Canada. This is but a start, but an exciting 

beginning. Saskatchewan is alive in 1966, alive in the oil fields, alive in the forests of the north, alive in 

the potash fields, alive in the underground wealth of its mines, alive in the initiative of its business. All 

this did not happen by chance or by luck. The modern capitalistic economy does not automatically work 

at top efficiency. It can only be raised to that level by the intervention and influence of government. 

Government has not only the ability but the responsibility to use its powers to increase production, 

income and jobs. We liberals believe that this can be done without violating freedom or restraining 

competition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — Our economy is booming because the private sector is making it boom. Private 

businessmen made the decisions as to where and when they should invest their money and under what 

conditions. But it is the government that gives business the incentive to expand. This is the difference 

between the Socialists and the new Liberal government. The only solution to the economic conditions of 

Saskatchewan that the NDP had to offer was government control and government ownership, a gospel 

which is politically dead and technically obsolete. The Liberal government took the opposite approach. 

It used its influence to remove controls and get out of business. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

18 

What was done, Mr. Speaker? We removed the monopoly of the Saskatchewan Timber Board, sold 

Wizewood Limited, provided incentives to prospectors, built access roads to mines, negotiated freight 

rates, negotiated taxation privileges for our northern cities, negotiated tax incentives for solution potash 

mines, introduced tax incentives for deep-well oil exploration, provided financial assistance through 

SEDCO, assisted in power installation. This is the influence and leadership we consider to be our 

responsibility. 

 

Presiding over the progress in Saskatchewan is the leadership of Ross Thatcher. To speak of 

Saskatchewan today without mentioning his personal contribution would be omitting the most important 

factor in its growth. He took office two years ago, dedicated to the proposition that Saskatchewan can 

and must grow and develop. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — My association with the Premier has enabled me to watch him at work, to come 

in contact with his energy, a fast paced leader, a man who maintains through all the crises and pressure 

of office his zest, frankness and singleness of purpose, a man with an unshakeable faith in 

Saskatchewan. That my acclaim is not unwarranted is made clear by the Premier’s amazing achievement 

after only two years in office. The curse of Saskatchewan was the mistrust of investors after 20 years of 

Socialism. The power of the Premier lies in his ability to throw out that curse. By his own self-assurance 

and his confidence in Saskatchewan, he has given to investors from Eastern Canada, from Europe, from 

the United States the faith that a new era has come into being in Saskatchewan. People all over North 

America are excited over his achievement. Let me quote the article from the Winnipeg Tribune, the front 

page, the most fantastic article I have ever seen on any individual in Canada. Its headline: 

 

How a Very Alert Premier Got $65,000,000 

 

Here is what the editor comments: 

 

For 15 years Manitoba has been attempting to get a major pulp mill for its north. The Campbell 

government tried, the committee on Manitoba’s future made it a major recommendation in 1963, and 

the Roblin government is still trying. While Manitoba keeps talking the Saskatchewan government has 

just secured a pulp mill for its northern Prince Albert region. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — Perhaps the most interesting feature of Saskatchewan today has been the 

attitude of the NDP. Instead of jubilation over the awakened interest in Saskatchewan’s resources has 

come an attitude of outright hostility. Fearful of lost prestige they have been stumping across the 

province making childish accusations and claiming personal credit. Examine their comments: we started 

the oil industry in Saskatchewan; we brought in the first potash mines; potash is here; the demand is 

great; it has nothing to do with those Liberals or that man, Thatcher. The question is not what they did 

but how much, not when it was done but how effective, now why it was done but at what speed, not how 

much was spent but who paid for it. 

 

The Socialists have always refused to use any yardstick but 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

19 

the depression of the Thirties. They have refused to compare themselves to anyone other than 

themselves. The only image they looked at was the reflected glory of themselves in their own mirror. 

For twenty years like the fairy tale they stood in front of the mirror and asked ―Mirror, mirror on the 

wall, who is the fairest of them all?‖ and with systematic regularity it replied, ―Socialism is the fairest in 

Saskatchewan‖. But now for the past twenty months the mirror has replied, ―There is now one more fair 

then you‖. 

 

Here is an example of their inability to face facts. Here is an article written by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) in the pillar of integrity, the epitome of good reporting, the ―Commonwealth‖. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Heaven forbid! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — It is entitled ―Shockingly False Claims made by Saskatchewan Liberals‖ and he 

goes on to attempt to downgrade the achievements of the past 20 months. In one paragraph I quote: 

 

The Liberal member for Milestone spoke in North Battleford in November. He claimed revenue from 

oil would increase this year by $25,000,000. The actual increase was $5,000,000. His error only 400 

per cent‖. 

 

What are the facts? Taking his figure of $24,000,000 in 1963, oil revenues in 1964 were $30,250,000 

and in early January of this year had netted $38,250,000. By the end of the fiscal year to come they will 

be close to $42,000,000 by March 31st. Six million dollars plus $18,000,000 is $24,000,000. These facts 

are available to him. Let the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) respond to the following facts: 

 

Why was the Saskatchewan timber industry disintegrating while the rest of Canada was experiencing a 

major boom? 

 

Why was the increase to 50,000,000 cubic feet, an increase of over 100 per cent, when construction is 

completed on new companies? 

 

Why in 1963 were there only 10 mining companies and individuals prospecting in our north while today 

there are 62, an increase of over 500 per cent? 

 

Why in 1963 was only $300,000 spent on exploration and mining development whereas today there is 

$8,000,000 – an increase of 26 times? 

 

Why in 1963 were only 12,500,000 acres of crown land being explored by oil companies whereas today 

there is over 34,000,000 and increase of over 150 per cent? 

 

Why have there been no major oil discoveries in Saskatchewan since 1956 whereas seven new oil pools 

have been discovered in 1965? 

 

Why in 1965 are not only eight potash mines committed but 42 additional companies and individuals 

have taken out exploration and development permits, compared to 19 in 1963? 

 

These facts and others are the questions that demand an answer. The NDP have accused us of selling our 

resources of oil, timber and potash to the vested interests. What resources? Mr. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

20 

Speaker? Not one barrel of oil has been taken from the ground without paying royalties. More revenue is 

paid by the potash mines than in 1963. Our new mining companies are Canadian owned, our timber is 

just beginning to reap benefits. Let me tell our NDP friends opposite. No, we didn’t put the potash in the 

ground, nor the lumber in the forests, nor the copper or the oil under our land, but we are developing 

them and we are developing them far and faster than Socialism could ever hope to attain. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Mr. C. MacDonald: — Perhaps they refer to the Guarantee and Fidelity Company of 

Saskatchewan Government Airways, Wizewood Limited or the removal of the monopoly of 

Government Insurance on public buildings, all of which cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer millions of 

dollars. However, despite our progress, Mr. Speaker, here and there we still find detours to yesterday. 

The most substantial ghost of all is the ghost of high taxation. I read, with interest, the newspaper 

clipping from the Leader Post dated January 10th. It was the Leader of the Opposition’s (Mr. Lloyd) six 

point program for Bengough. He called for a $12,000,000 increase in provincial aid to elementary and 

secondary education. He states that with this aid the school units would be able to reduce property taxes 

by four or five mills. A noble gesture by the former leader of the government of Saskatchewan for 

twenty years. The same man who in 1964 with a budget surplus in the neighborhood of $20,000,000 

scorned the idea of tax reduction. The same man, all of us remember his remarks on the subject that a 

government was better qualified to spend the people’s money than the people themselves. I wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, how the people of Bengough will react to his program of tax reduction. The same man, the 

same leader, the same party, who for twenty years increased property taxes 400 per cent, levied over 600 

new taxes, brought about 600 increases in existing tax . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — . . . when spending the other people’s money the Socialists were great 

self-starters but were always short on brakes. They raised taxes on everything from a baby’s rattle to a 

casket to be buried in. Compare this, Mr. Speaker, with the record of the Liberal government in this 

field. We in our first budget one year ago took the following steps: permitted the use of purple gas in 

farm trucks, reduced sales tax from five to four per cent, eliminated the mineral tax on farmers’ land, 

exempted many farm items from sales tax, exempted newly married couples up to a thousand dollars 

from paying sales tax on furniture and other household goods. When we expressed our concern over the 

tax burden of our people we were openly opposed by our NDP friends opposite. Some openly voted 

against purple gas and other tax reforms. We were charged by the sophisticated theorists of socialism of 

being more interested in people than in money. The program outlined in this Throne Speech proves how 

basic is the error of their judgment and their thinking. The basic error of the NDP has always been that 

they put the cart before the horse. When a new service is needed their only solution is to increase taxes. 

We believe that services are related to productivity and expansion, we believe that government has its 

hand far too deep in our pockets at present. The results have been startling. The prosperity of 

Saskatchewan under the Liberal government is the talk of America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

21 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — The door was open and the invitation obvious; the benefits are far beyond our 

optimistic expectations. Despite tax reductions services in every area of government action have been 

expanded, some by startling proportions: in education, in highways, in hospitals, in nursing homes, in 

employment, in wages, in municipal grants, in grid road assistance, in further tax reductions. Let me 

point to the most immediate and direct dividend of the expansion of our industrial economy, the 

Home-owners’ grant. 

 

Firmly believing that property owners were paying far too much of the burden of education and other 

basic services, we are proposing legislation to return directly to the taxpayer a cheque for up to $50 to 

bring a reduction in their tax levy. Property today carries an abnormal share of the cost of essential 

services, services from which in many cases the province and the nation receive the direct benefits. 

Every effort must be made to spread the cost of there services to the province and to the nation as well 

as to business and industry. The Home-owners grant is the dividend of our industrial expansion and 

resource development. It is the royalty from an oil well, a potash or copper mine returned directly to the 

home owner. 

 

It is important, Mr. Speaker, to remember that these benefits are just beginning to flow. The majority of 

these new developments are still under construction or just beginning operations. The real dividends are 

yet to come. Our potential needs in the labor market are also jut beginning – the 35,000 men in the 

potash field, the 3,500 men in the mill and forest operation of the pulp mill, the new base metal mines, 

the oil boom, the expanded forest operations, the secondary industries, the new business opportunities. 

The goal of the Liberal government of providing 80,000 new jobs will be practical reality in the next 

two years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — This, Mr. Speaker, was accomplished for one reason. This government 

recognizes that to bring about full employment demands not only the mobilization of industry, 

resources, and investment. We now face the task of not finding the job for the man but the man to fill the 

job. This is the challenge of 1966. For this reason I urge organized labor to re-examine its position and 

its relationship to the NDP. How can a man serve to masters? Union organizers today are more 

concerned about their political ambitions than about the ordinary working man. 

 

In the Moosomin by-election the people of that constituency witnessed an invasion of union organizers 

from all over Western Canada, unfamiliar with our problems, instructing our farmers how to vote, men 

who did not live in Saskatchewan, did not work in Saskatchewan, did not vote in Saskatchewan, 

exerting pressure in order to dominate the political life of our province. You saw the picture in the 

Leader Post. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government in bringing new industry . . . the ailing 

member for North Battleford (Mr. Kramer) is ailing again . . . to create new jobs will convince the 

working man that Socialism has nothing to offer. 

 

In Bengough union organizers again are at work. It is equally strange to see a new breed of organizer in 

that constituency, federal members of parliament walking the streets of Bengough constituency while 

being paid $18,000 a year to look after the nation’s business. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

22 

Turn for a moment to highways. Every car driver must have experienced moments of frustration over 

the past summer. Wherever you drove in Saskatchewan, in the far north, in the heavily populated areas 

around our cities, in the remote corners of the province, new roads were being built; old highways were 

being rebuilt; existing highways were being oiled and paved. These were built at a rate never before seen 

in Saskatchewan. Good highways are vital to Saskatchewan. We have more miles of highway than any 

other province in Canada. Modern cars and truck make neighbors of every community. We are far 

behind the rest of Canada in the development of a modern highway system. One year ago this 

government increased by 50 per cent its budget on capital construction of highways to a record 

$35,000,000. It is the intention of this government to make another staggering increase in 1966. This is 

long overdue, Mr. Speaker, I want to point to Bengough as a leading example. Like most out-of-the-way 

constituencies it has been a forgotten area in the NDP highway. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. C. MacDonald: — The Leader of the Opposition stated highways would be a major issue in the 

by-election in that constituency. Well, he was right, it will be a major issue. After twenty years in office 

NDP had completed nine miles, I repeat nine miles of oiled surface in that constituency. In 20 months 

we have completed 65 miles. In 1963 the NDP spent a grand total of $21,000 on capital construction in 

Bengough. Last year we spent over $100,000 and the estimated program for 1966 is $700,000. I repeat 

$700,000. I wonder how the people of Bengough, Ogema, Amulet, Assiniboia and the other 

communities feel as they drive down their newly oiled highways. 

 

The NDP spent in Saskatchewan in 1963 the lowest per capita expenditure on highways, the lowest per 

vehicle expenditure on highways, the lowest per mile expenditure on highways, of any province in 

Canada. In a province with the most miles of highways they spent the least. 

 

Let me turn for a moment to education. A few weeks ago the Leader of the Opposition called for a 

massive increase of $12,000,000 in education spending. He said he was willing to take the first step to 

bring in a program to reduce the burden of property taxes. Where has he been, Mr. Speaker,? One year 

ago this government spent an additional $11,000,000 on education plus over $4,500,000 spent in 

supplementary estimates for a total of $15,500,000. Compare this with the record of his government. 

 

His first step on behalf of the property owner is both humorous and ridiculous. It comes from a man who 

was the Minister of Education, Provincial Treasurer, and Premier for over 20 years. The first step - he 

took many steps on behalf of the property owner but all of them were up and none of them were down. 

 

Another new program to reduce the cost of education was the announcement of the program to cover the 

cost of high school text books. This year grade IX books will be free, then expanded each year until all 

high school text books are covered. As a parent I know how much this will save every family with 

children going to school. It is another plank in the Liberal program that has been completed. 

 

This government recognizes that education is the greatest challenge of the 20th Century. Today we still 

have people in 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

23 

Saskatchewan looking for jobs because they do not possess the skill needed in this age of automation. 

Our future and the future of Canada depend on the harnessing of the energy and vitality of our youth. 

We intend to respond to this challenge with massive increases in education spending. We must expand 

university, technical, secondary and elementary education opportunities. 

 

I want to bring to the attention of the house, Mr. Speaker, two other new programs contained in the 

Throne Speech, two programs that are not only new but revolutionary in Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones to rural Saskatchewan. All of us are aware that Saskatchewan Government Telephones does 

not service farm people but only provides the communication links with rural telephone companies. 

Thousands of farmers live in areas where there is no telephone service. In an age of instant 

communication many of our citizens cannot contact their neighbors, their community, or essential 

services in time of emergency. The cost of bringing this service often runs as high as $800 or $900, 

while their friends in town pay nothing but the connection costs and the telephone itself. We believe the 

telephone is a necessity in 1966, not a luxury. In this session you will be asked to inaugurate a program 

to bring telephones to these forgotten areas. 

 

The second is the introduction of a new program directed towards the youth of the province. The 

pressures and demands of youth today are demands to help solve the problems of youth and are 

staggering. Youth today are no longer content to sit and be taught, modern youth are not content with a 

passive role. Mr. Speaker, my time has expired, I want to say that we intend to attack the problems of 

youth head-on, to provide a corps of dedicated human resources to tackled the very difficult and 

complex solutions. 

 

It is with pride that on behalf of the people of Milestone I move, seconded by the member from Last 

Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) the motion for an Address-In-Reply. 

 

Mr. Donald G. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I want to express my congratulations to 

the hon. member for Moosomin (Mr. E. Gardner) on his election to this house and, Mr. Speaker, to state 

my appreciation for the long and devoted service to this legislature by the former member from 

Moosomin, Senator A. H. MacDonald. I wish both these gentlemen long and fruitful careers in their 

respective rolls as servants of their province and country. I wish, Mr. Speaker, to thank the Premier (Mr. 

Thatcher) for the honor he has given the people of the constituency of Last Mountain by choosing me 

for the role I have today. 

 

The Liberal government of this province is a government that is dedicated to the principles of free and 

private enterprise. The advantages of the free enterprise system over the Socialist system advocated by 

the former NDP government can be shown and proven to all. The trial period of the Socialist system in 

this province was 20 years, certainly long enough for anyone or any group to prove a point. This trial 

period has been over in Saskatchewan for almost two years. The results of this experiment have been 

recorded and tabulated for all time. What were the findings and recommendations of this extensive trial 

period? It was found that there was some progress made in Saskatchewan in some fields. The speed of 

this progress is what must be examined. The speed of progress under the CCF-NDP government could 

be likened to the 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

24 

speed of a snail; where Saskatchewan crawled and crept ahead, the rest of the country raced and leaped 

forward. 

 

At the end of the Socialist trail there were many signs that the Socialists had been around. One – there 

were closed-up, defunct crown corporations; two – there were crown corporations floundering in 

financial chaos; three – there was the exodus of our people to other provinces; four – industrial 

stagnation was evident everywhere; five – the existence of our local governments was being threatened 

with over-centralization; six – our people were paying the highest taxes in the country. One could go on 

and on listing the sad signs of Socialism. The recommendation made after the trial run of Socialism was 

certainly predictable. The recommendation was that the Socialist system was a failure; the electorate of 

this province examined the findings of this experiment, studied the recommendation and acted 

accordingly. They turned the Socialist government out of office on the 22nd day of April, 1964. They 

turned over the affairs of this province to a free enterprise government. Saskatchewan after almost two 

years of this government finds itself enjoying economic prosperity never before attained. This is not 

surprising because we now have a type of government that believes in the economic principles that have 

given the people of this entire continent the highest standard of living in the world. This philosophy of 

free enterprise is the form and basis of every government in this nation and in the great and prosperous 

nation to our south. The wealth that provides this high standard of living is produced by the independent 

business man, the corporately owned industry. These people, each group of them, depend on one 

another, working together for the common good. 

 

A government that appreciates their ability to work in this manner, a government that has faith and trust 

in this most successful system is a government that gains the respect and the co-operation of these 

people. This type of government is not a Socialist government but a free and private enterprise 

government. In Saskatchewan today we have such a government, a government that has no desire or 

tendency to gain absolute control over business, agriculture of industry. We have a government that aids 

and works with our farmer, our business man and our industrialist, so that they may become stronger 

and more prosperous in themselves. This government when it took office carefully examined all the 

problems facing Saskatchewan. This government then established a priority for dealing with these 

problems and then determined the action to be taken to solve them. In my address this afternoon I will 

speak of some of these problems and the steps taken to correct them. 

 

Time of day. Time of day has been a great concern to the people of Saskatchewan, not because there 

was a lack of timepieces in our province but the concern has been the setting of the hour hand on our 

clocks and watches. The previous administration in this province failed to bring in legislation to provide 

uniform time zones for Saskatchewan. The time situation in rural Saskatchewan was, and at the moment 

in some areas still is confusing, ridiculous and intolerable. Some towns and their surrounding districts 

had and still have three time zones. The town can be on fast time, the rural districts surrounding the 

town on slow time and the schools can be on half-hour time. 

 

This we all acknowledge to be a ridiculous situation, one that hinders business and commerce by 

breaking traditional trading patterns, one that has resulted in a situation that has become so emotional 

that in some areas in this province rural and town friendships have been torn apart. The success of social 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

25 

Enjoyments such as curling, hockey games, card parties, dances, and other forms of recreation have 

been hindered. Church services, public meetings have been hampered because the towns are on one time 

and the farm people on another. This has been the unfortunate position people outside of our major cities 

have found themselves in, through no fault of their own. I am proud to know that this government will 

take action in this session to solve this problem for what I hope will be for all time. 

 

The lack of a modern highway system in this province was another problem facing this government 

when it took office. There were virtually no roads in our north. There were hundreds of miles of 

highways in the southern part of Saskatchewan that were dangerous to drive on because of dust 

conditions. I will not deny that roads and highways were built and made dust free by the former 

government. What I take issue with here is the slow rate at which these roads were built, oiled and 

paved. Under the former CCF-NDP government we had one of Canada’s most retarded highway 

construction programs. The lack of highway and road development in our north cost Saskatchewan an 

untold amount of money. With little or no road development there was no development of our almost 

unlimited resources in our north. This affected all the people of Saskatchewan, not just the northerners. 

The development of our northern resources means increased revenues and services to all the people of 

Saskatchewan. This government in its first year of office increased the capital budget in the Department 

of Highways by more than 50 per cent over the 1964 program. Approximately 600 miles of 

Saskatchewan highways were made dust free in the past year. Highway construction was going on in 

four points in our vast north. In the high traffic areas, the construction of four lane highways was 

commenced and I am pleased to say, as stated in the Speech from the Throne, that the highway program 

in Saskatchewan will be greatly accelerated in the coming year. 

 

Another problem facing this government was one dealing with an industry that is rapidly becoming 

more complex – agriculture. To meet the changing conditions in agriculture this government is bent on 

providing more services to this basic industry. 

 

An example of a new major service available to the Saskatchewan farmer is the establishment of a long 

overdue soils-testing laboratory. A small soil-testing service has been in existence in the past year; the 

tests made in former years were not completed on time, however, for any spring programs but 

throughout the year whenever possible. In 1964, only 1685 tests were made. On a conservative estimate 

for the future under this new program, with new facilities this laboratory will test 30,000 samples 

annually when it is completed. This laboratory is located on the campus of the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 

 

The need of expanded government assistance to local government was another problem facing this 

government. This government on December 6th, 1965, convened a provincial municipal conference. 

This was the first provincial municipal conference called in almost 10 years. The changing conditions 

faced by local governments warranted such a conference. The main burden faced by all forms of local 

governments has been the increased costs of municipal services. 

 

Municipal government to finance their operations have had to rely primarily on the property tax. This 

government, being concerned about this tax burden, requested local government to state their priorities 

for further government assistance so 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

26 

that they may directly share in Saskatchewan’s new found revenues, gained as a result of our great 

industrial boom. 

 

This conference was of real value to all who participated in it. It gave the provincial government further 

understanding of the problems facing local government. The three local government agencies that 

participated in the conference, namely the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipal Association and the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, 

became more appreciative of each other’s problems. A feeling of mutual trust and co-operation between 

the provincial government and local government has evolved as a direct result of this conference. This 

feeling is one that has not always existed in this province, and I am sure, the fact that it exists now 

means much in benefits to the people of our province. 

 

A direct result of this co-operation and understanding is the proposals listed in the Throne Speech where 

it is the announced intention of this government to: 

 

1. Share the costs of snow clearance on grid roads. 
2. Increase equalization grants for the purpose of extending and improving grid roads throughout 

the province. 

3. To begin paying a portion of the costs of maintaining grid roads. 
4. To relieve municipalities of the responsibility for medical care of indigents and place it with the 

provincial government. 

 

The proper utilization of our water resources was another problem facing this government. Water is a 

commodity that is basic to almost all industry and every livelihood. The importance of water and the use 

of water are well known to any resident of this province. 

 

To assure the proper use and conservation of water, this government has set up the Water Resources 

Commission by proclaiming the Water Resources Act 1964. Further to this, this government has created 

the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board. 

 

The purpose of this board is to construct and administer multi-purpose water supply projects. There are 

for example 21 municipalities in an area south and east of Saskatoon which have for years been short in 

supply of suitable water. A multi-purpose scheme administered by this new board will with the coming 

of industry into this area make available fresh water supply at an economical cost to the people residing 

in that part of our province. 

 

High taxation was still another problem that this government faced when it took office. The high rate of 

taxation in this province has had harmful effects on Saskatchewan and her people. It hindered industrial 

development, and placed hardships on the taxpayer. 

 

This government realizing this took steps in its first legislative sitting to make a start in relieving this 

burden. Under this government Sales Tax reduced from five to four per cent; mineral tax on farm lands 

was abolished; tax on gasoline used in farm trucks abolished, thus the use now of purple gas; 

twenty-four farm items became exempt from the sales tax; for newly married couples there was a sales 

tax exemption of $1,000 on the purchase of major household furniture and appliances. This along 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

27 

with the elimination of many nuisance taxes and fees is the tax reducing record of this administration. 

 

The Speech from the Throne indicates that this government is aware of the fact that additional tax relief 

is still necessary. It is obvious from this speech that this government will continue to soften the tax load 

on the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Efficiency in government was another problem facing this administration when it took office. The 

ever-increasing cost of government itself came under the study of this administration. The expanding 

role of government in today’s society has caused a tremendous growth in government administration, 

responsibilities and government personnel. To be certain that modern and efficient methods are being 

used in government administration, this government set up a Royal Commission on Government 

Administration. This commission after a thorough study submitted its final report on June 15, 1965. It is 

hoped that as a result of this report thousands upon thousands of dollars of taxpayers’ money will be 

saved and that the wishes and desires of the electorate will be achieved with the utmost of speed and 

efficiency. 

 

The most serious problem facing this new government was the lack of wealth producing industry. The 

most spectacular phase of our industrial development is, of course, in the field of mining, potash mining 

in particular. 

 

We have witnessed the announcements of five new potash mines since this government took office. One 

mine has resumed its operation. One mine has announced a major expansion and others are about to do 

so. Five metal and sodium sulphate mines have been announced. Mining exploration is continuing in 

this province at a rate which has never been equaled before in our history. 

 

In the past two years we have witnessed a tremendous revival and expansion in the oil and gas 

industries, with companies once again locating in Saskatchewan. We have witnessed the opening of two 

major chemical plants, one in each of our two major cities. In the north our forest industry has finally 

matured with the long awaited announcement of a pulp mill. This announcement along with the 

announcement of a stud mill, a planing mill and other timber operations will make the forest industry 

one of Saskatchewan/s foremost industries. 

 

There have been many other major announcements concerning the construction industry, the milling 

industry, the machinery and manufacturing industry, the food and retail industry. What does it all mean 

to the residents of our province? 

 

1.It means thousands of new jobs at better pay. 

2.It means social progress and betterment for all our people. 

3.It means a broader tax base with greater government revenues. 

4.It means and has meant tax reductions. 

5.It means the direct sharing of this new wealth with our people in such programs as the $50 

Home-owner grants. 

6.It means that Saskatchewan’s economy is even more stable and that her future is even brighter. 

 

New business confidence has once again been established in the people of Saskatchewan. This is a fact 

because the present government has created a welcome atmosphere for investment in Saskatchewan. Our 

own people are investing their money in this province, other Canadians are doing the same; British, 

European and American capital is being invested in Saskatchewan and this capital is welcomed. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

28 

This is taking place because we have a government that is going out in the business world asking and 

assisting these people to come to Saskatchewan. It is a free enterprise government approaching free 

enterprise people and this alone is a major reason why capital investment is flowing into our province. 

 

This government in the social sphere faced up to another age-old problem, and that was the hardships of 

our Indian and Metis people in this province. The hardships of our Indian and Metis people are well 

known to all of us. Many of these people are living under conditions that would have been labeled 

disgraceful in the 19th century, let alone that it is a fact that they exist now in the 20th century. This 

government recognizes that it is not an easy problem to rectify. This administration recognizes the 

seriousness of their plight and has taken steps to correct this situation. In the past year, as a result of 

legislation passed by this government, an Indian and Metis branch of government has been set up. This 

branch endeavors to assist these people in many different ways. It is not the intention of this branch to 

take over, or assume, any of the responsibilities that the federal government have for the Indian people, 

but to supplement and expand their efforts. Some of the functions of this branch are – to assist the Indian 

and Metis people in the improvement of the community and surroundings they live in; to prevent job 

discrimination against these people; to encourage major employers in the province to hire Indian and 

Metis people; through its job placement offices to locate specific jobs for them. This is just some of the 

work that this branch is devoted to, and by doing this it is just a forward step to solving an age-old 

problem. 

 

These, we feel, are concrete actions taken by a concerned government to help our Indian and Metis 

people obtain a standard of living that we can all be proud of. No longer, we hope, in Saskatchewan will 

we have a second-class citizen, or a citizen that could be described as such by some people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record of this government, and the Speech from the Throne, indicate that Saskatchewan 

residents will continue to enjoy benefits that can only accrue from a government that is dedicated to the 

principles of private and free enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that I take a great deal of pleasure in seconding and supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — I am sure all of us have enjoyed the address of the 

mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne. It is always a most interesting moment at the 

beginning of the legislature, when we listen to the expositions about what the government has done, not 

much reference to what it hasn’t done. The two members who have just taken their seat have 

undoubtedly committed themselves in a way in which their constituents will be proud. I say that they 

were as fluent in language as they were fluid with facts. 

 

The member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) was good enough to say that he was glad to see me back 

in the chamber, and before he had finished I realized why. He needed an inspiration. I may say that if he 

had said something about the activity in which he is engaged, has been engaged during the year, the 

house 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

29 

would have been enlightened and better informed. I find it somewhat surprising that in the Speech from 

the Throne, after all the talk we have had about a Youth Program, there should be a couple of lines, and 

the member who has been chiefly responsible for it, should add about two more lines at this time. It 

seems to be most regrettable, and also significant. I suggest the reason there hasn’t been more said about 

it is simply there isn’t much more that can be said about it. I regret this, because it seemed like some 

good work was being done and I should have thought we would have had some conclusions placed 

before us at this particular time. 

 

He had some difference of opinion with myself with respect to comments on figures which he used in 

the city of North Battleford not long ago. I point out, as I understand him, in attempting to refute what I 

said, that he compared oil revenue for the 1963 calendar year with oil revenue for the 1965-66 fiscal 

year, and this, of course, is not quite the way statistics are meant to be used. May I just add one 

reference, since he introduced it also, to the matter of building roads in a constituency which 

undoubtedly will achieve some acclaim in these corridors in the next few days, Mr. Speaker. He had 

reference to a statement which the Liberal party has been using in advertising over the radio and over the 

television. There are some dust free miles of road in the constituency of Bengough, there are 106 miles 

of them. Seventy four of these were completed during the period of CCF government, another 21 were 

included in the program arranged for in 1964 by this legislature and in our budget. That is 93 out of 106, 

so the Liberals can claim some credit for the remaining 13. They have been going around the 

constituency and on the radio deliberately trying to leave the impression that there are only 9 miles of 

dust free roads in that constituency. That represents the level of the campaign to which the people of 

Bengough have been submitted by my friends opposite. 

 

He made reference also, I note, Mr. Speaker, to the article in the Winnipeg Tribune praising the Premier, 

and this is an interesting article. It shows the picture of the Premier at his coquettish best, may I say. He 

looks a bit like Cupid who still has a couple of arrows to shoot. But I thought the most interesting part of 

this was not mentioned. Speaking of the pulp mill, it refers to the guarantee of a $50,000,000 loan, and 

to the manager of the company, I believe, saying, ―This enabled us to obtain financing on the New York 

market, otherwise it would have been difficult to get that kind of money without an assurance that it is a 

viable project‖. That seemed like a very strange submission. But the next step is even more interesting. 

The Premier is speaking of the return which we are going to receive. The government, of course, is 

putting in some money. He says the province will receive in return 30 percent of the eventual profits but 

goes on, and I quote, ―Mr. Thatcher says he has promised to sell Parsons and Whittemore the province’s 

share at a later date when the operation is well established.‖ In other words it looks as if we are going to 

get the profits during the period when the company is making a loss and when that is over we are going 

to sell it back to them. 

 

There will be no doubt about it, this government welcomes these kinds of developments with open arms; 

sometimes during the embrace they even put money in their pockets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Let me turn to the matter that is before us, about which I am afraid I didn’t learn any 

more from the two members 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

30 

who have just sat down. Namely, the Speech from the Throne. Now it would be incorrect, Mr. Speaker, 

to say that there is nothing that is good and valuable to the people of Saskatchewan in this speech. There 

are a number of items which will be welcome. There are a number of programs to be continued and 

some to be extended which will do a good job for Saskatchewan. Having said that, may I add, that it 

would be incorrect to say also that I was disappointed in the Throne Speech. My disappointment came 

earlier, it has occurred in stages over the past six months as the Premier and members of the cabinet 

dropped the Throne Speech paragraph by paragraph, at Liberal meetings across the province. As a result, 

His Honour had nothing new to say yesterday. 

 

What we heard yesterday was a pasting up of old newspaper clippings, and if it weren’t for the paste 

there would have been nothing to hold the pieces together. You can’t make a newspaper by putting 

pieces of different ones together. Now some of the pieces about which we were told in the Speech from 

the Throne, were put together in Ottawa with the federal government footing eh bill, pieces such as the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, such as the Crop Reinsurance agreement, both matters which have been 

under consideration, and under request, for many years. The re-insurance agreement has been asked of 

Ottawa since before thee was a Crop Insurance Plan. The Saskatchewan Assistance Plan has been 

requested for at least the last four or five years. In the federal-provincial conference in 1963, the 

government of Saskatchewan at that time, is on record as having urged and recommended it twice. 

 

Some of the pieces in this speech were lifted almost word for word out of last year’s Throne Speech. 

Take for example, the reference to education, about which the members over the way have waxed 

somewhat eloquently at times this afternoon. Last year they talked of school grants. What did they say? 

They said that the government would, I quote ―Sharply increase assistance to education‖. The only item 

which was sharply increased was the mill rate throughout the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd: — ―Sharply‖ increasing turned out to be increasing by seven per cent in school grants 

as compared to an increase of 14 per cent the year before. Now this year the promise is for ―sharp 

increase‖ in assistance to education. We have gone from ―sharply increasing‖ to a ―sharp increase‖ 

probably with the same results. 

 

Last year the Speech from the Throne promised that the government would provide for extension of 

technical school facilities. Where are they? No added accommodation for technical school students can 

be found any place in this province. This year – what is the promise? They promise expansion of 

technical training facilities. Last year, extension which produced nothing; this year, expansion. We are 

to have expansion this year of extension of last year, and it still adds up to nothing. Now the government 

did, in taking bits and pieces of last year’s Throne Speech overlook a couple of good bets. For example, 

it overlooked the proposal to legalize wire-tapping, and the Attorney General was on record in the 

Financial Post, I believe, in saying that he hoped to introduce this sometime during this session. 

Interestingly enough, they didn’t include any reference from last year’s Speech from the Throne about 

the Fulton-Favreau formula. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

31 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, there are some other pieces of the Throne speech, these old newspaper clippings, 

which appear to have been selected more for the size of the hole to be pasted over than for what they had 

to say. Look, for example, at the magnificent reference to labor. What does it say? We are going to have 

a ―vigorous work-force policy‖. That is a beautifully enlightening statement, except that I don’t know 

what it means, and I suggest they may have difficulty in interpreting it also. 

 

What do they say about automation? They are going to deal with, and I quote, ―the consequences of 

automation, especially through the reclassification of workers‖. Now, Mr. Speaker, what courage, what 

wisdom, what understanding of a problem of automation! What indeed? Here to cope with the whole 

filed of technological change, to cope with one of the major causes of unemployment and 

under-employment, one of the major causes of human wastage, one of the major causes of social 

disruption and personal human concern, one of the major causes employer-employee problems, to take 

advantage of one of the major hopes for increase production, the government is going to have a 

―work-force‖ policy and a policy of ―reclassification of workers‖. Judged from the Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker, this government is without ideas or intent, and even without interest in this major 

force in the 20th century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd: — I expect that the most remarkable characteristic of this formless, shapeless, 

directionless document of shreds and patches of old newspapers is the spots where the baldness and the 

bareness show through. Look, for example, at the reference, or the lack of references, to health 

problems. No mention here of a base hospital to serve southern Saskatchewan, to be located in the city 

of Regina. This should have been mentioned. No mention here of extension to the University Hospital in 

Saskatoon. There should have been such mention. There would have been such extension now if the 

present government had not gone back on the undertaking of the previous government in that regard. 

 

No mention in the Speech from the Throne of a home for the mentally disturbed, promised two years 

ago when the government destroyed Embury House. There should have been mention here. No mention 

of drugs as an added benefit to medical care; there should have been such mention. This is one of the 

most needed services, one of the most equitable ways of assisting people. No mention here of reduction, 

or abolition of the premiums for hospitalization and medical care. Evidently the Saskatchewan Liberals 

have no faith in the federal Liberals, or else we would have had mention of reduction, or abolition, this 

would have been one of the most equitable forms of tax reduction. This is a . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd: — . . . this is a measure which should stand at the head of the line, it doesn’t even 

qualify for mention from the government which sits opposite. 

 

Add it all up, Mr. Speaker, and you have the great failure of this government revealed now for its second 

successive session. Its failure to understand the needs of our time; its failure to understand the priorities 

it must apply if it is to lead Saskatchewan into the future and not bury it firmly entrenched in the 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

32 

present, facing backwards. It is these failures, some of these needs and priorities I want to turn my 

attention this afternoon and tomorrow afternoon. 

 

I propose, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow afternoon, to deal largely with the problems, the possibilities of 

economic development, and of education. May I turn first of all to the matter this afternoon of public 

services. I suggest that one of the more malignant results of having the Liberal government we have in 

Saskatchewan arises because of its negative attitude toward public services generally. Now, it is true, 

they have added some bits and pieces. They have claimed they are spending more money on education 

and on health than ever before. It is true. But every government in every province in Canada can have 

made that same claim every year for at least the last twelve or fifteen years. There have been some other 

added services here and there, and a number of them good. But by and large, the increases by this 

government have been minimum increases. Not only that, but judging by their public comments, these 

increases have been done grudgingly. They scarcely make a reference to these kind of developments 

without use of adjectives like ―threatening‖, ―frightening‖, ―stupendous‖. This is a government of 

adjectives rather than of substantives, I am afraid. 

 

They failed to emphasize the productive and the humanizing aspects of services like health and 

education. They urge ―Whoa‖ when they ought to be shouting ―Go‖ just as their Ottawa colleagues did a 

few days ago when they rejected motions to increase Old Age Pensions to $100 a month, and decrease 

the age to 65. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — they regard the production of some of the most civilizing and significant human services, 

mostly with regret, seldom with approval, never with understanding. When in 1964 they imposed the 

first of tax increases, increased medical and hospitalization insurance premiums by $210 a family, an 

increase of over one-third, they shirked their responsibilities. They shifted costs to the individual with 

total unconcern for ability to pay. When they maintained that increase in 19643, they continued to shirk 

and to shift. When they failed this year to do anything about it this shirking and shifting continues. 

When they refused in 1965 to recognize the problems of education, they had a chance then; they could 

have done something about what they are talking now, it would have been worthwhile. But they refused 

to recognize the problem of education, held school grants to a very minimum increase; they closed their 

eyes to some human and economic facts. They made inevitable an almost general increase in property 

taxes, they shifted costs to local governments; so that they could claim a tax reduction themselves, they 

restricted the opportunities of school boards to supply needed services. Then they reduced by over 

$100,000 the amount in the estimates for scholarships to students, when they withdrew almost 

completely as a province from loans to students, they demonstrated a vivid lack of interest and lack of 

will to invest in the welfare of young people and in Saskatchewan’s economic future as well. 

 

When they reduced staff occupied in the care of those handicapped by mental difficulties they showed a 

callous disregard for one of Canada’s biggest problems. When they abolished the division for the aged 

to save money, they emphasized their callous disregard for that group. They made their own war, Mr. 

Speaker, they made their own war, not on poverty, but on people who live in a degree of poverty. 

Generalled, field marshalled and 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

33 

captained by the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) with the Premier sitting in the War Office, they 

have given Saskatchewan the name of the toughest and roughest province in Canada with regard to 

people who are in need. All of this and more has been done in the interests of claiming a better balance 

sheet. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, living standards and social standards, quality of living, if you like, are not to be 

determined just by the quantity and quality of goods on the shelves, or tons of potash, or barrels of oil. 

These are important. But the quantity and quality of services we provide publicly are an important 

component, and for many people the most important component, of the living standards they will enjoy. 

Fro many people the opportunity to own homes, to keep healthy, to acquire a complete education, to 

work or not to work if they happen to be ill, to have a reasonable choice to leisure and recreational 

activities, to be partners in the development of our province, depends on the quantity and quality of 

public programs. This government views with alarm and foreboding and regret expenditures on these 

subjects. This government relegates these kinds of programs to second class. 

 

It is because of this that it is certain to fail in helping Saskatchewan people achieve full satisfaction and 

to meet the challenge of the sixties. Mr. Speaker, I ask this government and this legislature to face this 

fact. Many of the shabbier features of our society are due to seeing things, as the government opposite 

does, only in terms of keeping public expenditures to minimum. In looking for answers we too 

frequently look for dollar signs on just one side of the ledger, we fail to look for a return, human and 

economic, in the investment in people. As a matter of fact, too frequently we ask the wrong question. 

The question which should be asked is this: What has to be done to get the public services we need and 

of which we can be proud? What is the fairest way of raising the money? Certainly the restriction of 

government programs which merely shifts costs to other governments and to individuals, which denies 

opportunities, is the most short-sighted kind of activity. It is nevertheless apparently the policy of the 

government which sits opposite. We, on this side, urge the government to at least add some new 

dimension to its thinking, to stop looking at costs of public programs as a threatening and necessary evil 

as minimum and as some kind of malignant character as a maximum. We urge them to admit the value 

of public programs in helping individuals and communities solve the problems of education, of housing, 

of transportation, of recreation, of keeping healthy, of ownership of resources, of water supply, and in 

too many cases of exorbitant interest costs. 

 

I will just add, Mr. Speaker, a quotation which I think is worthwhile all of us looking hard at from a 

writer who says that: 

 

These kinds of problems will never be handled in the style of a great nation until we rid our minds of 

the threadbare prejudices about the role of government, value the things we buy with our taxes as 

highly as those we buy with what is left over after taxes, and distribute our richest treasure, men and 

women, of intelligence and character, more judiciously among the callings and the professions. 

 

I recommend that to the government to look at. 

 

During this session, we in the CCF, will be advancing a number of suggestions of how responsible 

government would beat those problems. Some will be included in the remarks I make in this address, 

some in the addresses of MLA’s, some in private members sills and in resolutions. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

34 

I want to turn to one service which failed to receive any recognition whatsoever in the Speech from the 

Throne which was deserving of a place there. I speak now of rail services provided to the people of 

Saskatchewan. All of us know that transportation is an essential ingredient of a growing economy. 

Transportation services are, some of us believe, or ought to be, instruments of national economic policy. 

The rationale ought to be the needs of the country, not just the balance sheet of the company. Canadian 

railways unfortunately were built in a largely unplanned fashion. There is no reason why they should be 

dismembered, why our province should be denuded of railway branch lines and denied passenger 

service on all lines in the same unplanned fashion. We in Canada have two railways, one of them which 

we own but haven’t paid for, the other one we have paid for but we don’t own unfortunately. Let me 

look a bit at this latter one. 

 

The C.P.R. is a prime example of private enterprise to which much has been given and which has 

continued to take much. We usually think of the aid to the C.P.R. in terms of the original gifts of 

25,000,000 acres of land and $25,000,000. In fact there is much more, The Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics has published a report, September, 1965, entitled ―The Canadian Pacific Railway Company‖. 

In this report we find a table headed ―Aid granted the Canadian Pacific Railway company and other 

companies now comprising the system‖. This shows that cash expenditures and the expenditures in 

construction were undertaken in this way: The federal government over $80,000,000, provincial 

governments over $12,000,000, municipal governments over $5,000,000, a total of over $106,000,000; 

land grants – nearly 33,000,000 acres from the federal government, 11,000,000 acres from the provincial 

governments, nearly 44,000,000 in total. Included were mineral rights, from which sprang oil and mines 

of various kinds. Included was the opportunity to acquire capital, the continuing reward of land and 

minerals and investment of capital made possible by gifts of Canada. The C.P.R. was in many instances 

given valuable local tax concessions, some of which have been regained, some which continue to this 

day. It has built up a tremendous economic empire, it has been allowed, unfortunately and regrettably, to 

strip off by formation of other corporations almost everything from the railway company except the 

rolling stock and the rents, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, the most expensive striptease in the history of 

Canada. 

 

Its most profitable enterprises were made possible by ownership of resources granted them by Canada 

and for which they gave a commitment of continuing services. They are now separated from the railway 

company. The resources we gave for building and operating a railroad are considered by them as their 

rightful heritage, the commitments they gave have largely gone with the smoke of the coal-fired engines. 

 

I submit there are some reasons other than administrative for this stripping off from the rail company. 

Undoubtedly there is not much fun in running a railroad these days. Probably they can make more 

money by investing it in other than the railroad enterprises. They have a vast empire which Canadian 

gifts made possible. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the C.P.R. would like to sell their railway. They would 

continue to enjoy their gifts of Canada and wash their hands of the commitments. There is only one 

buyer, the people of Canada, acting through the federal government. I suggest that the Canadian Pacific 

Railway would like to be nationalized and I suggest that Canada ought to accommodate its interest. 

When the desire of the C.P.R. happens to coincide with the interests of Canada, let’s take advantage of 

the situation. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

35 

Naturally one would expect that the value of the gifts and considerations given would be taken into 

consideration when bargaining about the price. To acquire such ownership for Canada would be one step 

in rationalizing our transportation services which are needed in order to move Canadian goods and 

services in the best interests of Canada. Those in this group continually urge this step, will continue to 

do so. We invite the Saskatchewan government, Mr. Speaker, to give some leadership, at least if they are 

not willing to give leadership themselves, to give some encouragement to those organizations and 

individuals in the province who are giving leadership. 

 

Let me suggest three ways in which they have an immediate opportunity and obligation with regard to 

rail line abandonment with regard to the discontinuing services on the mainline by the C.P.R., and most 

important of all, with regard to the unsatisfactory movement of grain which is denying many farmers use 

of needed cash. Let me just look at a few statistics about this movement of grain, Mr. Speaker, to show 

the deteriorating situation. Look first of all at farm marketings and elevators in Saskatchewan. From 

August 1 to January 26, 1963-64, 176,000,000 bushels had been marketed, last year 151,000,000 

bushels, this year, same period, 153,000,000 bushels. In other words, 20,000,000 bushels less than two 

years ago had been marketed at our elevators. 

 

Let’s look at wheat in transit in Western Canada. On January 29th, 1964, 21,000,000 bushels, January 

27th, 1965, 13,000,000 bushels, January 26th, 1966 only 9,000,000 bushels. Let’s look at quotas at 

delivery points. There are still in Saskatchewan today some 257 delivery points at which the quota is one 

bushel, or two bushels or three bushels. This is 240 more than was the case last year, 240 more on this 

restricted base than was the case last year. Now there are more delivery points this year on the 

four-bushel quota but there are 100 fewer on the five-bushel and there are 350 fewer on the six-bushel 

quota. So that both ends of the picture are worse so far as the Saskatchewan farmer is concerned. There 

is some more evidence about deficiencies in transportation for this purpose reported in the Regina 

Leader Post February 3rd, an article under the title of James Richardson and Sons Company. We read, 

Mr. Speaker, from that: 

 

The facts are there are nine terminals at the Pacific coast, including six at Vancouver, with a capacity 

of almost 25,000,000 bushels. As of last Monday there were only about 12,000,000 bushels of grain 

and oil seeds in store – far below working capacity. To meet the heavy sales commitments from 

Pacific ports this winter a daily unload of about 550 cars is required and the average daily unload for 

the month of January was 395 cars. 

 

Later on it says, ―Other segments of the trade are also suffering from the transportation slow-down from 

country points. The case in point is the shorts in January rape seed‖. It is quite plain, I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are very real deficiencies in transportation. Governments must be more interested 

than they have been in this. Plainly farmers are being denied cash because they can’t sell the grain on 

which they have already paid the cost of production. 

 

We turn to the second of the items I mentioned on which we need some immediate leadership. Note the 

events since the latest C.P.R. proposal to withdraw still more passenger services. If this withdrawal 

keeps up we will be sending our children to the Western Development Museum to see a C.P.R. 

passenger car. The same day that the federal Board of Transportation agreed to this latest 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

36 

withdrawal, I, speaking for this group, urged the provincial government to ask the federal government to 

intervene. The next day the provincial government did so. Since then, now some weeks ago, the 

provincial government, according to press reports, has been studying the matter. In the meantime, thank 

goodness, the mayors of Regina, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, have been acting. The Premier of Manitoba 

has taken a strong stand on it, so has the Premier of Alberta. He urged the three prairie provinces to get 

together on it. On January 27th, the best our Premier could say about it on the radio was this: 

 

We are certainly going to go along with them. (The Premier has suggested something) he says, we are 

certainly going to go along with them, and there are merits on both sides. 

 

There are, Mr. Speaker, and it is high time the Liberal government of Saskatchewan decided which side 

it was on, the side of the people of Saskatchewan or the C.P.R. 

 

Let me ask that your contract this we’ll-go-along attitude with that of the CCF government when many 

branch rail lines were threatened with abandonment. At that time we took the leadership in getting the 

three prairie provinces together; included in the meeting were representatives of farm, municipal and 

business organizations. Branch line abandonment was not stopped but certainly it was stayed, and I am 

sorry to have to add at this point that proposed action by the Liberal government at Ottawa again 

threatens many branch rail lines. All of us know that Bill C-120 was before parliament more than a year 

ago; there has been no suggestion that there will be changes other than minimum in that bill. It is going 

to set up a proposed rationalization authority which again may stay abandonment. It does away with the 

requirement that there would have to be public hearings; decisions are going to be on the basis of the 

railway’s balance sheet. The rationalization proposed by Bill C-120 means easier branch line 

abandonment, not even planned abandonment but on a piecemeal basis. I note the comment of the 

President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, quoted in the October 1st issue, 1965 of the Western 

Producer, when he said that 

 

If the bill is passed in its present form the way will be open for the railway companies to tear up the 

tracks from all but a few branch lines in western Canada during the next fifteen years. 

 

The resulting action from this can affect one-third of the agriculture acreage of Saskatchewan, can affect 

millions of bushels of storage capacity, can affect hundreds of communities, can add to road 

construction and maintenance costs per province and municipality, can increase production costs for 

farmers because they will have to move goods more miles and they will need larger and more expensive 

trucks. 

 

It must be opposed at the level of the provincial government, it ought to be opposed at the level of this 

provincial government. If it is passed in the form proposed, it should be opposed in every community in 

Saskatchewan. We need leadership we are not getting, I suggest, from the government opposite. It is the 

most pressing agricultural problem which didn’t even get mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. The 

Speech from the Throne is vocal about more liquor outlets; it is quietly quiescent about fewer train 

services. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

37 

Let me just say a bit about this matter of liquor outlets as proposed in the Speech from the Throne. We 

are told that the demand exceeds the supply in regard to liquor outlets. Now here is a profound statement 

to be included in the dialogue of this kind. And so the government proposes to transfer more of the 

handling, the sale and control of liquor from public to private authority. The Speech from the Throne 

says this: ―We, the government will continue the policy of closing some stores in small villages where 

the population does not justify a regular type of store‖. Now, Mr. Speaker, the question which must be 

asked is while this is what the Speech from the Throne says, is this what the policy of the government 

has been? Has the policy been to add private outlets only in ―small villages where the population does 

not justify a regular store‖. This we were led to believe was to be the policy last year, this we are led 

again this year to be the policy. 

 

Let’s look at some examples, let’s look for example at the community of Churchbridge. The liquor store 

was closed there and a private outlet opened. The liquor store, incidentally, was moved from 

Churchbridge to Langenburg. The population of Churchbridge 778, Langenburg a little bit bigger 1,126. 

It is interesting to note that Churchbridge has grown in the last four years by 124 per cent, whereas 

Langenburg grew only 49 per cent. I submit one of the criticisms of this policy, Mr. Speaker, is that it 

lends itself to political manipulation – that’s what certainly happened in this case, a policy based not on 

population but on the politics of the voters. Now if the policy is that small stores are to be closed, then 

private outlets established in small villages, let’s look. Oxbow – population 1,750, is Oxbow a small 

village by Saskatchewan definition, was there a liquor store in Oxbow to be closed? The answer I submit 

is not, but there is a private outlet there now. Take Redvers – population 1,160, not a small village by 

Saskatchewan standards. I think no liquor board store was operating there before but there is a private 

outlet there now. Take Whitewood — population over 1,000, not a small village by Saskatchewan 

standards. No store there to be closed but a private outlet there now. Mr. Speaker, the point is the actions 

of the government have not been the policy spelled out in the Speech from the Throne, last year or this 

year, and this house is entitled to know why not. How many more private outlets next year and the year 

after next? How long until a very large amount of the handling and sale of liquor in this province has 

been turned over from the public to private interests. 

 

I was surprised, Mr. Speaker, that neither the mover or the seconder spoke of a supposed distinction 

which has come to Saskatchewan this year when our Premier was named the first salesman of 

Saskatchewan or something like that. Incidentally, it was a title which shouldn’t have surprised anyone. 

There are a great many people in the province who had given it to the government long before it was 

officially expressed. Let me just take a few minutes to examine what the Liberal government has sold in 

the period of 20 months. Well they sold Saskair and boast about it. The real price and the public cost we 

don’t know. They sold the investment in Wizewood for about sixty cents on the dollar. They had 

millions of dollars to put into, or to guarantee for a heavy water plant at Estevan without an agreement 

on a process that was unproven, but they didn’t have a penny to try to save and keep the ownership of 

Wizewood in Saskatchewan hands. They sold oil belonging to Saskatchewan people if it is discovered in 

deep wells for no royalty at all until after 1970. They have sold potash at rates already too low for an 

extended period of time to a number of companies. 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

38 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — You sold us out . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — You extended it to more people to get in on a price which was given to companies who 

had done a lot, risked a lot and succeeded in starting the industry long before the Liberals took office. 

They have sold vast tracts of forests to the Simpson Lumber Company at a price we don’t yet know. 

They gave away taxes, not of the province, but of local government by an unnecessary, unwarranted, 

unproductive cut to Canada Cement when it extended a plant near Saskatoon. It is prepared to sell out 

the protection and the savings which Saskatchewan people have enjoyed by owning and operating their 

own insurance company. Let me refer to a statement made by the Premier on CKRM radio on January 

27th. According to him the private companies were not in a position to handle license plate insurance on 

automobiles this year and so the Premier’s words ―for at least another year we have continued the 

automobile insurance‖. Then to further describe Liberal policy he added this: ―We’ve sold four of the 

crown corporations now‖, (It was boasted about this afternoon) ―but the insurance company is one 

which we do not propose to sell, certainly not in the near future‖. I would like to know what his 

definition of near future is. After the Bengough by-election, after the Canora by-election, when the 

private companies are ready to make a deal? This province needs some assurance about this. So far as 

this side of the house is concerned we are prepared to insist to the full extent of our ability that the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office be not sold either after Bengough or after Canora. 

 

They sold out Saskatchewan farmers by discontinuing the agricultural machinery testing program. They 

sold out a group of unfortunate Saskatchewan children and their parents when they closed down Embury 

House. They have sold, as I have just said, some of the control which the people had over the sale of 

alcoholic beverages. Advertising has been encouraged, beer salesmen have been encouraged, 

sponsorship of events by breweries, increased hours of sale. They have taken some action and they have 

more proposals to make to turn more of the sale of alcoholic beverages over to private industry. The 

compensation not yet known but some of it here. They have sold educational opportunities at a higher 

price by restricting school grants and forcing taxes up. They have sold opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people because of their procrastination in extending technical school facilities. They have sold out the 

hope for many of Saskatchewan’s older people when they dismantled last year the division of services 

for the aged and dismissed the competent director, Miss Lola Wilson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other comments which I want to make tomorrow. Before I take my seat and ask 

for adjournment, I would like to turn to one or two more pleasant and less controversial topics. I want to 

join with those who have welcomed the newly elected member for Moosomin (Mr. E. Gardner). There 

are a number of us who did everything we could to prevent him from having the problems of people 

who sit in this house, but since he was unwilling to act according to that direction, we welcome him 

here. We hope be finds his experience and his association pleasant in every way. 

 

I want also, Mr. Speaker, to associate myself with your words yesterday on behalf of this group in 

welcoming our Clerk who is visiting with us this year. We have a great respect for Mr. Koester and we 

are happy to see that he has the opportunity to advance his education. We are happy that he goes away 

for that reason and we 



 

February 9, 1966 

 

 

 

39 

feel confident since he is away we are going to be very well served indeed by our present Clerk (Mr. 

Bradshaw). I endorse what you said yesterday about the value of exchanges of this kind and further 

exchange which I hope, Sir, you along with others, will attempt to arrange. 

 

I welcome also, Mr. Speaker, the new Sergeant at Arms. He was for many years an employee in the 

Department of Education, a department over which I presided so badly for so many years, according to 

the member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) earlier this afternoon. He was a good employee of that 

department and I am sure he will serve this assembly well. I regret to say that I have many regrets in 

regard to the way in which the path was opened for him to come here. So far as he, himself, is concerned 

I can assure him every co-operation, we will try to only have a minimum number of candidates for him 

to remove from the house in any one day. Having said that I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate Adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:29 p.m. 

 


