




















































Hansard: March 16, 1966


1215 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

27th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 16, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2.30 o'clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mrs. M. Cooper (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to call the 

attention of the members of the house to a very fine group of students, 33 in number, in the Speaker's 

gallery. They come from Holy Rosary School which is in Regina West constituency, they have their 

teacher, Mr. Guy, and I am sure you would all like to join with me in welcoming them here today and 

hope they enjoy their stay and that they find it an educational opportunity. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, and members of the legislature I would like to 

bring to your attention a very fine group of business men and women from the metropolis of Carrot 

River, that is part of my constituency, a really outstanding group of people, who have come to the 

legislature to see the operations of the legislature and to enjoy the day. I certainly wish them welcome 

on your behalf and hope they enjoy this occasion. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say something about a group of students 

who are, I am informed, in the gallery today, a group of 45 students from Sutherland School, which I 

hasten to assure hon. members is in Hanley constituency. At least I haven't heard of any new perfidies 

by the Premier. Sutherland School is the school where my two oldest children got their public school 

education. It is one of the finest schools in Saskatchewan. They are here with Mr. Hunt and Mrs. 

Bradseth and Mrs. Thompson. I want on behalf of yourself, and all hon. members to welcome them here 

and to express the hope that they will have an enjoyable time and that when they get home they will find 

that they are still part of the constituency of Hanley. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS FOR MARCH 15TH 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When the votes were being prepared last night I discovered that three amendments 

moved by members in the course of debate were no longer in the file in which I normally keep them, a 

long search failed to bring them to light. The amendments are as follows — No. 1, an amendment by the 

hon. member for Regina East (Mr. Smishek) to the proposed resolution no. 8, moved by the hon. lady 

member from Saskatoon City (Mrs. Merchant). The assembly adjourned consideration of this 

amendment. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1216 

No. 2, an amendment proposed by the hon. Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) to a motion 

by the hon. member for Saskatoon City for Return no. 112, consideration of which amendment stood 

adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

No. 3, an amendment proposed by the hon. Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) to a motion 

by the hon. member for Saskatoon City. The assembly adjourned consideration of this amendment. 

 

The record in the Votes and Proceedings of the assembly's action on these amendments is accordingly 

defective. I have asked the Clerk, after consulting the members concerned, to issue a revised version of 

the Votes and Proceedings for yesterday's sitting. If we should happen to reach any of these adjourned 

motions today, I will have the correct form of these motions and related amendments ready to circulate 

to members. I apologize for the inconvenience caused by this untoward event. To avoid a possible 

recurrence may I ask members when moving amendments to have a copy delivered to the Clerk's table 

in addition to the copies handed in to the Speaker. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER (2) 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yesterday evening while the chair was putting a question the hon. member from 

Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) raised two points of order and asked for rulings thereon, which I said I would 

bring in today. 

 

The first point the hon. member raised was whether smoking is permitted during a sitting and in answer 

thereto I must inform him that it has never been the custom of the house to allow members to smoke 

except when the house is in committee. I hope that this custom will be continued and that all hon. 

members will observe it. 

 

The second point raised was whether members can enter the chamber and take their seats while a 

question is being put. Standing Order no. 10, subsection 2, states as follows: 

 

When Mr. Speaker is putting a question no member shall enter, walk out of or across the assembly or 

make any noise or disturbance. 

 

Citation 64 of Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms defines "putting the question" as follows: I 

quote: 

 

'Putting the Question' means the reading of the motion or amendment from the Chair before the votes 

are called and recorded. When debate begins on a certain motion, amendments may be made; and a 

member who was present at the outset may leave the house only to return when division is about to 

take place. The motion to be voted upon may then be different from the one he heard read, but it must 

be set forth by the Speaker who says: 'The Question before the House is as follows', and he reads the 

motion or amendment, and that is what is called 'putting the Question'. When the Question is put, a 

member must be in the House or else his vote cannot be recorded. 

 

and I put emphasis on the word recorded. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1217 

I would remind members that after an amendment has been determined by voice or recorded vote and 

before the next question is called for, further amendments can be moved. 

 

It would appear from the foregoing that members may enter the chamber while the less formal voice 

vote is being collected but that they may not enter after the Speaker has risen to put the question before a 

recorded vote. I doubt if the Speaker has the authority under any other circumstances to deny an elected 

member the right to take his seat. But I must point out that for the better order of the house and for the 

prevention of confusion it has ever been held improper for members to walk around the chamber while 

the Speaker is on his feet. I would, therefore, ask members when entering the chamber to take their seats 

by the shortest possible route. 

 

QUESTION RE ANNOUNCEMENT OF REDISTRIBUTION 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called, I 

rise on what I think is a proper question of privilege, and on behalf of the whole assembly. I think it is 

generally accepted that when the assembly is in session, announcements of government intentions or 

policy proposals will be made to the assembly before being made to the general public. In this morning's 

paper I read that the Premier in speaking last night to the Municipal Convention announced that 

legislation to permit redistribution of provincial constituencies will be introduced in the legislature soon. 

In addition to raising the question of privilege, Mr. Speaker, may I ask the Premier if soon is meant to 

define this session. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — I certainly meant this session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A further question, may I ask the Premier, Mr. Speaker, if he is considering reference of 

the matter of redistribution to a Distribution Committee such as the procedure followed by the federal 

government and still being pursued? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No, Mr. Speaker, we are going to proceed exactly the way the Socialists did in 1963. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, we had some hopes, of course, that the hon. members opposite might had 

learned something but this is a lot to look for. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, a few minutes ago when you called for introductions, my group 

hadn't quite arrived yet, and I hope that Your Honour will permit me now, on the Orders of the Day, to 

say that a fine group of youngsters from Sutherland School have now arrived. We hope they will benefit 

from the proceedings and that on their return to Sutherland they will tell their classmates that they 

enjoyed the proceedings and that they benefited from them. I join with you, Mr. Speaker, in wishing 

them a pleasant day and a safe return home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1218 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Referring to the students who were introduced by the 

member for Hanley, I think he did a better job the first time than he did the second time when he was 

more eloquent. If it would assist the proceedings in any way I would be glad if a copy of what he said 

the first time was given to those students. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE FEDERAL PROVINCIAL SCHOOL GRANTS 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, another question before the Orders of the 

Day. I direct this one to the Minister of Education. Is it correct as it is reported in a news item in this 

morning's paper that applications by school districts in order to qualify for federal-provincial 

government grants covering 75 per cent of capital costs (and this has reference to what is being called 

vocational schools) have to be in by April? Is it correct that the applications for this assistance must be 

in by April? 

 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — I have made no statement to that effect. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, that wasn't my question. I didn't mean to attribute the statement to the minister or 

any member of his department. The statement here is that it is the impression of one school board, and I 

was wondering if it is or is not correct? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I will make a statement later. 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — I would like to have the ear of the Minister of Public Works 

(Mr. Gardiner) on question of privilege affecting the privileges of all members. I have in my hand an 

envelope from A.M. Nicholson, member of the legislative assembly. This letter was mailed in Saskatoon 

on Sunday night, 10.30, and it was addressed to Mrs. Wallace who is the secretary for members' room 

263, Legislative Buildings. I phoned Mrs. Wallace on Monday morning to say that I wouldn't be here, 

and that it was important that this material be typed for me by noon on Tuesday. This letter apparently 

was sent to the Department of Education where it was marked "not education", and it was delivered to 

me today. Mr. Speaker, I realize nothing can be done about this but it is the first time in my long life that 

I have ever had to complain about postal service. I would appreciate it if the Minister of Public Works 

(Mr. Gardiner) would make sure that other members should not have letters which are clearly addressed, 

as this one is, have it run around and be delayed some 48 hours before they are delivered. 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — I can assure the hon. member Mr. Speaker, that I 

will look into this matter, and see what the explanation is. I am sure that 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1219 

I would like to say that if there has been an error on the part of the postal staff in my department, that I 

would as minister accept responsibility for that error, but I will definitely look into it and see what the 

problem was. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if I might continue. I think it is important, the question I raised with the 

Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp), he said he would make a statement soon on the matter. The reference 

is that application has to be in by April. We are now at the middle of March, and past it, and I trust the 

announcement will not be too long delayed. I wonder if the minister can indicate when we may have the 

information. 

 

Mr. Trapp: — Well, I want to read the statement first myself. Then I shall give you a statement. 

 

QUESTION RE POST-DATED GRANT CHEQUES, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

 

Mr. F. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Education. Is it true that some grant cheques or cheques for other purposes 

that have been sent to school units are post-dated cheques. If so, how many cheques have been sent out 

or are post-dated? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — I know nothing of such cheques, I can assure you. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): moved second reading of Bill No. 2, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Youth Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, you will recall that when I introduced the Saskatchewan Youth Act last year I 

indicated that the first function of the Youth Agency was to study programs available for youth in this 

province and make recommendations as to the adequacy of programs for youth in the province, whether 

any gaps existed, and what measures should be taken to encourage and develop meaningful activity in 

this important area. 

 

The study document "Youth in our Time" prepared by the Provincial Youth Review Committee and the 

Provincial Youth Agency sets out their findings and recommendations. The report, Mr. Speaker, stresses 

the need for the continuation of this government agency to co-ordinate the activities of the various 

official and voluntary agencies involved in this field, and to promote the development of leadership 

courses in Saskatchewan. 

 

The report also emphasizes, Mr. Speaker, the need to give financial assistance for the development of 

youth programs and facilities in the province. This bill, Mr. Speaker, contains amendments to enable 

grants to be made for this purpose and to enable the government to enter into agreements with Canada 

and other provinces and agencies. The purpose of the grants will be for the promoting of youth 

leadership programs and the creation of community recreation programs. Grants will also be made to 

provincial voluntary organizations to assist them in their youth work. It is also intended, Mr. Speaker, to 

give travel grants and grants for the holding of seminars and conferences among other things. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1220 

Mr. Speaker, we have given the report "Youth in our Time" general distribution, because I am sure that 

many people of the province will be interested inn the recommendations and the conclusions found in 

this excellent report. I would, at this time, Mr. Speaker, like to pay tribute to the members of the 

Provincial Review Committee, who are Dr. Lloyd Barber, Chairman, Professor John Leicester, 

Vice-Chairman, Mrs. L.J. Fournier, Mr. W.C. How and Professor E.W. Stinson. These people travelled 

hundreds and hundreds of miles; they held meetings in a great number of places throughout the 

province; they worked extremely hard; they showed a great dedication to the task that they were asked 

to perform, and I think they have produced an excellent report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like at this time to pay tribute to Dr. Nixon. You may recall that Dr. Nixon 

came to us from the University of Saskatchewan under contract, and we asked him to develop a plan for 

a youth program. We didn't give him a great deal of time and I think that he has done an outstanding job 

in a relatively short length of time. But in this work he was ably assisted by Mr. Cy MacDonald, the 

MLA for Milestone, who took this project on as his special task when he was Legislative Secretary to 

the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart), and I think again that he did excellent work. Together, Mr. 

Speaker, these two men with the help of their committee and many, many other people throughout the 

province have developed what I think is a frame work for a great work in the important field, the 

important field of youth, and I feel that we all owe them a great debt of gratitude. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, the greatest natural resource that any nation or any province has, of 

course, is people, and a very important part of this resource naturally is our youth. We through this act 

are attempting to give leadership in this great field. I am convinced that it is one of the most enlightened 

steps ever taken in this house. I do sincerely hope that it receives the unanimous support of this 

legislature. It is my privilege to now move second reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on the second reading of the 

amendments to the Saskatchewan Youth Act, I want to first take a few minutes to comment on the 

activities of the Saskatchewan Youth Agency over the past year. First, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that 

this report was delayed for two reasons. First because the initial step in our program was an 

investigation, a study, a program of research, and I wanted that research program to be completed, the 

report to be tabled in this house, so that each member of the assembly would have an opportunity not 

only to read it but to study it. 

 

Second, the reason for the delay was that after tabling the report "Youth In Our Time" I wanted each 

member of the assembly to have the opportunity of studying it so that they would be able to comment 

intelligently after having studied and read the report. Prior, Mr. Speaker, to the last provincial election, 

the Premier expressed as one of the campaign planks of the Liberal party the aspiration to establish a 

service for youth in the province of Saskatchewan. During the 1965 session of the legislature an act was 

passed for the promotion of the physical, social and cultural activities for the youth of the province. This 

agency was officially established on May 1st of 1965. Dr. Howard Nixon of the University of 

Saskatchewan was hired as the Executive Director. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1221 

I was given the responsibility of guiding the work and direction of this new agency. 

 

May I say first, Mr. Speaker, that I have enjoyed every minute of my association with this agency; I 

have found the work interesting, challenging and rewarding. Perhaps no area of human endeavor 

generates more enthusiasm among people of all walks of life than working with young people. 

 

Our first task was to determine precisely what role the government should play in providing programs 

and services to young people. To rush headlong into a program could have been both dangerous and 

disastrous. Today in our province, and across the nation, are thousands of dedicated men and women 

who volunteer their time and effort to direct and operate youth programs. To interfere or challenge this 

responsibility without first assessing the needs could have, indeed, been disastrous. To ascertain the 

government's role we first set out on a research program into every area of government, voluntary and 

community youth services. The terms of reference were left broad in order that no avenue might be left 

untouched. 

 

In an attempt to answer the questions the following procedures were undertaken. First, a general review 

of present government programs which are directed towards youth was undertaken. This review was 

accomplished through a series of questionnaires, interviews, and field visitations. Second, throughout 

the summer months a team of research assistants, together with the Executive Director visited a hundred 

and eighteen communities in the province. During this time community leaders as well as government 

field staff were interviewed. Interviews were held with mayors, reeves, councillors, priests, ministers, 

school teachers, school superintendents as well as volunteers working with young people. Hundreds of 

young people were also consulted so that some insight was gained into the present thinking of youth. 

The third step was public hearings. The Provincial Youth Review Committee was established under the 

chairmanship of Dr. Lloyd Barber, Dean of the School of Commerce in the University of Saskatoon. 

Named to this committee, as the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) has pointed out, were Mrs. Fournier of 

Prince Albert, Mr. W.C. How of Regina, Professor Leicester of Saskatoon, Professor E.W. Stinson of 

the University of Saskatchewan. A series of public hearings were held in eight selected communities 

throughout the province. These were Naicam, Canora, Prince Albert, Yorkton, Regina, Saskatoon, North 

Battleford and Swift Current. The hearings began in October and occupied a period of 12 days. In all 

some 242 briefs were received and 183 were publicly heard. 

 

I want to say a word, Mr. Speaker, on the calibre of the briefs presented. All of us were impressed and 

gratified with the interest and the enthusiasm shown. There are thousands of dedicated people involved 

in our youth programs. We also found hundreds of high quality programs that are now in operation. To 

Dr. Barber and his committee, I want to say that they won the admiration of the public, those presenting 

the briefs, and I believe the press, in the way in which they conducted the hearings and their penetrating 

analysis of programs and problems. 

 

The fourth method was the search through literature and, of course, the traditional approach was used, 

that of reading through all available and recent literature. Documents also were obtained from Europe 

and the United States, also from every province in Canada. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1222 

Fifth we made a contact with other provinces. Visits were made to the provinces of New Brunswick and 

Ontario. In these provinces programs and projects are presently under way of a similar nature to those 

now going on in this province. In addition, information and ideas have been exchanged between all of 

the provinces of Canada. I want to say that I also had the pleasure of visiting New Brunswick and 

Ontario, I talked to the minister, the Executive Director of the Department of Youth in New Brunswick. 

We visited and spent a day with the Executive Director and his research team in the province of Ontario. 

I was impressed with the work that is being done and the ideas that they put forth. 

 

The last method, of course, was to give the opportunity for young people to speak their mind. As 

mentioned previously, hundreds of young people were contacted and interviewed regarding their 

aspirations and expectations. In addition, 22 public briefs were solicited from young people who spoke 

freely of their desires and their hopes for the future. Mr. Speaker, we found six basic issues which must 

be faced realistically, if we are to attempt to implement a program of service for young people in the 

province. If our youth are to be able to confront the new challenge of automation, technological 

advance, and of course, the new leisure time that follows, then certainly we in this assembly, we as 

parents, we as adults, must be willing to give more extensively of our time, our effort and our resources 

than we have done in the past. 

 

We found five basic problems. First, the co-ordination of programs for young people is practically 

non-existent. Consequently large gaps exist between programs offered from various levels of 

government and various voluntary organizations. Similarly the overlap between programs and the 

duplication of services through these programs is also very evident. Second, the lack of leadership is 

probably the most serious issue of the day. For a multitude of reasons there seems to be an ever 

diminishing supply of volunteers and professional leaders in the field of youth work. I think all of us 

will admit that we cannot exchange or substitute money, facilities or equipment for strong qualified 

influential leadership. 

 

The third problem was due to the fact that, although Saskatchewan today is probably more wealthy than 

at any time in its past there seems to be a lack of facilities for qualified, diversified, youth programs. It 

has been observed that in many instances these facilities actually do exist but because of a lack of a past 

concern for the full utilization of those facilities many of them stand vacant for a goodly portion of the 

year. 

 

Fourth, an obvious deficiency exists in the depth and breadth of programs suitable to challenge young 

people. The desire for personal involvement in program planning and operation is most apparent from 

young people's point of view. The recent programs' offerings seems to be almost invariably directed 

toward adult ends rather than toward the ends of young people. It seems obvious that most programs do 

not involve more than a very small portion of the eligible youth population. There is also a need for a 

larger financial investment in a great number of our youth programs. In particular can be singled out 

programs which are directed toward the very young, toward girls, and toward the age group in their 

early twenties. 

 

Also programs which could be classified as social, or cultural, certainly need a great deal more 

encouragement. The report says that the multitude of confusion regarding youth, its 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1223 

aspirations, its needs and valid action to offset these needs is fairly apparent. Every one seems to have a 

theory but no one seems to know the answer. There is an obvious need for a continual research program 

in the area of young people and young people's programs. The findings of the research carried on by the 

Saskatchewan Youth Agency are contained in the report "Youth In Our Time" tabled in this house a 

week ago Monday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about the report itself. First, I am impressed with the report. In a very 

few months, Dr. Nixon and Dr. Barber have produced a report of high excellence. The honest sincere 

approach, the comprehensive coverage, the documented evidence will provide excellent guidelines for 

government action now and in the future. They are to be congratulated on a job well done, I hope every 

member of the legislature will make this report part of their reference library. If you will note, they do 

not suggest that in the limited time at their disposal they have exhausted the subject, nor do they suggest 

that their findings are conclusive. In fact, the opposite is true. One of the basic recommendations in the 

report is that the youth agency would be a research centre for youth activities, which emphasize the need 

for continual investigation to keep abreast of the times and to keep informed of the changing patters, 

interests, and problems of young people. 

 

I also want to point out that, as stated in the report, it contains a bias, a bias toward youth. When 

evaluating a program we concerned ourselves with how it provided a service to young people, not to 

agriculture, health, or any other department of government. You will also not that the report contains 

many recommendations directed towards other various departments of government. It was felt that each 

of the 66 recommendations made should be directed towards that area where action might be expected. I 

hope that each department of government, and each minister involved will consider carefully the 

recommendations made. I hope that they will be guidelines to future action on their part. I have not time 

to cover all the recommendations directed towards each department, but I would like to take one as a 

practical example of a real program. 

 

A. Making funds available to the university to improve, enlarge and expand its facilities for training 

full-time and part-time guidance personnel. 

 

B. Making an immediate survey of present services and future demands. 

 

C. Providing additional scholarships, bursaries and other aids to attract and train the required personnel. 

 

D. Ensuring that one trained guidance person be attached to each superintendency in the province and a 

comparable number in the city schools and technical schools. 

 

As pointed out in the report the present division of guidance and special education directs nearly all its 

attention to special education. It assists in helping educate children with programs for the deaf, 

emotionally adjusted programs, hearing and speech programs, crippled children's programs and many 

worthwhile and good projects. But, Mr. Speaker, little or nothing is presently being fulfilled for 

guidance or counselling in this age of automation. 

 

We have heard much from the members of the opposition 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1224 

regarding technical training. Yet, Mr. Speaker, they provided no machinery to direct students into 

channels of learning according to their ability and their interest. Everywhere that we went we listened to 

briefs from all over Saskatchewan with strong demands for counselling services. This is one area of the 

report that I hope will stimulate action on the part of the department concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to comment on the overall approach recommended in the report, that is the 

ultimate goal, what direction should be taken, how should this be achieved. First it recommends the 

establishment of the Provincial Department of Youth and Cultural Affairs. However, Mr. Speaker, the 

report warns, and I concur with it, that caution must be exercised. Youth needs and programs are without 

bounds and no government should initiate massive subsidized give-away programs. The report strongly 

advises that the government's purpose should be to assist, encourage, promote, rather than compete or 

interfere. Our objective must be to help communities help themselves. Our task must be to encourage 

communities, voluntary organizations and young people to stand on their own feet. It points out that 

program possibilities are without bounds and that a saturation point is very difficult to measure. It 

emphasizes that the approach must be motivational and complimentary to the great work already being 

done by the many thousands of volunteers in this field. It warns of the danger of attempting to replace 

the personal involvement of this volunteer army of dedicated peopled with a tax-supported structure. 

 

In our proposed program, Mr. Speaker, to initiate youth services in Saskatchewan we will attempt to 

follow this approach. We have no intention of dominating, controlling, or interfering in existing 

programs. We only want to supplement and reinforce those quality youth programs now in operation 

throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that you and many members of this house are interested in what action will be 

taken this year if this assembly passes the amendments to this bill. Let me first outline the organizational 

structure that will be used to initiate the first step of this program. First a Committee of Youth. This will 

be composed of 11 young people in the province between the ages of 16 and 21, from various centres 

and representing youth interest throughout the province. It will meet two times a year to advise on the 

effectiveness of our present programs and to advise on current needs and aspirations of youth. It will 

take the form of a seminar and its purpose will be to keep the youth agency in contact with young people 

it intends to serve. We are going to listen to and plan with young people. 

 

I would like to comment, Mr. Speaker, that this is a rather unique approach. Nowhere do I know of any 

other place in the North American continent or in Europe where this type of approach has been used for 

young people. 

 

A Provincial Youth Council composed of persons representing the universities, urban and rural 

municipalities, school trustees, volunteer and private agencies. Their function will be to review program 

effects, advise on grants and new projects. If the Saskatchewan Youth Agency is to assist present 

programs it must involve the people who presently operate these programs. 

 

An Interdepartmental Committee — through this device we hope to single out a concerted government 

effort. It will be composed 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1225 

of all heads of all branches of government now involved in youth programs. Just as we expect the 

agency itself to act as a principal co-ordinating body of provincial youth programs, we hope that this 

committee will act as a co-ordinating body for Saskatchewan efforts. I hope that all present and future 

youth programs will be carefully examined by this committee, with the hope of not only preventing 

duplication and overlap but with the specific intention of assisting each other in the operation and 

evaluation of programs. 

 

The establishment of a headquarters staff of professionals in youth work, that will consist of an 

executive director, a supervisor of athletics, a supervisor of recreation, a co-ordinator of regional 

consultants. In addition there will be a field staff of 11 people to be located in the following areas: Swift 

Current, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon West, Weyburn, Prince Albert, Yorkton, North Battleford, Tisdale, 

Rosetown, Humboldt and Indian Head. Through these 11 persons the entire province will be blanketed 

with regional representation. Each of these areas was drawn in order that between ten and twelve 

thousand young people between the ages of 10 and 24 would be served. The regions were drawn bearing 

in mind trading centres, highway routes, rural municipal boundaries, and feasible geographic 

distribution. Perhaps some might ask the question why the emphasis on recreation? The reason, Mr. 

Speaker, is that today this is the traditional approach or program. It has the most popular demands of the 

moment. It is the one area that provides immediate opportunity for action on our part. Until the Youth 

Agency is able to generate community interest and programs in the arts and cultural fields we must start 

on the accepted level. It is our hope to move in the direction of community art programs at once and we 

hope to expand in this area as fast as the demand is initiated. 

 

What about the program itself? First, Mr. Speaker, through public hearings the concensus of the 242 

briefs presented to the Provincial Review Committee expressed a great desire for assistance and 

consultation service in helping communities provide leadership for themselves. All of our research 

indicates that this was the most vital issue. There is a need not only to improve the capabilities of the 

present leaders but to provide opportunities for the development of new leaders for youth programs. In a 

great many communities in Saskatchewan the success or failure of all programs is directly related to the 

leadership within that community. There are many examples. If there is a pilot or someone who has had 

experience in the air force, it is probably that he would lead an effective air cadet movement. If that 

individual was transferred and no suitable replacement was found that program would die. We find that 

the same problem exists in the fields of sports, art, music and in all recreation fields. 

 

It is also important to remember that we are talking about young people in the formative years of their 

living. It is important to develop not only quality leaders as well as quantity. It is also important to 

remember that we must develop the kind of leadership that will encourage self-involvement of young 

people. To offset the need for leadership the agency will (a) through regional field staff conduct and 

organize local level institutes to assist leaders in becoming more skilled in a particular endeavor and also 

promote a general philosophy required by youth leaders to make a positive contribution to youth. 

Through these local clinics, institutes and work shops, specialists from private agencies, volunteer 

agencies, government agencies and university will be drawn in to act as resource specialists. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1226 

(b) It is also expected that each of these consultants working with local community groups will intend to 

implement regional leadership training institutes. These will follow the same pattern in an advanced 

scale as those in a local community level. 

 

(c) Selected activities worthy of provincial concern, provincial clinics, work shops and institutes will be 

developed to provide leadership training opportunities for volunteer and professional leaders. In addition 

to the professional staff involvement of the agency, local, regional and provincial grants will be 

available to assist these undertakings. 

 

An observation I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that many people employed as teachers, 

YMCA leaders, boy scout leaders and so on, need to be utilized more fully in the total community 

concern for youth. It is expected that the agency will work toward drawing these resource specialists 

into a complete involvement with community projects. 

 

Now for the second aspect of the program. Particular functions of the agency will be to act as a resource 

centre, as a research centre, a consultant service centre and a centre for the distribution of funds for 

advancement of youth programs. I want to again point out that the initiation of this new program 

research will of necessity be one of its most important functions. We are setting aside specific funds so 

that we may call on outside specialists to undertake particular areas of research. We expect the agency to 

be instrumental not only in direct involvement but more significantly in the involvement of many private 

and volunteer agencies. 

 

We also feel that the agency should be a resource centre for all youth activities. I refer to forms, 

pamphlets, reports, library facilities, planning services as well as people. The third area of the program 

will be in the field of grants, in providing funds for the advancement of youth program. We are again 

moving with caution. Before we establish a permanent grant structure we are hoping to gain the 

experience of one year's operation. We also feel that we need to draw the best advice and experience 

possible. We are, therefore, arranging meetings with existing organizations presently operating programs 

to examine existing and future needs. For example, we have now arranged a meeting with the 

Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association to review the Community Recreation Program grants, 

and to obtain their advice on program grants of the most prudent expenditure of funds in this area. This 

is the first of many such discussions to formulate a sound and permanent policy. 

 

In the meantime we have set up interim grants to continue many worthwhile programs and to encourage 

new ventures on the community level. In establishing this interim policy we have followed the principle 

of motivation rather than that of participation. We are providing grants to encourage a wide variety of 

programs. One of the most obvious problems pointed out in the report is the lack of breadth and depth of 

existing programs. Much of the attention today is in the field of athletics and particularly for young boys 

between the ages of 10 and 15 years of age. Little attention is given to girls programs and to young men 

and women in the early twenties, here, of course, is where the real problems and needs do exist. 

 

It was also apparent that there is a complete lack of cultural opportunities for many of our young people 

particularly in the rural areas. Thousands of our young people today have no 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1227 

opportunity to develop their talents in art, music, drama, dancing or any related field. Those that do, do 

so only because of a major sacrifice on the part of their parents. The Youth Agency will therefore offer 

motivational grants in the following areas: 

 

(1) Community recreational program grants through the established recreational boards which will be 

designed to promote local leadership and to encourage them to experiment and promote new and 

expanded programs. 

 

(2) Junior development programs in arts and athletics. These grants will be made available through a 

community for leadership development covering arts, crafts, drama, music and similar projects. Also 

money for development projects in athletics will be available to communities. The total junior 

development grant available to any community for these projects would encourage interests in new areas 

of endeavor, as well as to help the present leaders become more skilful and knowledgeable in specific 

program aspects. It is expected that 11 geographic regions will be established in the province, each to 

have a voluntary co-ordinating council. A junior development grant will be available to help these 

councils encourage similar leadership projects on a regional basis. It is also planned to encourage and 

develop provincial projects in several activities, in co-operation with existing provincial organizations. 

The agency will help in the operation of a central province-wide institute or clinic in a particular field of 

interest. 

 

(3) Provincial organizations assistance for the assistance of many provincial organizations to help in 

operating their organizations. Small grants will be given. We usually find that in organizations such as a 

boy scout organization there is no difficulty financing on the local level, but they do on a provincial 

level when they need money to promote as well as to organize. We feel that a small investment on this 

part, in this area will be beneficial. 

 

(4) Competition and travel grants. This grant is required to assist organizations, groups and individuals 

who might represent our province in the arts, athletics, or recreation fields. Travelling costs to national 

competitions are often an obstacle to participation by individuals and teams. If our youth are to aspire to 

a level beyond which we are capable we must assist them. We hope to do this by means of a small travel 

grant as well as by conference and seminar grants. The agency Youth Review Committee found that 

many organizations wish to benefit themselves through inter-agency conferences, workshops and 

institutes. We hope to motivate and assist these organizations by providing grants to assist tin this kind 

of undertaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Youth Agency is entering into two special programs that I want to bring 

to your attention. The first we are calling the Lighted School House Grants. In the report a 

recommendation is contained in point four of the general recommendations and I quote: 

 

This new department made grants available to stimulate and motivate the provision of new facilities 

and new programs. It is essential that very specific policies regarding grants be established to preserve 

the objective effect of motivation. This could be accomplished by establishing a capital fund. Grants 

and loans could be made to stimulate communities to construct major facilities for youth activities. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1228 

This is the general recommendation. We recognize that there is a change in the pattern of recreation 

facilities and activities. Thirty years ago the little red school house in every community was not only the 

educational centre but also the recreational centre of that community. With centralization came a shift 

not only of education but of leisure time activities. One of the unfortunate aspects of centralization is 

that the modern school facility has lost its formal position within the community. It is no longer the 

centre of major activities. The modern facilities valued at millions of dollars of the taxpayers' money are 

closed evenings, week ends and holiday periods. School buildings owned by the community are not 

available to the community. The reason is often legitimate, Mr. Speaker. The operational costs of lights, 

maintenance and supervision are often high. Many of these school boards prevent the opening of their 

schools with a clear conscience. On many occasions the cost of hiring and paying the janitor is too high. 

We, therefore, believe that before any new program is offered to encourage capital construction of new 

facilities we should provide leadership in encouraging the maximum use of existing facilities. It would 

take the government 50 years to build anywhere near the number of quality facilities that now exist. 

Community recreation boards, youth councils and voluntary agencies find it impossible to pay high 

rental fees necessitated to open these facilities. Consequently these great provincial and community 

investments in schools are idle because of a simple need of a few dollars. We intend to make these funds 

available. Though grants we hope to encourage the full use of schools. It is hoped that youth boards, 

recreation boards, voluntary boards and school boards will co-operate and co-ordinate their concern for 

mutual operation and supervision of these expensive facilities. 

 

The agency has set aside a sum to start this program. A grant will be made to each community recreation 

council to help pay for the rental of these facilities. It is our hope that this amount of money will start 

communities using school facilities. It is our anticipation that this program will be developed for young 

people who are in school and for young people who are out of school, for children and for adults. We 

believe that communities want to see their schools used to a maximum degree. We believe that 

communities will use their schools to a much larger extent if only some motivation and financial 

inducement can be brought forward. 

 

I would also like to point to recommendation six concerning the Attorney General's Department. It asks 

that this department review possible legal restrictions existing that might prevent school boards, 

municipal boards, and communities from pooling resources and providing multi-use facilities, programs 

and staff. Confusion is very apparent regarding the relationship of each board to the other in this matter. 

This confusion has resulted in duplication, lack of co-operation, lack of planning, and a lack of 

maximum use of existing facilities. When discussing capital grants or loan funds for construction of 

recreation facilities the Saskatchewan Diamond and Centennial Corporation has given us an excellent 

example of the principle of motivation. For one dollar of total government investment they have 

generated anywhere from $7 to as high as $29 of community participation. They have done a 

tremendous job of generating construction of community facilities with limited government 

participation. 

 

The second special program, Mr. Speaker, is the recreation program now operated in provincial parks. 

The Saskatchewan Youth Agency will assume responsibility for this program. This will be 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1229 

done in co-operation with the Department of Natural Resources. We are convinced that this is an area of 

public interest that is growing and expanding each year. We are also convinced that the Department of 

Natural Resources is not equipped to train and supervise this type of program. We are also convinced 

that the development of parks and recreation areas offers a challenge in water safety, swimming, 

supervision and other aspects of recreation. We intend to hire and train personnel for this purpose, to 

develop standards in this expanding field. We hope that this will initiate a real and dynamic program. It 

is important to remember that not only do we need parks and summer recreation facilities, we need to 

ensure that the best possible use is made of these facilities for their children and adults. The only way 

that this can be done is by improved programs and supervision within these recreation areas. 

 

To sum up, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in 1966 the Saskatchewan Youth Agency will take the first 

step in initiating a program for youth of Saskatchewan. In our first year we will spend a limited budget. 

Our grants will not be large. Our staff will not be extensive, but we hope it will lay the ground work for 

a dynamic youth program of the future. Our emphasis will be channelled into three areas which we 

consider to be fundamental (1) Organization. We will give top priority to the setting up of an effective 

structure that will do the best job for the future development of this agency. We will concentrate on 

hiring the best kind of personnel to be effective in working with young people. (2) Leadership. We feel 

that this is the first area that demands our maximum effort. We are interested in developing quality 

leadership for our youth programs. (3) Special programs. We hope that by encouraging schools to open 

their doors we will provide many opportunities for expanding programs for young people. We also hope 

our summer recreation program will open new doors in our provincial parks. 

 

We will move slowly, not by necessity, but by intention. We will encourage and co-operate with all 

existing community and voluntary agencies in youth services. We will work with young people to give 

them the kind of program they want. I hope that every member of this assembly will support the 

amendments to the Saskatchewan Youth Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to commend the hon. member for Milestone 

(Mr. MacDonald) for his address. As usual his oratory was very good. He had done a good rehearsing 

job but I thought he would have been a little less exuberant, a little more humble, because of the 

contents of the report and, I submit, the shortcomings of the legislation that is before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last two years hardly a day has passed by without the people of Saskatchewan 

reading or hearing statements made by the Premier or one of his colleagues about youth. The people 

were led to believe that some new imaginative and exciting programs are in the offing, are on the verge 

of being introduced by the government for our young people. The Premier before taking office said that 

a new Department of Youth would be formed. He promised our youth new educational opportunities, 

free text books, 80,000 new jobs. Last year the hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) introduced the 

Saskatchewan Youth Bill. It was given unanimous approval. This assembly voted $50,000 for what was 

termed co-ordination of youth services. With a clang and a 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1230 

clatter last May the Minister of Health announced the appointment of an executive director and the 

Premier assigned to him a political aide, the hon. member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). A legislative 

secretary was assigned to work with the youth agency. For this he was paid a $2,000 premium and given 

a $500 expense account. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Great job too! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — On September 10, by Order in Council, a Youth Review Committee was appointed. In 

between and during all these announcements the Liberal mills of propaganda turned out a mountain of 

publicity, of propaganda purporting to express their concern for the youth. Well, Sir, the mountain of 

propaganda produced a mouse, a lot of noise and thunder and not a drop of rain. 

 

I have read and studied the Review Committee Report. I am sure anyone reading the report will join me 

in expressing sympathy to the members of the Youth Review Committee for the way they were 

pressured to produce the report in haste. The committee clearly acknowledges, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government did not give them a chance, not enough time to consider and report upon the problems our 

youth are facing in this period of technological revolution and to recommend possible solutions. To 

prove my point of how the government rushed the committee, on page 101 of the committee's report the 

following is stated in regard to the public response to the work of the committee and the limitations the 

government placed on them to search out the public view. 

 

In total 242 briefs were received by the Provincial Youth Review Committee. Unfortunately, due to 

pressure of time the committee heard only 185 of these publicly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 57 organizations and individuals who spent hundreds of dollars and thousands of hours of 

work and research were not given an opportunity to even appear before the committee. They were 

rebuffed. They are disappointed. But the Premier's white haired boy, the hon. member from Milestone 

(Mr. MacDonald) who stood with a whip over the heads of the committee delivered his report to the 

master. 

 

I will admit there are a few useful recommendations. However, in general the report is dubious in value. 

The report does not grapple with the main problems youth are facing. A report that was conceived in 

haste, a report in which the youth of our province will be keenly disappointed. Mr. Speaker, the report is 

notable not for what it says but for what it does not say. I submit it is incomplete. The best that might be 

said about it is that it might pass for an interim report but not a final and complete report. Mr. Speaker, 

anyone who studied this report and the bill before us and examines carefully the estimates will come up 

with one question. Well, what else is new? I submit nothing, absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the report recommends the establishment of the youth department. The Premier back in 

May, 1964, promised a youth department, but a youth department is not being created. The youth agency 

which was approved and created last year is to continue. Nothing new here, Mr. Speaker, the 

amendments to the Youth Act which are before us (a) give the youth agency authority to make grants to 

youth service organizations; (b) permits the government to enter into agreement with the federal 

government in matters relating to youth, and (c) gives the government authority to enter 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1231 

into agreements with other provincial governments regarding youth. Nothing new here, Mr. Speaker. 

Every government has the authority to make grants and has the power to enter into agreements with 

other provinces and the federal government on any type of project of mutual interest and value. The 

amendments are insignificant and are superfluous. 

 

Well, let's look at the estimates. Anything new here? The proposed budget for the agency for the coming 

year is set at $427,000. Is it new money? Certainly not. The Premier has already told us that the 

Continuing Education Branch of the Department of Education is being dismantled and its budget which 

last year was $272,740, in the Premier's words, will be absorbed into the youth agency as well as the 

budget and staff of the Summer Recreation Program carried out at the provincial parks by the 

Department of Natural Resources. Two hundred thousand dollars lopped off there and transferred to 

youth. The $20,000 annual grant program for International Student Scholarships, a program which 

should have been enlarged is being eliminated. The only possible new thing, Mr. Speaker, is that likely 

less money will be spent on youth than was spent last year and the year previous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in reading this interim report, a kind description of it, three words seem to continuously 

repeat themselves, education, leadership and finances. Education and leadership are one and the same. 

One can't have education without leadership or leadership without education. Members on this side of 

the house in previous debates have sharply pointed out the inadequacies of the provincial education 

grants, the inadequacies of the government's total program in the field of education to meet the problems 

posed by automation and urbanization. The $3,000,000 extra the province will receive from Ottawa for 

the purpose of expanding our university program is not going to be spent for this purpose but will be 

used to finance current costs, not for the purpose of needed expansion. 

 

Several years ago the CCF government established the Student Aid Fund to be used for scholarships, 

bursaries and loans for university students. This fund has grown to $6,750,000. The provincial 

government last year stopped the granting of interest free loans to students and this year is proposing to 

rob the kitty by $3,000,000 to finance other programs. The government is proposing to take $3,000,000 

of this fund into consolidated revenue. Without this fund the province would have close to $3,000,000 

deficit budget this year. The Premier proposes to spend $6,100,000 for new vocational training facilities. 

It's about time. 

 

On taking office two years ago this government cut off completely the technical school construction 

program. Last year it spent a total of $10. Our technical school program has been badly deterred since 

this government took office. I should, however, point out that 75 per cent of the proposed $6,100,000 for 

technical schools will be paid by the federal government. The province's share will only be $1,500,000. 

When the Premier talks about education he can only see the cost of it, not its value, not the value of 

education to our youth, to solve unemployment problems, to stimulate economic growth, to give our 

native people a new future, to give life a better meaning, a new dimension, for that matter the 

preservation of life. The dollar signs must have really been flickering in front of the Premier's eyes when 

he decided to eliminate the International Student's Scholarship Program. He must have feared that the 

university could possible select a son or a daughter of some Socialist for this scholarship. Anything that 

the Premier can't control, the people can't 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1232 

have. Mr. Speaker, one section of the Youth Review Committee Report has me completely puzzled. 

Look at page 125, the top paragraph. It reads this way 

 

It is strongly urged that the government initiate a provincial organization structure and a provincial 

program which would encourage committees, groups in communities, 

 

So far so good, but here is the rub: 

 

. . . and young people themselves to provide the necessary finances, program and services for 

themselves. 

 

I agree, Mr. Speaker, that young people should make up the programs, but how can they provide the 

necessary funds. Young people going to school, where will they get the money to finance youth 

programs and services? Most of them and their parents have great difficulty in financing higher 

education, or take young people who have just married and are buying a new home, furniture and 

appliances and starting a new family. Most of them have mortgaged their earnings for the next 25 to 35 

years and this committee was gullible enough to suggest that they should provide the funds for youth 

culture, social and physical programs. I can't believe it. I can't believe that they were serious in this 

recommendation. This is another example, Mr. Speaker, of haste and pressure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the report levelled some criticism at the Continuing Education Branch of the Department 

of Education. I feel that criticism is unjustified. I feel this criticism should have been levelled at the 

government for curtailing the funds and staff of this branch. Last year the budget of the branch was 

pared by $28,000 and the staff reduced by four, from 22 to 18. The report states and I quote: 

 

The branch has been handicapped with a very limited field staff who have large field areas. 

 

Well, who caused the handicap? Our friends to the right of you, Mr. Speaker. They took the meat axe in 

hand on taking office and cut the field staff from ten to seven. What do they propose for a staff of the 

youth branch, for a new branch, a total of 17. I doubt if the field staff in this branch will rise much above 

ten, if that, and so far none have apparently been hired. We will likely lose the present qualified staff of 

the Continuing Education Branch if we don't start taking some action immediately. Mr. Speaker, even 

their friend, Mr. Norman Reben is apparently reluctant to go and work for the youth agency. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to briefly recount some of the activities of the Continuing Education Branch, 

particularly in the area of youth activities. In doing so I want to pay tribute to the branch and particularly 

to the staff for a job well done. Here are some of the functions of the Continuing Committee. Under 

athletics they held regular sports clinics with provincial sports governing bodies. They held annual 

conferences for presidents and secretaries of provincial governing bodies for planning leadership 

training, co-ordination of services, provided secretarial help for Saskatchewan High School Athletic 

Association which controls and promotes high school athletics; made grants to assist sport bodies with 

administration and personnel training; administered federal and provincial agreements for promoting 

physical fitness and amateur sports in the province; made available a library of films and books to local 

bodies; carried on liaison work with various provincial and national organizations in connection with 

athletics. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1233 

In the field of recreation, Mr. Speaker, they held two recreational conferences, each year bringing 

together community leaders. They had two and a half days each for training, planning and co-ordination 

purposes. They conducted certification courses by way of seminars and correspondence courses for 

recreation directors; made grants to committees on behalf of program operation costs; held regular 

meetings with communities to assist in the planning and operation of programs and facilities; held 

clinics on facility operations, for example, swimming pool co-ordination or swimming pool operation 

courses; helped develop regional organizations to plan and co-ordinate recreation programs; kept a 

library of films and loaned same. They also provided resource materials of all kinds and conducted 

playground courses — a fairly impressive list of activities in the field of athletics and in the field of 

recreations for our young people. 

 

The major assistance, however, of the branch was the provision of personnel to the youth groups. There 

were other programs conducted by the Continuing Education Branch, educational upgrading, human 

relations, forums, cultural activities, fitness, sports, recreational activities of all kinds including arts. 

Many, many of these programs were taken advantage of by youth; many were planned with and geared 

for the youth. The branch administered Saskatchewan House, made bookings for Valley Centre at Fort 

Qu'Appelle and other activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn again to section 7(a) of the bill, the section giving authority to make grants to 

youth organizations. In the event some members might be deluded into believing that this is a new 

innovation, I would refer them to page 143 and 144 of Public Accounts for the fiscal year 1964-65. Fifty 

four thousand, five hundred dollars worth of grants were made. Who were some of the recipients of 

these grants? Well, here are some of the examples, Amateur Athletic Unions, Saskatchewan branch — 

$1,000; Assiniboia Recreation Board — $1,545; Bengough Recreation Board — $448; Biggar 

Recreation Committee — $500; Esterhazy Community Research Association — $673; Estevan 

Recreation and Parks Board — $1,400; Eston Recreation Board — $1,225; Ogema Community 

Recreation Board — $325; Saskatchewan Council of Girl Guides Association $2,000; Saskatchewan 

High School Athletic Association — $2,500; the Olympic Fund Committee — $3,000 and so the list 

reads, Mr. Speaker. Over one hundred organizations benefited from the provincial treasury for 

recreation, athletic and cultural purposes. Not enough, I agree, but not a new idea I submit. 

 

Let me cite a few further contradictions or impractical recommendations. The committee under item 6, 

on page 92, agrees and let me quote: 

 

That there seems to be an obvious need for a continual program of practical research into the area of 

young people and young people's progress. 

 

Then they go on further and say: 

 

There is obviously a need to do long-range practical studies on youth, today's problems and 

tomorrow's answers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let us look to section 5, on page 127, the committee reaches this conclusion: 

 

This department (meaning the Youth Department) should undertake immediate and long term research 

projects. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1234 

These projects should be carried on in conjunction and in co-operation with other institutions and 

agencies. The department should not be the instrument of research but rather instrumental in research. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the committee agrees that there is an obvious need for continual programs of 

practical research. It agrees, and I agree with it, but then the committee contradicts itself. It recommends 

that the department "not be the instrument of research". Well, Mr. Speaker, can we expect that other 

government departments might do this research? Well, let us look at the Department of Labour. The 

committee makes some recommendations in this regard. The committee recommends that this 

department and I quote again: 

 

Conduct a continuing province-wide study of potential employment, training needs and manpower 

resources, compile information for this study and make it available to industry, schools and citizens. 

 

But apparently not to labor, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Assure that technical and vocational training is commensurate with current trade requirements. 

 

A tall order for a staff of four, Mr. Speaker. It used to be five two years ago. The budget for the 

Research Branch of the Department of Labour for the second year in a row has been cut by $4,000. 

Incidentally four people in labour research will this year share a total of $60 as their wage increase. 

 

I looked for research appropriations in the Department of Education and there are none. Can we look for 

some comfort in the Department of Industry and Commerce? I don't think so, Mr. Speaker. The annual 

report for the department that is before us says this and I quote: 

 

1964-65 fiscal year witnessed drastic staff curtailment in the Economic Research Branch, including 

the resignation of the Director. By the end of the year the professional staff was reduced from five to 

one. 

 

And this year there seems to be no appropriations for research whatsoever. Well, there is a possibility of 

the agency framing out research but I submit that if this is done it will be done on a project basis and not 

on a continual basis as the committee recognized the need, Mr. Speaker. I am keenly disappointed that 

the committee omitted completely any reference to labor, whether it is in manpower studies, planning or 

expanding technical, vocational or apprenticeship programs or consideration of problems posed by 

automation, employment or unemployment. I am convinced that our unions which have a membership 

of about 50,000 in the province have much to contribute. I doubt if this omission was deliberate. I am 

convinced it was the time element, the pressure exerted on the committee to produce this report in a 

hurry. Mr. Speaker, youth is the most precious resource this province and this country has. The 

committee tells us that the total number of young people between the ages of 10 and 24 is 229,308. The 

Royal Commission on taxation reports that another 220,000 are in the ages 0 to 9; in other words almost 

50 per cent of Saskatchewan's population is under 25 years of age. These young people are the future of 

Canada, let's quit playing politics with them let's quit leading them into a false sense of security, let's 

quit making irresponsible promises, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1235 

Mr. Richard Bellman, a computer scientist for Rand Corporation was reported by the Chicago Daily 

News more than two years ago as saying this, and I quote: 

 

Industrial automation has reached the point of astronomically no return. The pace will increase in the 

next decade. The scientific know-how to almost completely automatic American industry is already 

available and is certain to be used. 

 

He flatly disagreed with the suggestion that automation itself will create many new jobs. He said jobs 

that are by-products of automation will be relatively few and will be at vastly lower levels of interest. A 

mere two per cent of the population, by implication that two per cent of the upper administrative and 

executive level will be able to produce all the goods needed to feed, clothe and run our society with the 

help of machines. The resulting unemployment problem requires much more than job training, he said. 

Those are frightening figures, undoubtedly they are also applicable to a large extent to conditions in 

Canada. We know that the ratio of unemployment among young people is about three times as great as 

among the adults. If there is a future for our youth, Mr. Speaker, it lies in education. Education has 

become a matter of survival provided some trigger-happy madman doesn't get nervous and press the 

wrong button and blow us all up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said that education has become a matter of survival, not in the old sense, not in a 

sense that an uneducated man may not survive but in a new sense. In a technologically developed 

society like the one in which we live, the forces that we have unleashed in the form of atomic energy 

and mechanical brains may destroy us unless we have the knowledge and the will to control them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a man who is well reputed in the industrial world in the United States, Mr. John Snyder, 

the president of United States Industries, which manufactures the automated machinery, testifying 

before the U.S. Senate Committee on Labour and Public Welfare, pointed out that in the USA 

automation eliminates over 40,000 new jobs every week. That is over 2,000,000 jobs a year. Automation 

is not only displacing people directly, but also indirectly, he said, through what is called "silent firings" 

in reference to workers who would have been hired for jobs eliminated by automation. Mr. Snyder then 

went on to say that many people find it easier to look for proof that these problems do not exist rather 

than grapple with the human problems caused by automation. "In the coming months and years, if we 

are to survive as a nation we will need new sociological and economic ideas to solve the problem in this 

area" Mr. Snyder said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the late President John F. Kennedy said a few weeks before his untimely and tragic death 

that the involvement of young people into public life could do much to raise our sights and horizons. It 

could raise the morals and the prestige of politics. Now certainly a man like the late President Kennedy 

really had no personal gain to make from his involvement in public life. In fact as evil fates conspired he 

lost his life in the service of his country. I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that he tried to set a new standard 

in his short term of office, a new standard of political morality, of political honesty, and Lord only 

knows we certainly need it in this country these days. So I appeal to the members of the government side 

of the house, particularly the young members to stop playing politics for the sake of politics. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1236 

Let us examine carefully the problems our young people are facing; let us recommend some positive 

solutions; let us invest in our youth; for the investment that we make today in our youth is an investment 

in the future of our country. 

 

The amendments before us are minor I submit. The things they propose to do have been in practice for 

many years and need to be continued and will no doubt receive support from both sides of the house. 

But there is more to be done now and for the future. Mr. Speaker, I would, therefore, recommend that: 

(1) That this report that is before us be treated by the government as an interim report; (2) I recommend 

that the Youth Review Committee be reconvened, reshaped and enlarged; (3) That direct representation 

be allowed on the committee from organizations such as the Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, 

Saskatchewan Farmers' Union and Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Co-operative Movement, and 

possibly other organizations which are interested and concerned about the future of our youth; (4) That 

at least two young persons under the age of 25 be added to this committee. How can we talk about and 

recommend programs without having the youth even represented on such a body and this is exactly what 

has been the case until now; (5) We give this committee sufficient time and funds to bring in a 

comprehensive report. 

 

May I suggest also, Mr. Speaker, that the government and the new committee that I have suggested 

examine the following matter which I think are of vital importance facing the young people of this 

country, the problems that young people are facing in obtaining higher education, particularly the 

economic deterrents. They should examine whether all tuition fees should be eliminated, particularly at 

our universities. I submit that the only criterion for admitting a person to an educational establishment or 

to a training program should be a person's ability to benefit from the particular program. There should be 

no tuition fees, no charges for books, laboratory equipment or anything else. I submit no charges of any 

kind. Complete abolition of tuition fees and all charges in connection with education, however, is not 

enough. Neither are the existing student loan funds the absolute answer; they are a help. 

Pre-employment students represent a burden on the family budget which should be alleviated by making 

increased family allowances payable for all children attending high school until completion of Grade 12. 

In addition scholarships and cash awards should be provided as an encouragement to deserving students. 

After Grade 12 or after they have entered gainful employment, young men and women should be 

enrolled for approved education and training courses and should be paid allowances equivalent to wages 

received by those young men and women who have elected to accept employment immediately. This is 

the fundamental principle I submit. I say it is essential that we should adjust our thinking to present day 

conditions. If we admit that it is essential for Society to have a right man in a right job with the right 

kind of education or training, it should be obvious that in providing training to the right man we are not 

doing him a favor we are doing ourselves a favor. This should be considered by such a committee. 

Along with pay for training for employed persons there is the need to provide by legislation for leave of 

absence for training purposes. A person who is willing and able to take advantage of given educational 

programs should be assured that upon completing this program he should be allowed to return to his 

previous job if he so chooses. Unless some such provision exists many young men and women will 

hesitate to avail themselves of existing and future educational opportunities for fear that they would lose 

their employment for the sake of a certificate 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1237 

which will not pay for the groceries. This suggestion too should be considered by such a committee. 

 

Other suggestions, Mr. Speaker, are somewhat specific. A thorough system of counselling and guidance 

in collaboration with parents and parent organizations should be established. I know, Mr. Speaker, some 

reference is made in the report, but I submit that it should be given some further studies and specific 

detailed recommendations made in this respect. What better use can be made of our schools, our school 

gymnasiums and playgrounds is a problem that needs consideration. Problems of emotionally disturbed 

children and exceptional children should be examined. Why the increase of juvenile crime and what 

effect the television war and crime and horror movies have on this problem should be looked into by 

such a committee. People are getting married at an earlier age. In this world of commercialisation and ad 

men, they need special help as consumers. This matter should be given some consideration. Family 

formations are taking place at an earlier age; young parents have special problems; they need help and 

counselling. The committee made no mention of this particular problem. More women for economic and 

other reasons are entering employment. The need for public nurseries is urgent. No reference is made to 

this problem in the committee's report, even though I do know that groups had asked the committee to 

give this matter consideration. The whole matter of manpower training and the kind of skills young 

people should be training for is a vexing problem. It needs constant review and research. These, Mr. 

Speaker, are but some examples that need immediate and urgent attention. I urge that the youth agency 

give them prompt attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I won't take a great deal of the time of the 

house. I am like the member who is just taking his seat, I am very much in favor of the amendments to 

the bill. I feel badly, I am very sorry that the member opposite is opposed when he goes along and lists 

the areas that are problematic as far as youth is concerned, that he seems opposed to making a start. This 

I think is abundantly clear in the report; it was abundantly clear in the remarks of the member from 

Milestone (Mr. Macdonald) that in beginning a youth agency we are in fact making a start. Some of the 

problems that the member for Regina East (Mr. Smishek) mentioned probably in the course of time will 

be included in the areas for concern for the youth agency. But I do regret that he should stand in his 

place now when we are looking to the needs of youth in the province of Saskatchewan and appear to 

oppose making at least a beginning. He seems to have suggested, in the remarks he made today, to put 

into effect an endless committee to discuss the problem but never to do anything about it. 

 

For my part, Mr. Speaker, I have a variety of reasons for a wholehearted support for the bill because in 

the fist place, I think it will effectively initiate an agency whose purpose for existence is to serve the 

youth of the province in whatever way youth needs serving. My first reason, of course, must be just 

because it is in this way putting us in a position where we are investing money and effort in the most 

valuable direction that it can go, in our young people. As a society, of course, we are obligated to 

provide in the best possible way for the needs of youth but the obligation in this regard in my vision is 

only partly to youth. As all members will agree it is in fact an obligation that society owes to those who 

come after us. So I feel today that we are starting. Setting out to serve youth is to serve the future 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1238 

of this province and of all of Canada. In spite of the criticisms that the member from Regina East (Mr. 

Smishek) has had of the report and of the laxity he feels in the numbers and representations of people on 

the committee, I take some pride, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that so many of the people who have been 

closely involved in the preliminary planning are from my own city of Saskatoon. I would like to pay 

tribute to Dr. Nixon who has directed the youth agency this year and who has been the guiding spirit in 

the recommendations and patterns for its future shape. 

 

Three of the five members who are on the Youth Review Committee were from the University of 

Saskatchewan, Professor Barber, Professor Leicester and Professor Stinson. I don't take hollow pride in 

the fact that these men come from the city of Saskatoon. I take pride in the fact that we in the province 

of Saskatchewan have the kind of men who will give us the benefit of their experience in an undertaking 

like this. These four in particular, I think, have brought to their task an understanding of what 

co-operation between government, community and an institution like the university can be and can 

accomplish. But I think, almost more important than what co-operation can accomplish, these four in 

particular are very familiar with the ways in which a lack of co-operation and co-ordination can frustrate 

programs undertaken by any one group, whether it be government or a group within the community. I 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the benefit of their experience in these areas will pass on and be of profit to the 

youth agency. 

 

Unlike the member opposite, I have great hopes, Mr. Speaker, for what the youth agency will 

accomplish. The member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) has just outlined some ways in which it will 

function but along with the hopes that I have for the youth agency I must confess to some fears. I don't 

fear a lack of financial assistance to it. The member who has just spoken has indicated a complete 

misunderstanding of the report and function of the agency. He has suggested that we have withdrawn 

funds from other agencies, other branches of government and are simply transferring them into the youth 

agency. It would seem to me that he has in this way indicated a complete misunderstanding of the 

function of the agency at the outset as a co-ordinating body. When I express fears, I express fears not for 

financial assistance but I express fears as to the limitations that may be set upon the youth agency in the 

manner of administration because I feel, Mr. Speaker, that in the youth agency implicit in the structuring 

of it is a restructuring in a sense of existing departments. If necessary changes are not willingly made by 

those departments that must be affected, if areas of jurisdiction are not relinquished or at least 

co-ordinated with and closely bound into the youth agency, then the job that can be done for youth will 

be jeopardized at the very outset. The youth agency will be only what the member for Regina East (Mr. 

Smishek) was suggesting it should be, another branch of government superimposed on other branches of 

government. When I speak of co-ordination and relinquishing of jurisdiction I think in this connection of 

changes already in progress and referred to by the previous speaker in adult education. I have a great 

respect for what has happened within the Adult Education Branch and the Continuing Education Branch, 

but I also have a great sympathy for a branch that over the course of the years has had added to it endless 

numbers of functions for which there was no particular pattern or plan and was not able effectively to do 

the job that an Adult Education or a Continuing Education Branch could do. It was able to dispense 

grants but this is not to me a function of a Continuing 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1239 

Education or an Adult Education Branch. This is a branch that should be offering leadership rather than 

dispersing grants for use in one community or another. 

 

I have some respect for it but on the other hand to see a branch like this relinquish to the youth agency 

the kind of functions that the youth agency can do better will be the kind of co-operation that will have 

to exist in other departments. I think in this connection of the close liaison that will have to exist 

between the Department of Labour which is so vitally concerned in apprentice and trade-training 

programs. This is an area which the youth agency, if it is to be effective for youth, must use. I think of 

the Department of Welfare as they are concerned in retraining and in continuing education as well as in 

the social problems of our youth. It is departments like this that must co-ordinate and in effect relinquish 

some of their jurisdiction into the hands of the youth agency in order to make this effective for our 

young people. I think of the Provincial Library and the Arts Board whose resources and approaches 

should be co-ordinated with the purposes of the youth agency. Indeed, I think of the entire Department 

of Education, because unless there is a close interweaving of the agency designed to serve youth with 

those other departments and functions of government that are set up to serve it, it will not be effective. 

 

There are two very important recommendations within the report that seem to me, Mr. Speaker, to hold 

the key to the success or the failure of the youth agency. One is the interdepartmental committee which 

must approach this new agency with a truly interdepartmental philosophy such as has never honestly 

existed in interdepartmental committees dealing with specific problems. I would seem to me that in the 

interdepartmental approach at the top is contained the key to the success of the youth agency. The other 

key is the youth council of which the member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) has spoken that is 

proposed at the community level and this wherein everyone who has a part to play in the affairs of 

young people will be able to plan together how best to conduct their programs so that we find 

government at the top level where programs will perhaps initiate or perhaps not, where leadership must 

initiate, where a great deal of the financial resources will initiate. We find people at this level, people at 

the local level combining in the ways in which they must. In two recommendations it seems to me are 

the keys to the success of the youth agency. 

 

The regional structure suggested in the report would also, it seems to me, make it possible to put 

interdepartmental influence and resources at the service of young people, at a level where it will really 

serve them. There has been mention of guidance programs, psychologist service, recreation direction, all 

of these along with the traditional educational patterns that are co-ordinated at the regional levels. Now 

necessarily, Mr. Speaker, the emphasis at the outset will be in the fields of recreation and athletics. It is a 

natural thing to start and a good principle to start in the area in which there is already some activity. But 

it is my hope that it will quickly expand to encompass all aspects of the young person's existence. If it 

does not there will be large numbers of young people who are unserved and large areas of youth's needs 

unmet. However the start is made, I hope, Mr. Speaker, that it will be in such a way as to reach young 

people who would not on their own seek out such activities without a youth agency because I have felt 

over the years that governments have a very bad habit of setting up programs in recreation, of cultural or 

the arts in general that only reach the already 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1240 

converted. 

 

Unless the activities of the youth agency are alive and co-ordinated with the educational and vocational 

pursuits in which young people are normally engaged, its success will be very limited. But the important 

step that we are taking today, Mr. Speaker, is in endorsing a broad pattern of approach, the details of 

which will be filled in as time goes on. It is a pattern that will put the services that government offers 

into a new focus as I see it. It's an approach that would apply to any of the very particular groups in our 

society. The approach that is envisaged for the youth agency would be an approach that would be well 

used in relation to, as the member spoke a moment ago, the emotionally disturbed or to group together 

the handicapped within our society. The broad pattern of approach might be something that would be 

very applicable to the senior citizens within our society, the consumer within our society, but it seems to 

me that in passing this bill today, or in speaking to this bill, I am endorsing a broad approach that I feel 

is something that government needs. The bill we are discussing is not just a bill to set up an effective 

branch, not just to empower it to give money to share costs; but supported by the youth's report it is a 

bill, Mr. Speaker, designed to set in motion a governmental service to our youth and in a way that has as 

its first purpose not administrative ease as so often branches of government have, not jealousy or 

departmental jurisdiction as sometimes creates problems for the people that government departments set 

out to serve, but it has as its first purpose service to youth itself as youth needs to be served. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I am very happy to support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, the enactment of the Saskatchewan Youth 

Act to begin with had a considerable amount of fanfare and publicity as has been mentioned earlier in 

this debate. I think that this is an important subject which deserves a certain amount of publicity and a 

certain amount of fanfare provided the people that are bringing this plan into the legislative chamber and 

making it law are prepared to carry out the program. The fanfare of course was started off in May, 1964, 

before the Premier had the lines of government in his hands and he was announcing the intention of the 

youth portfolio. There was a further announcement in February, 1965, the Leader Post; the executive 

director was appointed. In a further announcement, in the Leader Post in May, 1965, the agency was 

granted $50,000 in the first year. The Leader Post, June, 1965, reported the youth committee to be set up 

and a report promised November 15, 1965. Again, the Leader Post, September 17, 1965, gave the 

composition of the review committee. The Leader Post on December 2, 1965, the youth agency 

completes study and report promised early in 1966, mentioning, of course, the number of briefs 

presented and the number heard. The hearings of the committee concluded on October 20th. 

 

Now, the Youth Act itself went through a series of readings and assent in a period of April 7, 1965 to 

April 17, 1965, and we have before us now the Youth Act, by its short title. In the introduction of the 

amendment to the Youth Act, the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) made a comment with regard to the 

attendance of CCF MLAs at the hearings. I can only speak for myself and say that I had a perfectly 

legitimate excuse for being absent from the hearings, just as legitimate an excuse as Liberal MLAs had 

for being absent from the Labor Review Committee hearing reports in Saskatoon which lasted two days. 

The only Liberal I saw around there close 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1241 

to it was a defeated Liberal candidate who has since been foisted on to the Labor Relations Board as a 

public representative. 

 

Leading up to the discussion of the particular bill, the Liberal action on behalf of the youth of 

Saskatchewan is the topic for some discussion. I think the Liberal action leaves much to be desired as far 

as the youth of Saskatchewan are concerned. We have witnessed among things, tax increases, premium 

increases, fee increases, all of a regressive nature. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Purple gas . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — The population drain continues. As a matter of fact it has speeded up 

and why has it speeded up? Lack of sufficient opportunity for the youth of our province. The youth 

opportunity has been left at the level that the previous government left it when it was moved out of 

office. 

 

The educational end dealing with youth, incentive grants for education appear to be an undesirable 

method of getting money in the proper places for the education of our youth. With regard to the 

academic improvements I submit, Mr. Speaker, that they are not considerably better enough to say that 

they are better. The technical education program is stalled. The university, that important phase of 

development in Saskatchewan, is suffering and it is suffering because other governmental programs 

have priority; and they have priority, Mr. Speaker, because of philosophical reasons. In addition some 

other programs of government show immediate material accomplishment and put the Liberal party in a 

good political light. 

 

The youth of Saskatchewan and the youth of Canada are reasonably intelligent groups and they are 

thinking. Just as an example of some of the thinking these particular youth groups are doing I quote 

from the Star Phoenix of March 12, headlined "Toronto" and it says something here about Liberal 

followers fed up. 

 

Thomas Sutherland, president of the Toronto and District Young Liberals Association said Friday 

night he is fed up with Prime Minister Pearson. Mr. Sutherland said 'a change in party leadership 

should be considered at the National Liberal Convention in October'. 

 

It shows they are thinking. I just want to quote one other source and this is the gospel I'm quoting from, 

the dedicated standard of unswerving loyalty and truth, the editorial page of the Star Phoenix, March 

5th, I'm going to quote the initial paragraph and the closing paragraph in the editorial: 

 

Don Olah of Weyburn vice-president of the Assiniboia Federal Liberal Association was outspoken in 

his criticism of Hazen Argue's appointment to the Senate. Mr. Olah said he was stunned . . . 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1242 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — On a point of order, can anyone in this house tell me if 

this is discussing the matter which is now being discussed? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Yes, I'll tell him, Mr. Speaker, if he asks. I'm relating this to the 

sincerity if there is any, of the government to carry out their legislation and I think it is quite in order to 

question their sincerity, I've given my reasons already why I question it. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Your mind is warped, boy. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — It's covered anyway. 

 

. . . and suggested that in the future interest of the Liberal party in the people of Canada, the Prime 

Minister through his blundering decisions has no alternative but to resign. 

 

Then his concluding paragraph: 

 

It would be unfortunate if, however, Mr. Olah were forced to surrender his vice-presidential crown. He 

may be beheaded for believing in the freedom to speak out. 

 

Yes, these young people are thinking. There is no doubt about that. These articles show that it is 

impossible to fool all the people all the time. 

 

Dealing directly with the youth report, Youth in Our Time, what does it say? It affords us a handy 

compilation of programs carried out by the CCF government as they pertain to youth. Those programs 

came under the authority of 11 different departments or boards. The Youth Review Committee summed 

up that section of the report by saying: 

 

By and large the agency has been satisfied that services extended by government through departments 

and agencies for the youth of Saskatchewan have been well conceived. 

 

I must admit, Mr. Speaker, I find myself in agreement with a great many of their recommendations made 

by the report although I think there are numerous areas where the recommendations of the committee 

could have been strengthened. I only wish to deal with two areas at this particular time. The one is the 

prudent use of leisure and the other is the rehabilitation of juvenile offenders. 

 

In order that these matters that I mentioned could be improved upon and corrected, respectively, it may 

have been necessary to employ consultants. Since the committee was rushed in making its report I can 

see where they would have been unable to examine the basis of the use of leisure time and the basis of 

the youthful offender. With respect to these topics I believe that modern Society's slavish adherence to 

Madison Avenue advertising has done much to weaken the family circle. Modern advertising, rather 

than seeking to disseminate information, seeks to make consumptive gluttons of us all. The only reason 

is profit. Modern communications, especially newspapers, also must share a great amount of the blame 

for placing too great a reliance on sensational news in order to sell newspapers, again to make profits. 

 

It is little wonder that many young people, and adults for 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1243 

that matter, are distressed because of this misplaced sense of values. The emphasis is on profit rather 

than on use. It has been the concerted attempt of advertisers to build a popular thrill experience which in 

some cases is hard for adults to combat. Put yourself, Mr. Speaker, in the position of a disciplinarian of 

the family when some other group holds out the promised land where no discipline is necessary. Adults 

must be especially adept to master a situation of that type. 

 

The bill that is before us as an amendment to the act is noted for its generality. Undoubtedly we will 

have some more inquisitive speeches later in committee about the making of grants and so forth. In 

conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I just want to refer to one section of the report. Perhaps the minister in closing 

the debate could remark on this particular section. It refers to "a branch within the department cannot 

co-ordinate activities of other government departments. A department, however, could have the power 

and prestige to co-ordinate all government activities pertaining to youth and cultural affairs." As I went 

through reports I was unable to find anything less than a government department to co-ordinate the 

activities of youth and I hope that the minister can shed some light on this topic when he speaks. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I just add a few comments to what 

has already been said. I am one of the many people in the province, I am sure, who followed with 

interest and a considerable degree of appreciation the hearings of the Youth Committee throughout the 

province. I've had the opportunity to read the report and, of course, also to study the legislation and the 

estimates which have been placed before us. Like many others in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, I enjoyed 

the remarks of the member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) when he explained some of the thinking 

behind and some of the hopes of the proposed Youth Agency. I was particularly pleased that he stayed 

away from the field of mathematics this afternoon. I think he made a much better speech. 

 

I am one, too, who can agree that a specialized agency of this kind may have a better opportunity to 

co-ordinate the numerous departments, and the activities of numerous agencies, which are offering 

programs which are useful to young people in the province. We shall be very interested in watching the 

success of the new proposal. 

 

One of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, I was interested and pleased to listen to the member from 

Milestone was that I recognized so many old friends as he talked this afternoon. I recognize old friends 

in the form of programs that I have known for many years, with which I have worked, programs which 

have served well the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — In recognizing them, however, I was somewhat astounded when I heard them announced 

as children of the present government and that in effect is what was being done. For example . . . 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — On a point of order. If he 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1244 

had listened. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — On a point of order. Can you speak from the seat that you are in? 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — May I speak on the point of order now, Mr. Speaker. If the Leader of the 

Opposition had listened a little more carefully he would have noticed that I said that we would want to 

carry on worthwhile programs now in existence and implement new ones as well. There was no intent to 

consider them as children of this government. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, I'm sure that is going to relieve a lot of people when they have that matter of 

paternity cleared up with respect to may of these programs. 

 

May I point out, Mr. Speaker, I may have misinterpreted the other member when I heard him say, for 

example, about the Boy Scouts, that the Boy Scouts need assistance on the provincial level. I agree they 

do, and as a matter of fact, of course, they have been getting it for many years. What the member from 

Regina East (Mr. Smishek) read from the Public Accounts, which we have just finished considering, 

would indicate this. I heard talk about the Lighted School Program, and grants to organizations 

throughout the province and leadership training, and supporting community organizations, and the 

encouragement of voluntary activities. All of those, of course, represent activities which have been 

pursued for a number of years. 

 

In the same line, Mr. Speaker, I was somewhat disappointed, indeed, a little bit shocked that in what was 

given to us by the committee in its report, on page 49, the section on Continuing Education there is no 

mention made of these many, long-standing excellent programs which have been beneficial to young 

people. They talk about the problems of the branch, and I admit it had very real problems — it had been 

the subject of re-organization just a year or two before. But I find nothing in there with respect to these 

programs of the kind to which the member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek) referred in his quotations 

from the Public Accounts. 

 

It occurred to me, Mr. Speaker, that it looks as if somebody might have almost cut out some of the 

summary that the committee wrote in its report before it was published and tabled in this house, I hope I 

am quite wrong in that. But I do point out, Mr. Speaker, with considerable emphasis that no recognition 

of these programs, their existence in the present, or their work in the past is indicated in that particular 

part of the review. That being the case, for this reason at least, I want to express the thanks of one who 

was associated with many of these people, both the employees of the department and the voluntary 

agencies throughout the province. I think, particularly, of those engaged in the activities of the 

Saskatchewan Recreational Movement, or Physical Fitness and Recreation, as it was sometimes called. I 

think of the council which was representative of groups in the province which helped to determine 

programs and to assess the effects of programs for a number of years. I think, as has been thought 

previously during this debate, of the great many voluntary organizations, voluntary leadership 

throughout the province which helped to make this an extremely valuable contribution to the people of 

the province, and particularly the young people of the province. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1245 

I regret that more recognition of what they have done was not given. 

 

I could recall at very considerable length a number of the programs. I could recall the assistance given to 

a number of the amateur athletic groups, which provided leadership training, schools for coaches, 

schools for managers and schools for players. I could think of activities which supported work in the 

field of drama and some of the other related arts. I can think of the opportunities given for young people 

over a period of years to attend what has been called the United Nations Seminars, held at Valley Centre 

for a period of time. These have been good activities and I feel that they should have had more 

recognition than was given in the report or in the remarks this afternoon. What they do do, of course, is 

to provide a sound foundation of experience on which the present organization hopefully will build. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one program in particular which I want to express some hope for. I want to urge in 

particular that the new agency will give consideration to it. It is a program which was just getting started 

and which I regret is evidently being wiped out by the government, because there is no money in the 

estimates for it. This is the program of providing scholarships which enabled some young people from 

Saskatchewan to attend university in other countries, to come back to Saskatchewan and have support 

here for one year following during which they could report to the people of Saskatchewan what they had 

experienced during that year away. 

 

The minister pointed out that young people were mainly, I think he said, interested in recreation, and I 

agree there is a great interest and a great need here. May I emphasize that young people are also, and 

thankfully so, becoming more and more interested in what is going on in other parts of the world. Young 

people, more and more, and thankfully so, are identifying themselves with people in all parts of the 

world. I think, Mr. Speaker, we have a bad habit sometimes in our country and in our kind of 

civilization, of thinking that the greatest help to these people in other parts of the world comes as a result 

of them visiting us, of them learning what we do and how we do it, I think we overlook too frequently 

the fact that we need to know more about them, that we need to understand them more than we do. This 

little program which was started some several years ago was aimed at doing just that. This started out 

with the selection of two students only. These two students went to universities, one in Africa, and one 

in Asia as I recall it. They were to come back, spend the year here in the province of Saskatchewan, 

receiving further financial support. During that year the plan was to make them available to student 

groups, to service clubs, and to all other kinds of organizations in the province. Two more students were 

selected the next year. They were to come back and do the same sort of thing. It is my hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that this program could have been broadened and broadened considerably, not only broadened 

by taking more than two students, but also by selecting some young people not necessarily from the 

university group. I think it would have been most worthwhile if we could select young people involved 

in farming, young people involved in business, young people involved in working in our plants, and give 

them a chance to go to the countries of Africa, the countries of Asia, the countries of other parts of the 

world which we need to understand so much. Let them get some experience there, bring them back, 

make them available as a part of the resources of the province. Let them go forth into communities and 

meet people all over the province, so that we can learn something about those many millions 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1246 

of people of whom we know all too little. 

 

Let us be certain, Mr. Speaker, that many of the decisions which are going to affect the lives of our 

young people are not going to be made in Regina, or in Ottawa, or in Washington or London. Many of 

these decisions are going to be made in other parts of the world. We need to know more about why these 

decisions are made. I submit that the new authority can make a fine contribution to our young people, 

can stimulate the sensitivity and the imagination and usefulness of our young people if it will give 

emphasis to this program, which I am afraid the government at the present is prepared to destroy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I want to recognize the valuable work done in the past by many of the staff 

who have worked in this field, by many of the voluntary organizations, and by much of the voluntary 

leadership throughout the province. I want in particular to urge consideration of this interest and 

potential of our young people with regard to understanding of what is going on in the world, better than 

we do. Having said that, I want to assure the minister and the government that we wish the new 

organization very well, very well indeed, in serving all of the people and particularly the young people 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the members to the fact that the mover of the motion is 

about to close the debate. If anyone wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, with the exception of the last speaker in the opposition, the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), I was impressed that the criticism of this bill, and the criticism of the plan they 

are attempting to formulate for the youth of this province is typical Socialist opposition. They whined 

and cried about what we were failing to do but rarely mentioned what was contained in what has been 

referred to as a very excellent report. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) finished up on a rather 

strange note considering what line the other two members in the opposition had taken, by saying that he 

wished us well, and for this I thank him. 

 

He did make one comment about the Lighted Schoolhouse grant not being new. Well, I would point out 

that they had done something along this line themselves. I would point out that the Lighted Schoolhouse 

grant is new. It is a special grant, it is different from community recreation grants that we had in the past 

and it is for a different purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek) who spoke for the opposition first concerning 

this bill, began by deploring the tremendous amount of publicity that was generated by the committee, 

by everyone connected with the new youth agency in their work that they accomplished over the past 

year in developing this program to the point where it has come today. But in the next breath he 

complained that there were some people who were not given the opportunity to appear before this 

committee or present their briefs. I am told that everyone, every individual and every group was given 

ample opportunity to appear before this committee and present their views. As a matter of fact this was 

the reason that there was so much publicity such as ads in the newspaper. There was ample publicity 

given by press and radio. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1247 

The news media co-operated to a tremendous extent and this was one of the reasons why hearings were 

held all over the province so that everyone would be given an opportunity to appear and present their 

case if they were, in fact, serious and if they, in fact, wanted to present a serious brief or a serious 

presentation to this committee. Both he and the junior member from Saskatoon (Mr. Brockelbank) went 

on to complain about all the things they say were not in it, and to suggest a whole myriad of topics, 

subjects that should have been included. If they had read the report carefully, seriously, they would have 

found that one of the major recommendations in this report is that we put an end to government 

overlapping. We put an end to what has been going on to a great extent in the government in the past 

and to some extent outside of the government when we are dealing with youth, and that is, overlapping 

of programs, people and programs with too much concentration in one area and other areas of youth 

programming being left blank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for example, they talked about and criticized us in the field of technical education. Well, 

we don't pretend to enter the field of education. We are not going to step over into the responsibility or 

the area that belongs to the Department of Education. In fact, if the youth program and youth agency are 

to succeed it will do something totally different. This has been the problem with the Socialists. This is 

the problem of the Socialists' approach. They want to plan everything and everybody down almost out of 

existence. They want to turn people out like little sausages . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They ought to turn you out. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, the machine really went wild when they flopped you out. They left the bologna 

end of it on too long. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well, the price is slipping. You should sell out while it is still up. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They want to plan everybody's life from the cradle to the grave, Mr. Speaker. Well, this 

is one of the reasons, I suggest, that youth by the thousands have left this province. 

 

They didn't want their lives planned by you boys down here in Regina, the Ivory Tower Socialists, and 

they left Saskatchewan and went other places where it was more exciting, more challenging. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) the former Minister of Education, talked about 

what we have done to the Department of Education, the Continuing Committee on Education. Well, I 

can tell you there is no change here but there will be some changes. One of the problems of that 

particular division is that it tried to be all things to all people. It was given too many jobs to do and the 

result was that too often it accomplished nothing, or far too little. We were convinced, again, when the 

government looked around for the money that was being spent. From $300,000 up was being spent 

totally in all departments for youth; too little value was being received. When this committee went 

around they were impressed over and over again that the need was for leaders, that the people who were 

working with the youth of this province, and the youth of this province didn't want the government 

moving in and planning every detail for them. They said 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1248 

"What we want is encouragement. We need leadership. We want the government to help our young 

people and help us to help ourselves." This is something, Mr. Speaker, where the Socialists fail not only 

in this field, but in all fields. They won't recognize, and they can't seem to recognize that people don't 

want their lives lived for them, especially young people. They want some help, they want some guidance 

and leadership, then they want the older people to stand out of their way and let them do things for 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they mentioned about labor, manpower. We are not going to try to be the Department of 

Labour in the youth agency. We have a Department of Labour, a very excellent Minister of Labour. This 

is their responsibility; they will face this responsibility; they will meet this responsibility; but I suggest it 

has nothing to do with the kind of thing we are trying to develop in this youth agency. 

 

You know when the member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek) talked about what we should be doing in 

the field of education, he said he would recommend that we give free school books, free education. You 

know this has a rather hollow sound, Mr. Speaker. The Socialists on your left were promising for over 

22 years, they were promising free tuition, free school books, free education. What did they do? They 

stood idly by while the cost of education soared; they did little or nothing. As soon as they are put back 

into opposition again, they again start talking, promising free school books, free tuition, and free 

education. You know, Mr. Speaker, as I listened to the three members of the opposition, I was impressed 

by one thing. Every one of them had recommendations and suggestions of things that the committee 

should be doing or should have done. I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that, if the committee took 

all of the things that were suggested this afternoon by the opposition into account and tried to follow 

them up, by the time they got a program outlined, by the time we got this program off the ground, the 

young people of today would be eligible for the old age pension. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are trying to do something today for the youth of Saskatchewan. These people had 20 

years to do something for the youth of Saskatchewan and they failed and they failed miserably. The 

yardstick of how they failed was the fact that two-thirds of our high school graduates, and over half of 

our university graduates, year after year, left this province. Why? Because they couldn't find 

opportunities here, they couldn't find challenges here, they couldn't even find jobs here. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we intend to change that. We have already started to change that. We are going to make 

Saskatchewan, and we are making Saskatchewan a more exciting, a more challenging, a more 

worthwhile place in which to live, not just for our old people, not for the middle-aged people, but for the 

youth of this province and they will stay home and they will help us to build a better Saskatchewan. 

 

I am disappointed that the members opposite obviously will fail to support this legislation; but I am 

disappointed that they obviously intend to, by their words, not support our efforts in regard to a youth 

program. They may, as they have done with most other things, they talk one way and then when the vote 

comes they will either leave the chamber or they will hang their heads and vote in favor of it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I challenge them to put up or shut up, either to support this youth legislation, what 

we are trying to 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1249 

do and talk in favor of it, or they should have the nerve, the intestinal fortitude to back up what they say. 

 

I was amazed when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) got up after the member for Regina East 

(Mr. Smishek) and the junior member for Saskatoon got up and literally attempted to tear this whole 

program apart, tear down everything we have tried to build up. Then he stood up and said we wish you 

all kinds of luck. Well . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And meant it, and meant it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Like the fellow said, it only hurts when you laugh. Well, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that we feel this is a very important step, a very worthwhile step as I said, there are probably a very few 

things that this legislature over the years has been asked to pass on that have been more important and 

hold greater promise for the future than this youth activity program. Some day it will be a department 

when it proves itself. I am confident that with the kind of positive thinking we have on this side of the 

house, the kind of positive thinking that was shown by the committee that it will prove itself, but 

whether it is an agency or department, we are saying to the young people of Saskatchewan we are going 

to give you leadership, we are going to recognize our responsibility, we are going to supply opportunity 

and challenges and we are going to do it in our time, now, this year, not 10 or 20 years from now. We 

are going to do it through this agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all people of this province will be bitterly disappointed by the shortsighted 

and destructive attitude and criticism shown by members opposite of something that I thought everyone 

in this chamber would support, something we are trying to do for the young people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, something rather than just lip service to the young people of the province. I am 

disappointed, I am not surprised, but I am sure the young people of this province will be bitterly 

disappointed . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — This is not telling the truth. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — But in spite of that we intend to carry on and I think we will develop a program of 

which not only this chamber will be proud, but the people of Saskatchewan will be proud and the young 

people of this province will be more than happy and eager to help us participate in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The motion was agreed to on the following recorded division and Bill No. 2 read a second time. 

 

Yeas — 52 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Leith Willis Merchant (Mrs.) 

Howes Radloff Whelan Loken 

McFarlane Weatherald Nicholson MacDougall 

Cameron MacLennan Kramer Coderre 

Steuart Larochelle Dewhurst Bjarnason 

Heald Hooker Berezowsky Trapp 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1250 

 

Guy Cuelenaere McIsaac MacDonald 

Gallagher Breker Coupland Gardner(Moosomin) 

Mitchell Lloyd Cooper (Mrs.) Brockelbank (Kelsey) 

Wood Nollet Walker Baker 

Blakeney Davies Thibault Pepper 

Michayluk Smishek Link  

Snyder Larson Robbins  

Brockelbank (Saskatoon 

City) 

Pederson   

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): moved second reading of Bill No. 66, An Act Respecting The 

Government Finance Office, Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation and The Crown 

Corporation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in the Budget Speech, the loan program which has been carried out 

by the Industrial Development Fund has been taken over by SEDCO. I think this bill is fairly routine. 

Since SEDCO was established in 1963, no new loans have been made by the fund and the business in 

force prior to that time has gradually been wound up. A number of loans receivable and other assets 

have been transferred to SEDCO. During the year 1966, three final loans were cleared from the accounts 

of the fund. With the completion of its loan activities the assets of the fund essentially consist of shares 

in two major companies. Before the fund is closed out the Provincial Treasurer will purchase these 

shares at their cost to the fund. The liabilities of the fund consist of a loan payable to the Government 

Finance Office and the balance of the advances not yet repaid to the Provincial Treasurer together with a 

contingent liability of $13,920,000 in the U.S. funds under a short-term guarantee of a letter of credit for 

Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited. 

 

I may say that as soon as the legislation is passed by the house pertaining to the Prince Albert pulp mill, 

this particular guarantee will be cleared up. The fund liability will be repaid out of the proceeds of the 

share sales. This act will confirm the transfer of Industrial Development Fund business to SEDCO and 

will provide for the transfer of any remaining miscellaneous assets and liabilities to SEDCO. A bill to 

amend the Industrial Development Act will broaden SEDCO's powers, so that in future SEDCO will 

assist in the establishment of new industries and the expansion of existing industries in certain 

circumstances by acquiring shares and/or guaranteeing loans. 

 

It is proposed that the effective date of closing out the Industrial Development Fund and the transfer of 

any remaining assets and outstanding liabilities to SEDCO take place on June 30th, instead of April 

30th. A house amendment will be introduced when the bill is considered in the Committee of the Whole. 

I would, therefore, at this time beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of Bill No. 66. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this bill is not controversial. When 

the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation was set up in 1963, it was the intention that it 

would assume the obligations of the Industrial Development Fund, and would carry on the work of 

assisting industry that had been initiated by the fund. 

 

As the Premier and Provincial Treasurer has pointed out, at or about that time, the fund ceased making 

new loans and during the last three or four years, the fund has been winding up its 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1251 

affairs. This bill will complete the merger of the activities of the Industrial Development Fund with the 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation as was contemplated at the time that SEDCO was 

established. 

 

Section 4 of the bill repeals Part III of the Crown Corporations Act which is the Industrial Development 

Fund portion of the act. One sees this part go with a little bit of nostalgia since this was the first such 

Industrial Development Fund in Canada. I am advised it was set up in 1947. From relatively small 

beginnings, it did make a very appreciable contribution to the industrial growth of Saskatchewan. Such 

companies as the company which is now known as the Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Corporation 

Limited obtained their first financial assistance from the government from this fund, and a goodly 

number of others, smaller industries obtained, for the most part, assistance from the fund. 

 

A particularly gratifying aspect of the work of the fund was to have one industry borrow three, or four, 

or five times as it expanded its operation. And a look at the records of the fund will indicate that some 

industries started in a small way, expanded, took another loan from the fund, expanded again, and took 

another continued expansion. However, it is, I think, contemplated by all members of the house that the 

same work will be carried on by SEDCO. It is believed and I think rightly so, that SEDCO is a slightly 

more convenient vehicle for handling these loans and as they are increasing in size the Industrial 

Development Fund type of organization which was grafted on to the Government Finance Office crown 

corporation, is probably not as appropriate a vehicle as SEDCO. Therefore, I join with the Provincial 

Treasurer in believing that this housekeeping move is a good one. Aside from the nostalgia at seeing the 

fund pass out of existence, I welcome the bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): moved second reading of Bill No. 63, An Act to amend The 

Tuberculosis Sanatoria Superannuation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this bill is concerned with only one subject, the integration of the Tuberculosis 

Superannuation Plan with the Canada Pension Plan. Provision is made in the act for a committee of the 

League to administer the act. Section 38 of the act authorizes the committee to make regulations with the 

approval of the Board of Directors of the League for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the 

act. The amendment authorizes these regulations to provide for the integration of the superannuation 

plan with the Canada Pension Plan. This legislative provision, Mr. Speaker, is similar to a form of 

amendment that is being taken, that has been taken for integrating most of the other superannuation 

plans with the Canada Pension Plan where the plan is governed by a statute. 

 

Changes required in the superannuation plan for this purpose are in such detail that it appeared to the 

League and its advisors that it would be more practical for these changes to be made by regulation than 

by actual amendments to the act. This is similar to the conclusions reached by persons administering 

other superannuation plans which have also been established by statute. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1252 

I have been advised that discussions have already taken place between officials of the League and the 

Union representing the employees and that agreement has been reached in principle with respect to the 

changes to be made. You will note, Mr. Speaker, that the regulations are subject to the approval of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. This seems advisable because the regulations will in effect be 

amending the provisions of the statute and the participation of this government in this process seems to 

be indicated. 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make one or two brief comments. 

I realize the bill was perhaps a minor amendment in a sense but it does mention integration with respect 

to the Canada Pension Plan. Personally I think there are three choices available to Pension Plans, a 

decking or a stacking process which has previously been mentioned, an integration process, or a third 

one which I think is much preferable where cognizance is taken of the fact that the Canada Pension Plan 

actually operates and some adjustment is made in relation to contributions made by both employees and 

their employer. 

 

I think if the employees involved with respect to the Tuberculosis Sanatoria Superannuation Act really 

had all the facts available to them in relation to these three choices they would be much more inclined to 

take the third choice. Now, I realize that in all probability when they have been confronted with the 

proposition they have been looking at it from the standpoint of two choices only, either a decking or 

stacking process where they would continue to make the regular contributions they have previously been 

making to their own private plan plus contributions to the Canada Pension Plan, or what is commonly 

referred to as an integration approach which simply means that the regular contribution to the private 

plan is reduced by the amount which is payable to the Canada Pension Plan. Again, I repeat, I think 

neither one of these is the preferable approach. The third approach would be much preferable because 

these people would not then lose control. In effect they do lose control. The possibility is there that the 

Canada Pension Plan contribution rates will be increased before benefits are increased. Social Security 

in the United States clearly indicates that this is a possibility. 

 

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would simply say that I would prefer the third approach. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I rise simply to say something that is more in the 

nature of a question than anything else. As I understood the minister when he introduced the bill, he said 

that the League and the Union have had discussions on this matter and these sections were really to 

expedite the results of their discussions. I would just like, when he rises to speak, to ensure me that 

anything that is done will be as a result of a free exchange of effective bargaining and that the 

regulations of the passage of this amendment won't in any way frustrate the exercise of free bargaining 

on pensions by the League and the employees of the League. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, very briefly. The hon. member from Saskatoon (Mr. Robbins) 

raised a point here about one of the three 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1253 

forms, as he pointed out, open to the employees and the employers in this case. In answer to him and to 

the hon. member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), I have been told, as the members are well aware, the 

League runs its own program, hires its own people, sets its own working conditions and they derive their 

power from the statue of this legislature; but I have been told that discussions are going on and have 

been held between the officials of the League and union representing the employees and an agreement 

has been reached in principle and that they have, as I understand it, come jointly to the government 

saying "Will you make this amendment, enact this amendment to this particular act so we can proceed 

along these lines." 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): moved second reading of Bill No. 64, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, all the provisions of this particular bill are related to hospitalization tax collection. 

We have already discussed in this assembly the purpose of the Saskatchewan Assistance Act, 1966, and 

amendments to the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act to bring the provisions of that act into 

line with the Saskatchewan Assistance Act and the forthcoming Canada Assistance Plan. Similar 

amendments are required to be made to the Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. One amendment for 

example, removes the requirement that each municipality and the province pay the hospitalization tax on 

behalf of their indigents. In its place it substitutes provision authorizing the Minister of Public Health to 

pay the tax on behalf of prescribed classes of persons. The act now authorizes a municipality to pay the 

tax on behalf of residents and to recover the amount of such payment from the resident in the same 

manner as municipal taxes. 

 

Similar provisions authorize the Minister of Municipal Affairs to pay the tax on behalf of a resident of a 

Local Improvement District and the Minister of Natural Resources to pay the tax on behalf of a resident 

in the Northern Saskatchewan Administration District. An amendment will specify in detail the manner 

by which such payments may be recovered from the resident. This amendment has been recommended 

by officials of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the act now provides that each collector is to send tax arrears notices during the month of 

January in each year to each resident who has not paid the tax. This provision does not take account of 

the fact that hospitalization tax may be paid in instalments and that a person may, therefore, be in arrears 

at any time during the year when an instalment payment becomes due. Because instalment payments are 

authorized by regulation it is proposed that this provision of the act be repealed and that an amendment 

authorize that regulations be made prescribing the procedures to be followed by collectors in collecting 

the tax. Regulations may then be made in line with reasonable collection policies that would in detail be 

in harmony with those regulations authorizing tax instalment payments. 

 

These amendments, Mr. Speaker, are an integral part of the legislative provisions being introduced so 

that the responsibility for payment for health services received by municipal indigents will be shifted 

from the municipalities to the government of Saskatchewan. The total number of persons involved will 

be close to 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1254 

30,000 people. The shift of financial responsibility will represent a significant reduction for the 

municipalities, in excess, we believe, of $500,000 and I, therefore, suggest that this bill should receive 

the strong endorsation of this entire assembly, and I would now beg leave of the assembly to move 

second reading of Bill No. 64. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): moved second reading of Bill No. 65, An Act to amend The 

Health Services Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, all the provisions of this bill are concerned with health regions. I have already 

announced that as of April 1st, the Assiniboia Health Region and the Moose Jaw Health Region will be 

amalgamated. This is being done at the request and with the full support of the Regional Boards of both 

health regions. Legally the amalgamation is being effected by the Assiniboia Health Region being 

dissolved and the area contained within that district being added to the Moose Jaw Health Region. When 

these matters were being considered questions arose with respect to the authority for carrying out the 

following two matters: (a) Disposing of the surplus funds of the Assiniboia Health Region and (b) 

Changing the name of the Moose Jaw Heath Region so as to appropriately reflect the fact that the 

amalgamation has taken place. 

 

The Health Services Act does not seem to provide adequate authority for either of these matters to be 

dealt with and the act is, therefore, being amended or we propose that the act be amended for these two 

purposes. 

 

The third amendment authorizes a Regional Board to make expenditures for facilitating the provisions of 

health services in health regions. Mr. Speaker, the act now provides that estimates for this purpose may 

be included in the board's annual budget but the authority to make expenditures for this purpose is not 

included in the board's stated powers. The amendment, Mr. Speaker, is being proposed to clearly confer 

this power on the board so that there will be no doubt as to the board's authority in this regard. 

Expenditures for facilities for the provision of health service would include such matters as the purchase 

of hospital equipment for certain purposes and the purchase of equipment to be used by physicians, 

dentists or other persons providing health services. This amendment, Mr. Speaker, is for the purpose of 

clarification only and is not intended to represent a change of legislative policy. I would, therefore, beg 

leave of the assembly to move second reading of Bill No. 65. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, just a brief comment. I am somewhat concerned 

about Section 28 and the question of disorganization, but I do think that we can probably discuss it in 

some detail when it comes up for third reading. I understand there is a procedure under an Order in 

Council for disorganization of the Regional Boards. I do not know whether it is really the place to have 

it, or whether it really should be included in the act. However, I have checked the other amendments and 

I do agree with them, but will reserve the right to discuss it in more detail when it comes up for third 

reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1255 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): moved second reading of Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The 

University Act. 

 

He said: This amendment, Mr. Speaker, is to establish a principal at the university campus in Saskatoon, 

as well as a principal that has been here established in Regina. This would give us a president at the head 

of the university, a principal of each campus and we would also have a Board of Governors for the two 

campuses and the Senate for the two campuses. I personally believe that it will allow for an orderly 

development of the two campuses without undue rivalry or competition or political interference at one 

centre or the other in its development. I believe that one Board of Governors and one President will see 

the development of our university more orderly than if it were otherwise devised. And without a long 

speech, I would like to recommend this to the house, this amendment. It has been requested by the 

university and I would beg leave of the assembly to move second reading of this bill. 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I noticed the Minister of Education smiled this way. 

I guess he knew I was going to get up, but I assure him that I will continue to prod him and the 

government, or any government, to see that complete autonomy is given to both universities, that is a 

Board of Governors. Now, in reading this I see where the establishment of the principal and 

vice-principal in Saskatoon — is this, do I take that correctly, Mr. Minister — that you will have a 

principal and vice-principal in Saskatoon as well? 

 

Mr. Trapp: — A principal in each centre. 

 

Mr. Baker: — When we established a principal here at the outset of the university, I objected to it then, 

although I was not in a position that I am here today. I think this is going to belittle the organization of 

the university at Saskatoon as well. I have always strived to get a president in each place, 

vice-presidents, with its separate Board of Governors. Now last year the Minister of Education, and I 

had stated that we should have another look at this over the next year, indicated that he thought I had 

sown a good seed which would probably bear fruit. But I see he has cut down the seedling before it got 

growing and I take it that this is the policy of himself and I would have to assume of the government's 

side, that we do not work towards autonomy for this campus or any others that might be set up as the 

years go by. I am convinced that autonomy is the only answer if campuses are to grow systematically. I 

notice that in the building program this year at Saskatoon there is money being provided for the 

expansion of already well-established courses and building instruction. I would hope that more monies 

would be poured into this campus to cope with the growing need in southern Saskatchewan. We could 

easily handle 6,000 to 7,000 students if that many would come here and go to this university. If they are 

not able to get into Saskatoon they go to other provinces or even across the line. 

 

We talk a lot today about providing facilities for our youth. This is the key method in keeping our youth 

at home. We have lost thousands over the years because we did not have a choice of courses from which 

they could choose and go into different fields. 

 

In looking over the various universities across Canada I have mentioned some of these things before. 

Why is it that Ontario has autonomy for every university? Why is it that Alberta is going to 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1256 

give autonomy to the Calgary campus now? Why is it in British Columbia that the Simon Fraser 

University which is smaller than ours has autonomy? I do not think you can ever create an interest in 

any university if you do not have complete authority. How are you going to get the Regina people 

interested in our campus, the business people, if it is being run from another source. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that we should make the change now. This amendment, while it is trying to put the same thing 

at Saskatoon as here, is belittling that one as well. I would think it would be Saskatoon members that 

object to it. I am somewhat surprised that it is being put forth and, therefore, I want to reiterate that we 

have another look at this whole act. I sowed the seed last year; I hope it will be nurtured along, not only 

nurtured, but it should be in full bloom this year. I am somewhat surprised that the minister has now 

taken a definite stand against autonomy for the Regina campus. I had thought that he had been 

somewhat sympathetic to my suggestion. I hope he still changes his mind on it. I am sure that the people 

in his constituency which belong to southern Saskatchewan want autonomy. I am sure all the southern 

constituencies of this province want autonomy for this campus and I would ask the government to have 

another look at it. I am not trying to criticize them. It was established under the former government, with 

a principal set up here. I opposed the idea then when Dr. Spinks made his speech in the Saskatchewan 

Hotel as to the setup here. 

 

I opposed it when I heard that there was an indication of a principal setup in this one. I am still opposed 

to it and I will as long as the people keep me in this legislature and in public life. Even if I wasn't in 

public life, I would still continue with this struggle. I am sure that the Premier in his own heart thinks 

exactly as I do on this question, but I am sure — we might have to call on him to support me in this to 

get it through. I can't say I oppose it because it is really doing what is on the books now, but I do oppose 

the whole act as it is. Let's bring in a new act, giving division to the two major campuses in this province 

and in another eight or ten years you will have another major campus, probably in the city of Moose 

Jaw. I won't mention Prince Albert, but we will have colleges in the places I mentioned. There is one 

city I left out and that was Lloydminster the other day. But anyway, I believe that this should be looked 

at again, Mr. Speaker, and revamped to the extent where we would have a complete Board of 

Governors, presidents and vice-presidents. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have noted some of the remarks of the hon. 

member for Regina East (Mr. Baker). I wondered whether or not he was speaking for his party, as he 

spoke this afternoon, because I have seen frequent utterances, I think, from the Leader of the Opposition 

and other members on that side that it did not make sense to have two separate universities. Now, I can 

assure you that as far as the government is concerned, we feel at this time that to have a separate 

university in Regina as distinct from the one in Saskatoon would lead to a costly duplication of facilities 

and administration. I am quite sure that there will probably come a time some years hence when it does 

make sense but I don't believe from a business point of view and from an efficient point of view that that 

day has yet arrived. 

 

The member for Regina East (Mr. Baker) said that he would like more money poured into Regina 

campus. Well, I don't blame him. I wish we could pour more in, but I can tell him, as he knows, that we 

are certainly pouring in a lot more that did the 



 

March 16, 1966 

 

 

1257 

previous administration at any time. I want to remind the house that in the 20 years they were in office 

their average grants every one of those 20 years for both capital and operating were $3,100,000. This 

year alone we are giving over $21,000,000 to the university in a single year and last year . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Would the Premier permit a question? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — As soon as I finish. I have just got a minute, then I will be very pleased. Mr. Speaker, 

you can see that this government gives priority to higher education, but we don't just talk about it, like 

my hon. friends opposite. We give them hard cash. We are at this moment building a new Veterinary 

College, getting ready for a new Dentistry College, yes, having to put up the money. We are getting 

ready to put duplicate engineering facilities down here in Regina. This government is doing something 

for the university besides talk. I think the record is a pretty good one. As far as this bill is concerned, we 

are setting up a principal in Regina as well as having a principal in Saskatoon and Dr. Spinks will be 

over the whole university. We think Dr. Spinks has done an excellent job. We think this will give him 

more time for overall co-ordination and I commend this bill to the consideration of the house for second 

reading. 

 

Now, I would be pleased to answer the question of the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if I may pick up the debate, I will make a statement during the course of my 

remarks. I just wanted to point out to the Premier and I think it is time he sort of clarified to the people 

that this $21,500,000 that he speaks of, this grant to the university this year, as I read the budget and as I 

read the estimates, at least $8,000,000 of this is a loan, money to be borrowed. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — But the university will have that amount to spend. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Yes, and have that money to pay back, of course, Mr. Speaker. I beg leave of the 

assembly to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

On the motion of Hon. Mr. Steuart the assembly adjourned at 5.29 o'clock p.m. 


