



















































Hansard: February 08, 1966


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Tuesday, February 8th, 1966 

3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the 

Fourteenth day of January, 1966 for the meeting of the Second Session of the Fifteenth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 

p.m. today, Tuesday, the Fourth day of February, 1966. 

 

3:05 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and having taken his seat upon the Throne 

was please to open the Session with the following Speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: it is my privilege to welcome you to the second 

session of the Fifteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
 

For the people of our province, 1965 has been a prosperous year. 

 

Nature favored our agricultural economy with a near-record wheat crop, most of which is committed for 

sale in the world markets. 

 

Our industrial economy continued to advance at a remarkable rate, as several hundreds of millions of 

dollars of new investment come into the province. 

 

The buoyant economic situation has created virtually full employment, while wage levels have 

continued to rise. 

 

My government will continue to pursue those methods of private and responsible enterprise, which have 

proven so successful these past several years, in accelerating development in Saskatchewan. 

 

Company registrations in 1965 increased about 20 per cent over 1964. 

 

TAX REDUCTIONS 
 

My government realizes that despite tax cuts made at the last session, the municipal and provincial tax 

burden in Saskatchewan remains greater than that borne by Canadians in other parts of the country. 

 

Although large new expenditures are required in numerous fields during 1966, additional steps will be 

proposed to help the taxpayer at these two levels. 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

2 

GRANT TO HOME OWNERS 
 

As one step in this direction, my ministers will ask for your approval of a measure to provide a grant of 

up to fifty dollars annually to each rural and urban homeowner. 

 

AGRICULTURE 
 

My government wishes to enact a number of measures to encourage maximum development of our 

agricultural industry. 

 

While our cattle populations in the past year reached a record two million, three hundred thousand head, 

my government will ask you to approve expenditures to promote an even larger measure of 

diversification in the livestock industry. 

 

You will be asked to approve new legislation respecting animal diseases, so that our livestock industry 

can be provided maximum protection. 

 

You will be asked to approve of the setting up of new community pastures and the enlargement of 

numerous existing ones. 

 

My government proposes to expend further sums for operation of a newly established soil testing service 

at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

My ministers believe expansion of the crop insurance program will result from the re-insurance 

agreement signed recently with the government of Canada, lessening the financial risk to the province. 

 

You will be asked to approve appropriations to expand the government’s fodder shelter program, and to 

provide assistance for the seeding of sub-marginal lands and the improvement of privately-owned land. 

 

SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN IRRIGATION PROJECT 
 

Legislation will be presented for your consideration to permit full realization of the irrigation benefits of 

the South Saskatchewan River Development Project. 

 

UNIFORM TIME 
 

My government will seek your approval for the appropriation of further sums to expand its incentive 

program to encourage mineral development in our north. 

 

The scheme which was initiated last year, has been most successful in attracting mining exploration 

companies into our pre-Cambrian areas. 

 

AID TO EDUCATION 
 

You will be asked to approve sharp increases in my government’s assistance to education. 

 

These measures will enable expansion of technical training facilities to meet the increasing demand for 

skilled industrial manpower. 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

3 

You will be asked to approve large increases in grants to the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon 

and Regina. 

 

Members will be requested to approve an increase in grants to public and private schools, and 

establishment of special grants to school units for the purpose of encouraging a reduction in the mil rate. 

 

FREE TEXT BOOKS – GRADE IX 
 

My government will ask your approval of a measure to provide free test books for all students in Grad 

IX. 

 

DENTAL SCHOOL 
 

Recognizing the serious shortage of dentists, especially in rural Saskatchewan, my government will ask 

for funds to proceed with the construction of a dental college at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

TELEPHONES 
 

You will be asked to approve increased spending so that telephone service can be extended to many 

areas of the province not now benefiting by such service. 

 

WATER SUPPLY 
 

You will be asked to approve legislation that will enable construction of a multi-purpose water supply 

scheme to meet the needs of municipalities and industry in an areas south and east of Saskatoon. 

 

LABOUR 
 

In the field of labour, the government intends to press forward with a vigorous work-force policy. 

 

In particular, it will encourage measure to supply our industry with qualified workmen, and also to take 

the necessary steps to offset the consequences of automation, especially through the reclassification of 

workers. 

 

My government will again make proposals to increase the Saskatchewan minimum wage. 

 

HIGHWAYS 
 

My government will seek your support for sharply increased spending on highway construction in all 

parts of our province. 

 

TOURIST INDUSTRY 
 

My government continues to be dissatisfied with the progress which Saskatchewan is making in 

developing the tourist industry. 

 

Therefore, once again, you will be asked for increased expenditures for tourist promotional purposes. 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

4 

AID TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
 

In this session of the legislature, you will be asked to approve a program of substantially increased 

assistance to local governments. 

 

Among a number of measures which will be advanced are: 

(1) A proposal to share the costs of snow clearance on grid roads. 

(2) A proposal to increase equalization grants for the purpose of extending and improving grid and 

municipal roads throughout the province. 

(3) Legislation to begin paying a portion of the costs of maintaining grid roads. 

(4) A Bill to relieve municipalities of the responsibility for medical care of indigents, placing it with 

the provincial government. 

 

PULP MILL 
 

My ministers will ask you to approve legislation enabling the government to assist in the establishment 

of a pulp manufacturing plant at Prince Albert. 

 

HOUSING 
 

In order to meet the ever-increasing demand for new housing in a rapidly industrializing province, you 

will be asked to approve legislation establishing an entity to: 

 

(1) facilitate the orderly development of urban communities throughout the province. 
(2) promote the construction of new housing in areas where the need is particularly pressing. 

 

INDIANS AND METIS 
 

Your approval will be sought for a program to accelerate the training and employment of our citizens of 

Indian ancestry, so that they may more rapidly achieve the opportunities of our increasing prosperity. 

 

AID TO THE ARTS 
 

In order to facilitate the development of the arts in our province, you will be asked to approve further 

increases in the annual grant to the Saskatchewan Arts Board. 

 

SOCIAL WELFARE 
 

You will be asked to approve establishment of a Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. 

 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

5 

The new Plan will integrate six categorical welfare programs. 

 

It will extend financial help to more people, and raise the level of assistance to those in real need. 

 

In addition, costs of welfare administration to local governments will be reduced. 

 

The program will permit provision to indigents of hospital services, optical and dental services, 

appliances, and a major measure of assistance in meeting drug costs. 

 

LIQUOR OUTLETS 
During the past year, the demand for liquor agencies has far exceeded the number opened. 

 

My government will continue the policy of closing some stores in small villages where the population 

does not justify the regular type of store. 

 

You will be asked to approve amendments to the Liquor Act which will permit the establishment of 

additional agencies. 
 

PENSION INCREASES 
 

During this session of the Legislature, you will be asked to approve increases in pension benefits for 

public servants who retired between April 5, 1951 and April 1, 1954. 
 

YOUTH ACTIVITIES 
 

Because my government believes that our most precious resource is our youth, you will be asked to 

approve a greatly expanded program of the Provincial Youth Agency. 
 

HEALTH 
 

My government will ask for large additional sums to expand the province’s various health programs. 
 

NURSE SHORTAGE 
 

To overcome the chronic shortage of nurses and modernize their training in line with other professional 

groups, you will be asked to approve legislation placing the education of nurses under the Department of 

Education. 

 

This proposed legislation is the outcome of the excellent work done by a committee chaired by Mr. 

Justice Tucker, and will represent a new approach to nursing education in Canada. 
 

MUNICIPAL HOSPITAL FINANCE 

 

As requested by the Hospital Association, and approved by both municipal organizations, legislation 

will be introduced for your approval, requiring all municipalities to give financial support to hospital 

units on a formal basis. 
 

GRANTS TO T. B. LEAGUE 
 

My government will ask you to approve legislation increasing grants to the Anti-Tuberculosis League, 

to enable it to carry on 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

6 

its work without increasing demands on the municipalities. 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 

1966, will be submitted to you. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full confidence that you will favorably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

WELCOME TO NEW CLERK 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Members will be pleased, the Clerk of our Legislature, Mr. C. B. Koester, was 

successful last year in winning two scholarships for further study. He has accordingly received one 

year’s leave of absence without pay, in order to attend the University of Alberta at Edmonton, to study 

for his Ph.D. in History. I am sure the house will wish to extend to him most hearty congratulations and 

very best wishes for success in securing his degree. 

 

During his temporary absence, by special arrangement with the Clerk of the British House of Commons, 

Sir Barnett Cocks, and with the approbation of their then Speaker, the late Sir Harry Hylton Foster, and 

the present speaker, Dr. Horace King, we have been accorded the services of a Senior Clerk of the 

British House of Commons, Mr. K. A. Bradshaw, who will be Acting Clerk during Mr. Koester’s leave 

of absence. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw has a degree from Cambridge, with first class honors in history. He has been one of the 

clerks in the British House of Commons for the last seventeen years, before which he saw active service 

as a Commissioned Officer with the Royal Ulster Rifles. Mr. Bradshaw’s visit has been arranged on the 

basis that our own clerk will later have the privilege of going for a period to the British House of 

Commons and serving there. This is the first time that an exchange of this nature has been arranged 

between our two countries, and it is being watched with keen interest. It is most earnestly hoped that this 

precedent-making action will lead to an expanding exchange of clerks and other key personnel 

throughout the Commonwealth, thus strengthening the bonds of friendship and understanding for the 

mutual preservation and extension of those great traditions of freedom and self government which we all 

hold dear. I am sure that all members will wish to extend a most warm and friendly welcome to Mr. 

Bradshaw, and also express most sincere thanks and appreciation to the Speaker and Clerk of the British 

House of Commons, through whose wholehearted co-operation this arrangement was made possible. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the assembly that Joseph Ronald Lindsay Parrott has been appointed 

Clerk Assistant of the Legislative Assembly during the present session, and to express our thanks to him 

for once more taking on this duty in addition to other duties. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

7 

NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES AND ELECTIONS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has received 

from the Chief Electoral Officer notification of the following vacancies which have occurred in the 

representation: in the constituency of Moosomin by the resignation of the Honorable Alexander 

Hamilton McDonald, and in the constituency of Bengough by the death of Sam K. Asbell, Esquire; and 

a certificate of the following election and return of Ernest F. Gardner, Esquire, as member for the 

constituency of Moosomin. 

 

WELCOME TO MR. GARDNER, NEW MEMBER 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Welcome to Mr. Ernest Gardner member for the constituency of 

Moosomin, who has taken the oath and signed the roll, and now claims the right to take his seat. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before we proceed to the business before the 

house this session, I think it would be fitting that the assembly pause and pay tributes to former 

members of this house who have passed away since our last meeting. One of our number, known and 

respected by all of us is among those departed. Some hon.members knew and served in this assembly 

with two deceased former members. It is appropriate that we express our gratitude, the gratitude of the 

people of Saskatchewan, for their faithful service to their communities and to the province. 

 

Therefore, I should like to move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That this assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year, of three former 

members of this assembly, and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution each made to 

his community, his constituency, and to this province. 

 

Dr. James A. Kiteley, who died on July 14, 1965. He was a member of this assembly for the 

constituency of Torch River, from 1938 to 1944. He was born at Penville, Ontario in 1886, and was 

educated at Penville public school, Bradford high school, and Manitoba university. He took a degree 

in medicine, subsequently becoming a physician and surgeon. He was a medical pioneer of 

north-eastern Saskatchewan, a member of Saskatchewan clubs, and a member of the Blue Lodge 

Nipawin, the Wa Wa Temple of Regina, and the Elks Lodge of Nipawin. 

 

Mr. William C. Woods, who died on December 12, 1965. He was a member of this assembly for the 

constituency of Kinistino from 1948 to 1952. He was born in 1891, and was educated in Napanee, 

Ontario, Oakville and Elm Creek, Manitoba. He enlisted in the Canadian Signal Corps in 1916, 

transferred to the Royal Air Force in 1917, serving as a pilot until 1919. Subsequently he was 

President of the Association of Rural Municipalities, Director of the Saskatchewan 

Anti-Tuberculosis Board, representative of the Senate of the University of Saskatchewan. 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

8 

Mr. Sam K. Asbell, represented the constituency of Bengough from the general election of 1964 

until his death on October 10, 1965. He was born in 1914, was educated at Horizon, viceroy and 

Regina. Served in the armed forces during the Second World War. He was an implement dealer and 

a farmer. From 1965 until his death he was a Councilor for the town of Assiniboia; he was also a 

member of the Royal Canadian Legion, rotary and the Elks Lodge 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathy with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I, on behalf of the MLA’s with 

whom I am associated on this side of the house, associate ourselves with the remarks of the Premier with 

respect to those former members who have died since last we met. There are other members who knew 

some of these gentlemen more intimately than I, who I am sure, will comment on them as well. Perhaps, 

I might just say a word. 

 

It was not my pleasure to know Dr. Kiteley. I had, however, heard much of him as a member of this 

legislature, and as a particularly devoted member of his own community. He was a pioneer doctor, he 

was one who was greatly beloved in that capacity. He was one who had what must have been considered 

for his day, advanced ideas as to how he might be of best use to his people. I have heard more of him in 

recent years again, I know how much he will be missed by his community, as a citizen and as a very fine 

physician. 

 

It was my privilege to be in the legislature while Mr. William Woods represented the constituency of 

Kinistino. I remember him as a quiet person. As the record indicates he was the one who gave a great 

deal of his time and energy to public service, first in respect to local government, and more latterly in 

regard to his work representing his constituency in this legislature. 

 

My acquaintance with the late Mr. Asbell was indeed very short. I do recall, Mr. Speaker, that he was 

thoughtful enough to greet me most kindly when I returned to the house last year, but more important, I 

recall many remarks from a number of my colleagues as to the impression which he had made on them 

of his friendship and his sincerity. 

 

In seconding the motion of the Premier, I heartily concur in this expression of respect to be passed on to 

those members of the families of our three previous members. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier 

and the hon. Leader of the Opposition, in paying a tribute to the former members that sat in this house. I 

would like to pay special tribute to the memory of Mr. Sam Asbell. I knew Sam as a business man, as a 

community leader, as a member of this legislative assembly and as a friend. Sam Asbell considered it 

the greatest honor of his life when his fellow citizens paid him the tribute of electing him to sit in this 

legislature and represent them. As a matter of fact, he tried on three separate occasions before he was 

successful in 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

9 

becoming a member of this house, and he considered this a great honor, as I know we all do. He also 

considered an honor the fact that he was the first of his faith, the Jewish faith, to sit in this legislative 

assembly. Sam had a very short time to sit in this house, and he acquitted himself with dignity and with 

honor. He proved to be a very hard working member for all of his constituents. I think we all agree that 

his untimely passing was a tragedy, and I think it is very fitting that members of this house take time out 

on this occasion to pay tribute to Sam and to the other members who in former years graced the 

legislative assembly. I would like to go on record as joining with others in this house in paying a tribute 

to the memory of Sam Asbell and in saying how we regret his untimely passing. 

 

Mr. Gordon T. Snyder (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, I wish also to say a few words in memory and in 

recognition of a man who served his country, his community, his political party, and his constituents 

with both dedication and distinction. During World War II, Sam Asbell served with the Royal Canadian 

Artillery and following his return to the civilian life, he maintained his interest in veterans’ organizations 

and played a prominent part in the work of the Royal Canadian Legion, serving on the executive 

committee, on the sports, the poppy and grave committees. I had the good fortune, Mr. Speaker, of being 

acquainted with the late member for Bengough (Mr. Asbell) prior to his election to this legislature in 

1964. For those of us who were fortunate enough to be associated with him in the Royal Canadian 

Legion we were aware of his dedication and his willingness to give freely of himself for the causes in 

which he believed strongly. He was a member, as has been mentioned, of Rotary, of Elks, of the 

Chamber of Commerce, of the Retail Merchants Association, and I know that Sam Asbell will be missed 

by the people of Assiniboia and surrounding district, where he lived, farmed, and operated his business. 

I know that the community and the province will be somewhat poorer for his departure. So, I also, Mr. 

Speaker, would like to join with other members in expressing our deepest sympathy and our 

condolences to his wife and family. 

 

Mr. Frank K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to join with other members of the 

legislature in expressing sympathy to Mrs. Asbell in the loss of her husband. A man whom I worked 

with and did enjoy working with and who made a terrific contribution to our legislature. I would also 

today like to join with Premier Thatcher and Mr. Lloyd, the Leader of the Opposition, in a few 

comments regarding Dr. Kiteley. Dr. Kiteley was a citizen of my constituency, a man who was an 

outstanding doctor; he was a wonderful doctor, I knew him for 25 years when I was in Nipawin; and he 

certainly served the people of that constituency well. Dr. Kiteley represented the people of Torch River 

constituency, it is now known as the Nipawin constituency, and he was a Liberal member for that 

constituency from 1938 to 1944. Dr. Kiteley was highly regarded and he was loved by the people of the 

Nipawin constituency. It is only fitting and proper that I rise and pay tribute to Dr. Kiteley today. Dr. 

Kiteley was born March 23, 1886, in Simcoe, Ontario. In 1905 he moved, with his mother and five 

brothers, to Tugaske, where the family homesteaded. In 1915, Dr. Kiteley obtained his doctor’s degree 

in medicine from the University of Manitoba and he stared his profession in Tugaske. However, the 

north beckoned to the doctor and in 1919 he moved to the Nipawin district. Now, word spread that the 

doctor had arrived, and homesteaders from far and near called for his services. There was little cash in 

those days and payments were generally made with some type of food. The doctor 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

10 

and his young wife were often discouraged and thought of leaving our district. People needed his 

services and so the doctor and his wife just never got around to leaving Nipawin district. 

 

Now, there are many stories by patients regarding some of the miraculous cures and operations made by 

the doctor. The kitchen table served as the operating table for many of these urgent and serious 

operations. I have heard many pioneering stories from the doctor. One might well wonder how people 

survived such hardship. Some of the operations and repair work done under the most primitive 

conditions seem incredible in this day and age of immaculate and sterile operating rooms and 

post-operative care. 

 

Dr. Kiteley and his family endured all the hardships of the early settlers and for five years he served as 

their MLA. In 1960 Dr. Kiteley retired from a full and useful life. On July 14, of this year, the doctor 

died after a very short illness. There is no way to assess the doctor’s contribution to human welfare and 

the development of north-eastern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many honors have been showered on the doctor. The students of the Nipawin composite 

high school honored the doctor by making him Citizen of the Year. Dr. Kiteley was crowned King for a 

Day in Hollywood. He was made a life member in the Canadian Legion for his work done on behalf of 

the Legion veteran members from the 1914 war. The Saskatchewan College of Physicians and Surgeons, 

in association with the Dominion Medical Association, gave him an honorary life membership in senior 

medicine. On June 27th, 1953, Nipawin and district held a Dr. Kiteley day, and presented the doctor 

with a new car and many other gifts. Hundreds of people, brought into this world by Dr. Kiteley, came 

back to Nipawin for this occasion. A sitting room in the Nipawin Union Hospital is also furnished in his 

honor, and a brass plaque suitably inscribed was placed in the room. I might also add Dr. Kiteley was 

also appointed member of the Saskatchewan History Archives Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during his many years in the district the doctor took a great interest in the agricultural and 

natural resources development of the country. He was vitally interested in the welfare and social life of 

the community. Dr. Kiteley represents the kind of people who give generously of themselves and of 

their families in the service of mankind. There is no way to repay such sacrifice and devotion. We can 

only record a small portion of their achievements in the history of Saskatchewan. Today, I wish, on 

behalf of all the people in the Nipawin constituency, to add a few words of condolence to those 

expressed by the Premier, and to express our heartfelt sympathy to Dr. Kiteley’s wife, daughter, and 

many friends. The doctor was a legend in his own lifetime and will be long and lovingly remembered by 

all the people in north-eastern Saskatchewan and especially by those people of the Nipawin 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Arthur Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this motion, I would like to join 

the mover and the seconder in paying tribute to Mr. William Carlton Woods. As has already been 

mentioned, he represented the Kinistino constituency in this house from 1948 to 1952. 

 

May I add to what has already been said, Mr. Woods was a diabetic of several years before the 

discovery of insulin. He was in the original ward of diabetics treated by Doctors Banting, Best and 

Gilchrist, in Christie Street Hospital, Toronto in 1922. 



 

February 8, 1966 

 

 

11 

In spite of his handicap he served his country well. He was a member of the Masonic Lodge and the 

Canadian Legion. 

 

I would like on behalf of the constituents of Kinistino to pay tribute to him and to express sympathy to 

his family. 

 

Mr. Ed Whelan (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, close relatives of the late Dr. J. Archie Kiteley, are 

neighbors of mine in the city of Regina. Through your good offices, Mr. Speaker, they are in the 

chamber today. Although it was not my privilege to have known Dr. Kiteley, I have heard many 

accounts of this remarkable man, of his dedication to his patients, his appreciation of flowers, shrubs and 

trees, his disregard of financial and material gain, and his enthusiasm for public medical care. 

 

I join all members of the house in expressing sympathy to relatives of this dedicated doctor who became 

a legend in his own lifetime. 

 

There are many fascinating stories about him. When the season of the year was right, it was Dr. 

Kitelely’s habit to wander about the farmyard after the arrival of a new baby, to carefully plant a shrub 

or tree from a supply of seeds he kept in his waistcoat pocket. The tree grew and flourished along with 

the growing child, and those who have one of these trees cherish it as a reminder of their doctor and of 

an eventful day in the history of their family. 

 

I am told that Dr. Kiteley painstakingly put his memoirs, beginning on the homestead, during his study 

of medicine and his experiences as a general practitioner in the north-eastern portion of the province. 

These memoirs, Mr. Speaker, are in the possession of his daughter. Perhaps, through the legislature, the 

people of Saskatchewan would wish to pay tribute to Dr. Kiteley by publishing his story as a centennial 

project. His memoirs tell part of the history of Saskatchewan and the early history of the pioneers. 

 

His relatives have asked me to convey that it was the wish of Dr. Kiteley that a scholarship in medicine 

be established. Perhaps in the legislature sometime we could consider establishing a scholarship in 

medicine, a Dr. J. A. Kiteley scholarship for students in the field of public health. 

 

The memoirs when published would become part of the recorded history of our province, and the 

scholarship would carry on into the future as a tribute to one of Saskatchewan’s most colorful and most 

dedicated doctors of medicine. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — moved, seconded by Mr. Lloyd, Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of 

deceased members, be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:08 p.m. 


