




















































Hansard: March 03, 1966


693 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

18th Day 

 

Thursday, March 3, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2.30 o'clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to your attention and through you to 

the members of the legislature, a group of students in the Speaker's Gallery. These students are grade 11 

and 12 students from the Goodwater High School. Goodwater is in the Weyburn constituency. These 

students are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Andrew Medwid and their bus driver, Mr. E. Erickson. 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that you all join with me in wishing them a very profitable and pleasant stay 

with us and a very safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, may I draw to your attention, the presence of 

a group of school students from the city of Saskatoon, in the west gallery today. They are 37 students 

from Northcott Public School. The one that is here each day, is the best school, of course, of the whole 

city. They are with their teacher, Miss Talbot, and I am sure the members will join with me in 

welcoming them to this legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce through you 

to the members of the house a group in the Speaker's Gallery, which comes from the Elrose 

constituency. There is a student from each of the high schools, which are Lacadena, Kyle, Beechy, 

Eston, Elrose, White Bear, Wiseton, Birsay, Lucky Lake and Dinsmore. Their drivers are Mr. and Mrs. 

Bob O'Hara with Mr. Bill Leith and Mr. Lorne Burns. These students are here for two days. They are 

here for a rather more detailed study of the business of government rather than our usual half a day tour, 

and I know that all members would wish them good luck, wish that they learn something this afternoon, 

and that they enjoy themselves. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of the house to join in 

extending a welcome to a group of university students who are here in the galleries today. I am advised 

that they are from the Political Science Department of the university. I am sure that all of us would want 

to extend to them our very best wishes for an enjoyable and, hopefully, an informative afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

694 

 

CORRECTION OF NEWSPAPER REPORT 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, might I rise on a point of 

personal privilege. It has been drawn to my attention that in a report in the Leader Post on Tuesday last, 

I was inaccurately quoted as indicating that oil production in Saskatchewan had been 7,000,000 barrels 

in 1963, 10,000,000 barrels in 1964, 6,000,000 barrels in 1965. What I, of course, said was our increase 

in oil production had been those particular figures in each year. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion of Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier) that Mr. 

Speaker do now leave the Chair and the amendment thereto by Mr. Blakeney. 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate 

yesterday evening, I had taken some time to review a number of the programs, policies of my 

department, which I thought would be of interest to members, and I had just completed some remarks on 

the LID branch. I would like to make another comment or two on one more branch of my department, 

namely the Municipal Assessment Branch. This branch is responsible for the assessment of practically 

all of the property in Saskatchewan, other than the two cities, and we have found that we are behind in 

the reassessment program of the province some ten to fifteen years and in some cases up to 20 years. As 

a result we have sought to increase the staff in the department and as well as that to hire and train a class 

of assistant assessment officers to help speed up the load and update the assessment picture of the 

province. With that comment on the assessment branch of my department, I would like to spend some 

time this afternoon dealing with the budget presented by the Provincial Treasurer and to point out some 

of the areas that particularly affect my department, and just how specifically they do so. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer has come up with a budget that sees a predicted increase in spending over last 

year's estimates by almost $48,000,000, and yet the budget provides for only two tax increases and two 

major areas of reduced taxes. The reduction in income tax will benefit everybody and bring this 

province in line with the other provinces of the Dominion; also the Home-owner grants is a major step in 

an attempt to return some of the revenue of the province to the property owners of this province. 

 

Now his budget also provides some major increases in present programs and some significantly new 

programs as well. Of particular interest to me, Mr. Speaker, is that his budget very clearly reflects the 

Liberal party's recognition of the fact that local governments do need more financial help from the 

province. In his Budget Address, the Provincial Treasurer stated that the total increase in direct financial 

assistance to local governments will be $15,700,000. I would like to mention some of the increases that I 

would like to deal with in the time at my disposal. There are the Home-owner grants which will be going 

directly to every home owner in the province; the increase in the budget for the urban assistance 

program; the increase of $800,000 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

695 

over last year's estimate for grid road construction; the increase of $1,400,000 in equalization grants to 

rural municipalities; a new program providing $250,000 to assist rural people in snow removal on grid 

roads and school bus routes; a new program providing $1,000,000 to rural municipalities to help in the 

maintenance of grid roads; the increase in the estimates for regravelling of grid roads, another 

contribution. 

 

I would like to just further illustrate the value and the meaning of the Home-owner grants to the people 

of this province, and to cite the example of a town in my constituency, the town of Scott, Mr. Speaker. 

The 1964 assessment in the town of Scott was $199,000, 1964 mill rate in that town was 68 mills. Now 

in that town there are 77 homes privately owned, and seven owned by the experimental station. In 

talking with the secretary of the town this morning, we estimated that there are about 70 of these homes 

that are owner occupied and will qualify for the Home-owner grant. Now, just how do they rate when 

we break them down? Sixty-four per cent of the homes in Scott will qualify for a grant equal to 50 per 

cent of the mill rate based on the 1964 figures, in other words, the Home-owner grants will mean a 34 

mill reduction in the property taxes to 60 some per cent of the people in that town. Sixteen per cent of 

the people will qualify for a grant of $50 which will represent a saving in mill rate of at least 25 mills, 

and 16.8 per cent in total will enjoy a reduction in mill rate of at least 36 per cent over last year. 

 

The Urban Assistance Program is another program that is administered by the Department of Highways. 

However, because of the fact that my department does deal with urban officials in many other programs, 

I will make brief mention of it here. 

 

The total expenditure last year, the minister tells me, will approximate $5,000,000. The last year the 

NDP government was in power, the amount of money they spent on urban assistance totalled slightly 

under $1,000,000, yet yesterday, the hon. member from Swift Current, (Mr. Wood) intimated that we 

were forgetting the urban governments. I would suggest that the increase in this program alone certainly 

indicates that the urban people are getting their fair share of the gasoline tax dollar as well. 

 

In connection with urban assistance to municipalities, pardon me, assistance to urban municipalities, the 

member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) made the point yesterday that I mentioned in yesterday 

evening's remarks, but I would like to repeat it now. He said that the estimates indicated reduced 

assistance under the Municipal Water Assistance Program. That is correct, they do indicate some 

reduction, however, he also intimated that the policy was being curtailed by this government. This, Mr. 

Speaker, is not correct. For the first year in the history of the program there was no rationing of the 

funds. Up to this date, as of yesterday, $586,000 had been paid out this year under this policy, and we 

expect that the total for the current fiscal year to run over $600,000, with every qualified application for 

a grant being taken care of. We are using the same formula as I mentioned yesterday, that has been in 

effect for some years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence, I would like to take a moment or two to direct my remarks to the 

people of my constituency, the constituency of Wilkie. I want to thank them first of all for the support 

they have given me, not only in the last election but since that time. It is the first time ever, Mr. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

696 

 

Speaker, that Wilkie constituency has been represented in the Saskatchewan cabinet, and I want them to 

know that I will continue to make every effort to look after their needs even though I am 300 miles from 

home most of the time. 

 

Last year we saw highway no. 14 oil surfaced from south of Landis to Wilkie, and from west of Unity to 

Macklin and the Alberta border, thus completing a dust free highway from Saskatoon to Edmonton 

running through my entire constituency. Arrangements were also finalized for the completion of the grid 

between Kerrobert and Unity and this road will become a reality this year. 

 

Highway 29 which is the major access road for all of my constituents to North Battleford was oiled a 

distance of 15 miles north of Wilkie last year. This is a road used by most of my constituents in going to 

North Battleford as well as to the resort areas farther north in the province. 

 

I know I am speaking for people of all political faiths in my constituency when I tell the Minister of 

Highways that we were very happy with last year's program. Although I will remind him that we still 

have a few more projects to look after before we will be satisfied. Highway 29, the balance of it to North 

Battleford, is in need of reconstruction. Highway 31 from Macklin through Primate, Denzil, Salvador, 

Luseland to Kerrobert, needs to be dust proofed. The people of north of Macklin are anxious to see 

Highway 17 oil surfaced to Lloydminster. We will be most anxious to see what the Minister of 

Highways has for us when he speaks in this debate next week, and opens his bag of goodies. With 

$47,000,000 the record expenditure on highways, as revealed in the budget, it is clearly obvious to 

everyone in this province, that we are making every effort to catch up on the tremendous backlog of 

roadwork bequeathed to us by the Socialist administration opposite. 

 

I would like to turn now to an event that I was closely involved with last year, Mr. Speaker. I refer to the 

Provincial-Municipal Conference which was called by the Premier of this province in December of 

1965. I would like to spend some time, Mr. Speaker, to tell the members how the conference has 

affected the estimates and the programs of my department for this year. I will deal first with the 

Municipal Road Assistance Authority. 

 

To give this agency the recognition and the emphasis that it deserves, and as an indication of what we 

intend to do with this agency, we propose to establish this authority under an act of the legislature this 

year. This authority is embarking on a number of new policies and expanding some of the present 

policies. The original ten year grid road program is completed as of this year, 860 miles, approximately, 

were built by municipalities this year, bringing the net total to date of a few miles short of 12,000 miles. 

Over $5,000,000 was allotted by this government for construction in the past year, almost a record, Mr. 

Speaker, for grid road construction. This grid road program is being extended and to that end the grid 

road authority, itself, is presently negotiating extension mileage. To date approximately 3,000 miles of 

extension to the grid road system have been approved and additional miles will be approved as early this 

season as possible. Now in order to sort out the various requests we have had for extensions, engineers 

of the Municipal Road Assistance Authority will begin, as soon as we can this spring, to conduct traffic 

counts and do on-the-spot studies, and of course to work in conjunction with the municipalities involved 

to sort out the remainder of the approvals. As I mentioned yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

697 

question of designating a road as a grid road is now being handled by the Municipal Road Assistance 

Authority and not the Advisory Commission. The Advisory Commission has done this work in the past, 

and they have done a good job on it. The criteria that we are presently using to designate a road as a grid 

road are basically very simple. Firstly, that such roads be arterial in nature or intermunicipal connections 

and secondly, that they carry or will potentially carry 50 to 60 vehicles a day. Putting it very briefly, 

they must be going somewhere and carrying reasonable traffic as well. 

 

Obviously, of course, all municipalities in the province will not be getting a specified average number of 

miles to construct as grid road. For some municipalities, the original mileage allocated some ten years 

ago comes very close to fulfilling their need of a network of all-weather roads. Others still require a 

good deal of mileage to be built before such a road network is complete. We realize, of course, Mr. 

Speaker, that occasionally local industries will develop and local trading patterns change that will in 

future require that a road be designated as a grid road. We will be prepared to look at these special cases 

when they arise. 

 

As well as this we are initiating and encouraging another new service to municipalities this year. I refer 

to a traffic flow study of municipal roads. This will be a cost-shared program between the government 

and the municipality. Now what are the aims and objects of such a study, and what good will it do the 

municipality? The immediate objective of course would be to help us to designate any necessary grid 

road extensions. The more important, long range objective of such traffic study and overall road plan 

would be to determine the need for a system of access roads and feeder roads. And certainly 

municipalities should be able to more efficiently develop a long term complete road program that will 

make the best use of their tax dollar and our tax dollar. We announced this in late January, Mr. Speaker, 

to the municipalities and recently we have had a total of over 50 applications from municipalities 

interested in conducting such a survey. 

 

Another program that I referred to earlier was the Equalization Grant structure of assistance to 

municipalities. Any overall program of assistance to municipalities should give special recognition to 

the poor municipalities, those municipalities with a low assessment in relation to the cost of services that 

they are required to provide. This brings us to a definition of equalization grants and their purposes. 

 

Equalization grants are cash grants paid in an attempt to provide the lower assessed municipalities with 

the financial resources necessary to provide their residents with a reasonable average standard of 

services. Now the poorer municipalities are given special recognition in the formula we use for 

determining grid road grants. The weakness of the grid road grant and other shared-cost policies, of 

course, lies in the fact that they may be very hard pressed to make up their own contribution in order to 

take advantage of our assistance. To relieve this situation, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal government is 

increasing its unconditional equalization grant by over four times, reaching an annual figure next year, 

an actual figure of $1,820,000. This is in comparison to a figure of $420,000 last year and in every year 

since 1958 under the previous administration. This, I submit, Mr. Speaker, will be a significant step in 

the direction of helping out the low assessed municipalities. Increased equalization 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

698 

 

grants were termed the top priority of rural governments at our recent Provincial Municipal Conference 

and this is the result of that. 

 

For years, the former administration used a formula which no one in my department is presently able to 

understand. The result was that the annual equalization grant was not always an equalization grant. The 

existing formula is inflexible and it has not, as I say, resulted in the poorer municipalities actually 

getting the larger grant many times. In contrast to this inflexible, irrational and 

little-bit-difficult-to-understand formula. We are presently in the final stages of drafting a formula that 

will channel the majority of the funds to the poorer municipalities. The main category of expenditure, of 

course, that they have is road construction. We will be taking into account such factors as the population 

of the municipality, the density of population, the assessment per township, existing provincial 

highways, the need for intermunicipal road connections and the location of service centres in that 

municipality. We arrive at a theoretical road need for each municipality. When we work out this 

formula, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that it will be a much more equitable, flexible formula than has been 

used in the past. We are working this formula out in conjunction with municipal officials who will be 

consulted and advised as we go along on it. 

 

Grid Road Maintenance is another new program that is instituted this year for the first time. The SARM 

has asked the provincial government for the last several years to provide them with financial assistance 

to help cover the cost of maintenance of grid roads. This request is based on the fact that a good 

percentage of the traffic on these roads is not local municipal traffic. Certain grid roads incidentally 

show traffic counts equal to or about that on some of our minor highways. At the Provincial-Municipal 

Conference, the SARM again raised this question as being one of their high priority requests. Now the 

estimates show a figure of $1,000,000 to be provided for general maintenance for grid roads. We do not 

have the detailed policy worked out as yet, Mr. Speaker, but again we are working on it and consulting 

with SARM officials in developing a fair and equitable formula. We will provide this on a dollar for 

dollar basis as far as our funds will go. One million dollars spread over 12,000 miles of grid road will 

provide a good reasonable amount per mile for maintenance cost. We will expect a certain basic 

minimum standard of maintenance to be adhered to. For example, surface blading, shoulder reshaping, 

mowing and brush removal, are some of the requirements that I could mention. 

 

Another new policy, Mr. Speaker, that is provided for in the sub-vote of $250,000 is a policy designed to 

assist municipalities with snow clearing costs. While this policy is also intended to be a shared-cost 

policy, we have made this policy quite flexible for the first year. The money will be made available to 

the municipalities in the coming year's estimates, but it will apply to this last winter's operation. We are 

well aware that the amount is not large, but it is $250,000 more than has ever been provided before for 

this purpose, and we do recognize that the problem exists. 

 

I will say this much, Mr. Speaker, that in my opinion the great bulk of our assistance to municipalities 

should be in the construction of more all-weather roads. This, I believe, is the best long term approach to 

this problem of snow removal. The budget estimates, I submit, reflect this approach, Mr. Speaker, in that 

the increase in estimates for the Municipal Road Assistance Authority this year totals $3,800,000. This 

figure alone represents an increase in assistance averaging five mills over the 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

699 

total rural assessment of the province, an average of five mills in representing the increased assistance 

provided this year alone. It will give the municipalities a chance to either reduce taxes on an average, or 

extend their services in particular, their services on all-weather roads. These roads, of course, are used 

by people in the towns and villages and by school buses as well. 

 

Now the previous administration, Mr. Speaker, was very concerned and very intent on facilitating means 

of centralizing our school system. I don't wish to get into the pros and cons of this at the present time. I 

just want to point out one parallel development. In 1955 there were 12,000 children going to school by 

school bus. Last year, at the beginning of September, 1965, there were almost 76,000 children travelling 

to their schools by bus, fantastic increase in a short space of ten years. School bus routes total over 

50,000 miles daily in this province and most of these miles are on municipal roads. Such roads for 

obvious reasons should be all-weather roads. Yet the former government never demonstrated in a 

financial way that it had any concern for the tremendous increased demands that were placed upon the 

municipal councils of this province by the centralization of the school system. I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and to all members, that the budget for the Municipal Road Assistance Authority this year 

clearly indicates to municipal people and to school board members that the Liberal government does 

recognize this need for better roads and better services in the country. Not only are there increases, but 

the variety of policies, Mr. Speaker, are positive proof of our attitude. 

 

I would like to just briefly review, Mr. Speaker, the suggestions that were made to this government at 

the Municipal-Provincial Conference last fall. All three bodies at the conference, School Trustees, Urban 

Association, Rural Association, requested increased funds for education. Major increases are contained 

in this budget for schools and educational costs. The rural association sought increased equalization 

grants. I have outlined to you that this has been done. They also requested that the province assume part 

of the cost of grid maintenance, and we have done this. All groups expressed concern over the property 

tax burden and the Home-owner grants to be paid to the citizens next year will be a major step forward 

to help relieve this burden. The Urban Association asked for more comprehensive housing legislation 

and this is being introduced at this session. The urban delegates also asked for an expansion of the 

Urban Assistance policy and this, I understand, will be forthcoming when the Minister of Highways 

speaks to this debate next week. There were several other requests that were made and granted. I would 

suggest that the atmosphere that prevailed at the conference, the overall success, and the results of it, 

that is something that the Liberal government and the municipal government of this province can well be 

proud of. 

 

The last such conference was held in 1956, Mr. Speaker. At that one, municipal officials were brought in 

and rather than consulted with were mainly lectured to. What were the results of that conference? 

Basically this — a long series of public meetings by a boundary commission, meetings that aroused the 

ire and antagonism of almost every rural council and rural ratepayer in the province. I need not comment 

on the comparison of the Liberal approach to the municipalities of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite obviously I will support the motion and not the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

700 

 

Mr. H.E. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, on rising to take part in the Budget Debate, I 

would like to add my name to those who have congratulated our new members. I feel sure that they will 

make a big contribution to this house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives one a good feeling to stand up and support a budget that was brought down by our 

Provincial Treasurer and Premier in the house last Friday. I just can't understand why the members 

opposite could vote against it. Mr. Speaker, when we add the savings of this budget to the savings in last 

year's budget, the savings to the taxpayers in this province under a Liberal government are amounting to 

a good sized figure. 

 

Special mention should be made of the $50 Home-owner grants, also the reduction of one per cent in the 

income tax. Add to this the tax free gas for farm trucks, which incidentally, Mr. Speaker, some farmers 

tell me will save them up to $200 in their farming operations within a year. But of more importance I 

feel it is a saving to the small farmer of my constituency who can only afford one vehicle and this a 

half-ton truck, which they use for transportation as well as for transporting their farm produce to market. 

Mr. Speaker, these savings mean quite a lot when one thinks of the savings in the reduction also of the 

education tax from five to four per cent last year. There is a tremendous saving and it is a considerable 

help in what is called she cost-price squeeze of the farmer. Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite 

were the government they used to do a lot of talking about the cost-price squeeze of the farmer but the 

only thing that I recall them doing about it was yelling to Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, now that we have a 

Liberal government here in Saskatchewan we are doing something about it and we intend to do more 

about it in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — Mr. Speaker, there are other ways in which we are saving the taxpayer money, one 

of these is grants, some of which the hon. member has just finished relating. One, as you may recall, Mr. 

Speaker, was when the Meadow Lake constituency had rains of up to seven inches in a few hours last 

June, causing 21 bridges to be washed out and a lot of roads disappeared and this would have created a 

raise in the mill rate in one LID had not this Liberal government stepped in and advanced something 

around $10,000 to help replace these bridges and some of the roads. Mr. Speaker, I have also a copy of a 

letter which I received from our LID office in Meadow Lake. I would like to quote form it. It is a 

resolution, and I quote: 

 

The following is a resolution passed by the committee of representatives on February 14, 1966. 

 

It is addressed to the Hon. J.C. McIsaac and a copy to myself. 

 

That a letter of thanks be sent to the Minister of Municipal Service for formulating the snowplow 

policy with a copy to H. Coupland. 

 

On behalf of the committee, the ratepayers and myself, I wish to express our thanks for the snowplow 

policy. It is of great assistance in the neighboring snow removal on school bus routes and grid roads. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

701 

Mr. Speaker, this is what people in my area think of the liberal policies that are being brought forth in 

their term of office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to commend the Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant) for a job well done in 

his department. We have had almost a $1,000,000 of work tendered on capital construction in the last 

year in the Meadow Lake constituency. This is apart from the ordinary maintenance that is carried on. 

Mr. Speaker, I must say that the maintenance crews must be doing a far better job as I have had far less 

complaints in the last year than we used to get in the past. I think this speaks for itself in the job that is 

being done throughout the country. I hope the minister will take into consideration the rebuilding of no. 

4 highway south of Meadow Lake in the near future so that when the road is completed to Dorintosh the 

tourists will be able to enjoy one of the best recreational areas in Saskatchewan. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to the attention of the house the picture on the highways 

report. It is a picture of the start of the Vermette Lake road which goes up on the west side of Canoe 

Lake and goes on into the country north. It gives an indication of the type of terrain that the crews have 

to work in, in order to push this road north. It will open a lot of country for the tourist trade as well as 

give access to the Primrose Forest Products timber berth which would have been in operation this year, 

Mr. Speaker, if the Timber Board monopoly had been lifted as much as I would have liked to have seen 

it lifted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) for his part 

in getting a pulp mill into Saskatchewan. Even though this pulp mill is situated over at Prince Albert I 

feel that it is going to create a lot of employment in the Meadow Lake area. Mr. Speaker, I have a 

clipping here that I would like to quote from; I see the member for North Battleford (Mr. Kramer) is not 

in his chair. This clipping is from the North Battleford News Optimist, dated January 18th, 1966, and the 

headlines are "Kramer Forecasts Surprise Election", but I think the only surprise he got was in 

Bengough, Mr. Speaker. But I would like to quote form this article to show some of the double talk that 

we are getting, he said: 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are going to build a mill, build a road, supply the site and pay the 

company to take our timber. I sincerely hope that these suspicions are wrong but I feel they are right. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we got the pulp mill but he goes on to say: 

 

The government of Saskatchewan has a lot of new advantages in dealing with any pulp company. 

 

And I would say that they have some advantage being a Liberal government. That's one big advantage. 

He ends up by saying: 

 

That while he had been Minister of Natural Resources he felt confident that with such guarantees of 

grants and freight rates he would have had Green Bay Package build a pulp mill. 

 

In other words he's saying that we shouldn't do it but he should have done it when he was Minister of 

Natural Resources. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to turn to the problem 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

702 

 

we have in our area. It involves the Metis settlement of Green Lake. There has been lots said about it but 

I would like to say a few words about some of the agitators we have in our area. I have a copy of a 

university paper in which the Neestow students have an appeal for funds. Now, I would just like to quote 

a paragraph or two from that paper, Mr. Speaker, to show where these people come from; one of them is 

Robertson Wood. This is dated January 21st, 1966. 

 

In October, Mr. Robertson Wood finished his work with the student non-violent co-ordinating 

committee in Mississippi and other parts of the south, and has come to work with Neestow on a long 

term basis. 

 

Farther on it says, there are three people, I am informed that there are four there now, but here it says all 

three people working in Green Lake are there on long term commitments to Neestow and intend to stay 

and work at the shortest for a year. 

 

Both Rob and Linda have experience in community organizing in the free movement in the south and 

are living on subsistence wages. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Communist agitators. 

 

Mr. Coupland: — Mr. Speaker, these four, two boys and two girls, are living in a little house up there, 

a two-roomed house, and I don't feel, Mr. Speaker, that they are setting a very good example to our 

Indian and Metis population in Green Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coupland: — All they are doing is creating a lot of problems. We have been trying to set up 

policies. We realize that these people over the past twenty years haven't been getting a break in that area, 

but when we have people like these four up there that are agitating and causing dissension when the 

government is trying to set up policies, I just don't feel that it is right. I have another clipping here, Mr. 

Speaker. It is a paper put out by the Metis Association — a newsletter. In these papers most of the 

literature is compiled by the Neestow students. I have one here the Metis Association newsletter, Green 

Lake Local, December 23 and I would like to quote from here and show what type of things they are 

trying to stir up. In this newsletter there is a copy of a letter from Malcolm Norris. It is addressed to 

Richard Thompson, Associate Member, M.A.S., Green Lake. 

 

Dear Richard: I have been given a copy of the paper entitled a new approach to human rights, which I 

will have cut on a stencil for distribution. 

 

It starts off with the first sentence as follows: 

 

People don't get opportunity or freedom or equality or dignity as a gift or an act of charity. They only 

get these things in an act of taking them through their own efforts. Pass this on to the people of Green 

Lake. The more militant they become the better. Tell them to get more militant. 

 

And then he goes on to say: 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

703 

Perhaps a march on the legislative buildings in Regina is what is required. 

 

Now how are you going to do things for these people up there when you have people telling them to get 

more militant. I would just like to say that I have had quite a few discussions with a lot of the Metis 

people up in that area and they have been asking me if maybe they could start petitions to have these 

people out of there. This is the feeling that is up in that area in regard to them and I think that if the 

people knew what was going on in Green Lake there would be very few donations come in on an appeal 

like this one here. Mr. Speaker, as you will fully realize I will wholeheartedly support the motion but I 

will vote against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I notice there are few minutes left before the 

opposition takes over the floor on radio time and I have just a few comments that I would like to make 

on the budget. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I think that this is a budget which will be received by the people 

of Saskatchewan with great enthusiasm, particularly from the viewpoint of tax reduction. We Liberals 

have long believed that the people of Saskatchewan are the most highly taxed people in Canada. We are 

particularly concerned over property taxes. We watched over the past 20 years property taxes increase 

over 400 per cent in this province. We believed that it was absolutely necessary to do something in this 

regard. Let me briefly review some of the things that the Liberal government has done to tackle this 

problem in the past two years. 

 

First of all in our first budget brought down a year ago we reduced sales tax from five to four per cent. 

Second, we permitted the use of purple tax free gas in farm trucks. Third, we removed the mineral tax 

from farm lands. Fourth, the exemption of newly married couples from sales tax on purchases of 

furniture and other household goods up to $1,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, in this budget we have taken 

further steps to see that property taxes in Saskatchewan are lowered. Number one, of course, and the 

most important, is the Home-owner grant. When I think of what has been accomplished in this province 

by this government in regard to property taxes, I am sure that the people of Saskatchewan will accept it 

as a direct attempt on the part of the Liberal government to reduce property taxes. Let me turn to a 

couple of other items. Number one, the incentive grants in education. This can either be passed on in 

increased service or can reduce taxes to the equivalent of two mills. Grid road assistance, you know, Mr. 

Speaker, it was rather interesting for all of us on this side of the house to watch the former Minister of 

Municipal Affairs (Mr. Wood) stand on his feet and talk for half an hour and never mention the 

tremendously expanded budget in the Department of Municipal Affairs. I know of no man who should 

have stood on top of his desk and shouted to the heights about the increase and expanded revenues in 

that department. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, I said a good deal about the large increase 

in the Municipal Road Assistance Grant. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Now, Mr. Speaker, his points were not only critical but highly confusing, insofar 

as first of all he looked around for an 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

704 

 

excuse and an opportunity to criticize the Water Grants to small communities. The minister explained 

that not only were these Water Grants given to small municipalities but they were given to any and all 

towns and villages that applied for them. 

 

I want to also comment, Mr. Speaker, for a moment on the Saskatchewan Youth Agency. Many of the 

members opposite have commented and expressed an interest in the work of the Saskatchewan Youth 

Agency. Unfortunately they didn't show their interest in a more tangible fashion. The junior member for 

Saskatoon (Mr. Brockelbank) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) both expressed concern that 

no comments had been made on the Saskatchewan Youth Agency. Early this summer I wrote a letter to 

every member of this house extending a very cordial invitation for them to attend the public hearings of 

the Saskatchewan Youth Agency. I can say that many members of the government side attended those 

hearings but not one single member of the opposition, not even those members where public hearings 

were held in their own communities, showed any interest whatsoever in attending these public hearings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I would also like to say, Mr. Speaker, the reason for delay in reporting on the 

Saskatchewan Youth Agency is the fact that I was most concerned that each member of this assembly 

receive a copy of Youth Today, a public report presented by Dr. Howard Nixon and Dr. Lloyd Barber on 

the problems of youth in Saskatchewan as found in the research carried on by the Saskatchewan Youth 

Agency over the past summer. I felt that not only should it be presented to this house but that every 

member of this house be given an opportunity to read it and study it carefully before the amendments to 

the bill were put in. Early next week I hope to give a complete and rather detailed report, not only on the 

progress of the Saskatchewan Youth Agency and what has been accomplished in the past year but also 

on the plans and programs for the coming year. Mr. Speaker, in the few minutes I have left I would like 

to comment on a phase of the work in the Department of Health that I had an opportunity to work with 

as a Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health. 

 

This government has moved ahead to meet the existing and emerging needs for trained personnel in the 

health area. In September the School of Physiotherapy was opened on the Saskatoon Campus of the 

university. This government has announced plans for a College of Dentistry, a need long overdue. We 

have had increases in the number of both doctors and dentists practising in this province and I am 

pleased to say that about one-third of the new physicians are practising in smaller urban centres, centres 

which traditionally suffered from a shortage of doctors. This government has also acted to consider the 

problems of shortages of trained and qualified nurses in Saskatchewan. Last July we assembled an ad 

hoc committee on nursing education, chaired by Mr. Justice W.A. Tucker of Saskatoon. Members of the 

committee represented the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, the Saskatchewan Hospital 

Association, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, The Catholic Hospital Conference, the University 

of Saskatchewan, the Department of Education and the Department of Health. As you all well know we 

have in this province been continually faced with a shortage of qualified nurses. This is a problem of 

many years' standing, a problem that becomes more and more urgent. We must resolve the question of 

supply of an adequate number of well-trained nurses and we must ensure that they are best used in the 

important work that we entrust to them. We believe that the best way 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

705 

to examine these questions was through an independent committee. A committee made up to represent 

many of the groups vitally interested in these problems. We, therefore, asked the committee to study the 

nursing education system that we presently have in Saskatchewan. We asked them to determine our need 

for nurses by type, by quantity and by quality. We asked them to consider whether the present system 

would be able to meet these needs. We asked them to consider how to best use the human and physical 

resources that are now and will be available. We asked them to consider costs, to examine the processes 

of standard setting of inspection, of enforcement. We asked them to recommend which agency could 

best discharge these functions and what definitions of authority and responsibility would be needed. We 

asked them to provide a means of establishing a good form of relationship between the agency 

responsible and other groups interested in nursing education. 

 

We are pleased to be able to tell you that Mr. Justice Tucker, two months ago, submitted an interim 

report and based on recommendations therein, and study by cabinet, we have introduced legislation in 

the house that will substantially affect nursing education in this province when passed and put into 

effect. 

 

I notice, Mr. Speaker, that my time is expired. I hope that you have noticed from my remarks that I will 

support the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I rise at this time to enter into the Budget Debate. 

Being on the air for the first time this session I deem it most fitting to extend a very warm welcome to 

our radio audience who faithfully listen to these broadcasts coming from their capital city. We extend an 

invitation to them to come in person sometime and visit this assembly. It is my duty as an MLA to help 

inform the people of Saskatchewan, as well as the citizens of the Queen City of Regina, and particularly 

my own constituency, Regina East, whom I have the privilege of serving and advising as to the effects 

on the economy of the 1966-67 budget. 

 

In fact these estimates do not provide the benefits the citizens of this province wish to retain and 

magnify in the future. This budget appears to represent a slowing up of the economy, considering the 

history of this province over the past 20 years. There is one essential thing needed in this day and age 

and that is to give security to our people. It cannot be recognized to the full in this budget for this year. 

This can be done only through proper welfare legislation and by strengthening our economic base. Over 

the past 20 years while the CCF were in office they gave the farmers, the workers, the people in business 

and in industry, real security in this fine province of ours. What security did we give the farmer? Too 

often we forget what transpired in the past, such as what took place during the 30's before 1944, while 

members of the government side were in power. We forget about the men who worked on farms for 

board and room and in some cases may have received $5 a month. We forget about the farmers and the 

city people who lost their farms and homes through tax sales or repossession because of not being able 

to pay off their mortgage. 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Estevan): — I don't believe you . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — We forget about the days when 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

706 

 

the farmer got three or four cents for a dozen of eggs. We forget about the days when we couldn't get 

into a hospital because we could not pay the entrance fee and we could not pay for doctors either. Not 

only did we not have car insurance but we didn't have any cars to drive. We have forgotten when 

teachers were paid $300 a year and collected their wages by notes or by being on relief. Yes, we forget 

when our school children were ill-clothed and when we had poor schools and no facilities for them such 

as school books. We forget about our young boy sand girls who worked 50 to 60 hours a week for $4 to 

$6 in the cities. I could go on and on, recounting incidents how our people were treated by a government 

which we again have in power in our province today. 

 

What security did the CCF give in those 20 years while in office? First let's take a look at our farmers. 

The first form of security was to bring in the Farm Security Act so that farmers could not lose their land 

during the times of drought or crop failure. This same act gave similar protection to our city dwellers if 

illness or loss of job on the part of the breadwinner and payments could not be made. How was the 

worker affected when the CCF government took office? The first thing it did was to give collective 

bargaining rights to working people. It gave holidays with pay. It brought in an Hours of Work Act, 

raised workmen's compensation and raised the minimum wage, and saw that people received proper 

incomes. I may point out at this time that the workmen's compensation benefits today need an upgrading 

very soon. How did this affect business? When more money was put into the hands of our salaried 

people it was spent in our business premises. People bought insurance, they bought and built homes and 

created a demand for more industrial goods thus getting the wheels of industry going. What did we do to 

attract industry to our province and set up an economic base? The key to this was to get electricity. This 

is where the Power Corporation came in and distributed electricity to the cities, towns and villages and 

to all the farms. Also included in this was the distribution of natural gas to these centres. What do you 

suppose will put British Columbia strong in the field of industrial development? It is the public control 

of its electricity. They followed our pattern; but they did one thing different, they took the B.C. Electric, 

a privately owned company, away from the owners and paid for it after. Manitoba as you notice is now 

embarking upon a large hydro development, following Saskatchewan's example of the Power 

Corporation. 

 

Yes, we gave security in many ways: through our hospitalization and medicare plan, our car insurance, 

our air ambulance service, commonly known as flights of mercy; by developing 5,800 oil and gas wells, 

by discovering and developing potash mines and fertilizer plants, by setting up a steel mill in Regina, 

cement plants and other enterprises in different centres. We extended a modern telephone system to 

most of the province and it is now one of the finest on this continent. Yes, we attracted private monies 

for industry, housing and apartment building. We provided public and co-operative monies to start new 

and expanded industries. We established a well-balanced economy to look after all the people of this 

province. 

 

Now what does the budget just brought down for 1966-67 do at this time to give further security, to 

continue to build on our solid economic base? I must say that in just two short years, the stature of this 

province has been steadily slipping. Surely the government's policies can be altered to eliminate the 

conditions that created the 30's, still fresh in the minds of the citizens of this province. The budget talks 

about priorities. What are the real priorities for cities, towns, villages and 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

707 

our farming industry? 

 

First, I would like to cover the number one priority as I see it in this province, and that is the condition 

of most of our senior citizens and pensioners. It is the senior citizens in the twilight period of life who 

are annually finding it more difficult to exist on fixed incomes and an ever increasing cost of living. 

These are the people who developed our great province of Saskatchewan. These are the citizens who 

lived through the Dirty Thirties when the government of that day did absolutely nothing to aid their 

meagre living. Let's amend these estimates to immediately increase the old age pension from $75 to 

$100 per month at this session. We in this province need not wait for Ottawa to take action in this 

regard. Let's make it a humane budget and help, as all government should, the people in need, mainly 

our senior citizens who are having a difficult time. 

 

Our provincial economy is lucrative enough to increase the pension by $25 to $100 a month as well as to 

give mothers' allowance and social aid people the same increases. Added to this the pensioners should 

get $150 a year homeowner grant at age 65 if they own their property, and $120 a year for those over the 

age of 65 if they pay rent. 

 

What would I list as priority number two in this budget? We must compensate the farmers for the 37 or 

38 cent wheat payment they just received; it's some 10 to 17 cents less than last year. This reduced price 

takes place in a period of increasing prices for machinery and other costs. In spite of this situation this 

government provides no concrete proposals in this budget or recommendations to Ottawa. 

 

It appears there isn't much money provided to fight the CPR to prevent the reduction of passenger 

service to our communities or rail line abandonment. Nothing has been provided to work out plans to 

reduce handling storage charges of farm products. No recommendations have been pressed on my 

suggestion regarding the two-price system for wheat. Nothing to stop the sky rocketing of costs of farm 

machinery. I am told that farm tractors are going up by $300 to $400 this year. I repeat again for this 

assembly, my recommendation through this house to Ottawa that the farmers be paid for the first 2,000 

bushels a fixed price of $2.75 for no. 1 Northern wheat over and above freight charges; and wheat over 

and above the 2,000 be sold at prevailing rates. If this cannot be accomplished then we have reached the 

stage in Canada where farm machinery for the farmers must be subsidized. 

 

These are some of the things that will maintain the family farm and produce a diversified agricultural 

economy, and also keep the economy of the whole of this country moving. We need floor prices to 

protect the income of those engaged in diversified agriculture such as raising cattle, hogs, dairying and 

so forth. We need a board to handle their products, the same as our successful wheat board. 

 

The farming industry is our prime resource and income and must be protected at all costs. It was 

broadcast all over this province that when the present government got in it would return to the farmers 

the cost of installing electricity in farm homes, something like $500 per home. With a profit of between 

$8,000,000 to $10,000,000 this year, I suggest that we work out a plan and pay this back to the farmers 

on the basis of $100 a year over a five year period. Although the net expenditure is up $2,000,000, we 

see no new programs of significance to help the farmer. The time 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

708 

 

is also ripe to pressure Ottawa to put all farm laborers under the unemployment insurance plan. 

 

I turn now to municipal financing. Recently the Canadian Federation of Mayors and Municipalities, met 

with the government of Canada on urgent matters facing the municipalities of this country. It was 

through the efforts of the mayor's organization that the Municipal Development and Loan Act came into 

force some three years ago. It was a good act for it provided low interest borrowing not obtainable on 

the open market for municipalities. It was resolved by the Federation of Mayors and Municipalities that 

the government continue through additional appropriation to make municipal capital available to those 

provinces still lacking low interest provincial schemes. After consultation with the provinces, the 

government itself could determine through what machinery, either new or existing, such funds could be 

made available and at what point the federal scheme may be terminated and a provincial plan enacted. 

 

You and I today are faced with a tight money policy in this country. Perhaps tight money may be 

necessary in eastern Canada but it is certainly not necessary in Saskatchewan or Regina. We need more 

investment money to keep our economy continually moving. Some say that tight money will continue 

for six months or even longer. What will happen? It will certainly have a recessive effect on our 

economy sometime in the next year or two. It will effect the revenues of this province and of the 

municipalities as well. It is primarily designed, this tight money policy, in the main to force up interest 

rates. If monies are not available for the construction of houses, apartments or other living quarters, we 

are going to be faced with a serious housing shortage in Regina in the next two years. What are the 

answers to stop these booms and busts that we are continually faced with because of policies at Ottawa? 

The municipal loan fund that the mayors got the Ottawa government to set up will be discontinued this 

year. The Canada Pension contribution in Saskatchewan could give our province $25,000,000 for 

investment. What method should be followed to get this money in the hands of our people? A 

development corporation fund has been suggested. This is good. But I believe we have reached the stage 

where we must go one step further and that is to set up a Saskatchewan bank. Let's get into the banking 

business as a province. Oh yes, you may say you can't do it under the BNA Act. I'm sure this can be 

worked out on a joint effort with the Bank of Canada without forfeiting any of the federal rights of 

Confederation. These monies could be available now as social capital to municipalities for sewer, water, 

roads and transportation. These monies are needed now as risk capital to lend to the construction 

industry for building houses, apartments, nursing homes, hospitals, for commercial and industrial 

purposes too. This could be done by charging reasonable interest rates. It is the only way we can offset 

recessions, when the loaning institutions clamp down in providing money thus causing ups and downs in 

our economy and increasing interest rates. 

 

The government of Saskatchewan has a duty to direct the funds of a buoyant economy to attain lasting 

benefit. One such place requiring these funds is the University of Regina. This government must direct 

funds to this educational institution in order to make a sound investment in our youth. Today's students 

are with us for such a short period. This time is quickly reduced when the student must go to other areas 

to complete his or her university training. Many of these students are gone forever as they secure 

employment other than in Saskatchewan upon graduation. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

709 

We must rapidly expand our training facilities. It is the best way to develop our youth for the benefit of 

this province. This can be accomplished to the full by giving our university in Regina its own Board of 

Governors and by establishing complete degree-granting courses here in our city to take care of southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Independent boards are now given to the universities in British Columbia and in the province of Alberta. 

The ten Ontario universities have all got autonomy with separate boards of governors. Let's take this 

step at this session and move ahead with the university here as planned to accommodate eight to ten 

thousand students so that we can get on with other centres that should be receiving colleges for their 

share of higher education too, such as Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Swift Current — I can go on and name 

Estevan, Weyburn, Melfort, Melville, and North Battleford . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about Prince Albert? 

 

Mr. Baker: — If we are to establish advanced degree courses here in Regina then the government had 

better act soon because there won't be many left. 

 

I am very surprised at the Premier, who while working for the whole of Saskatchewan forgets about all 

of the other cities, particularly when he himself lives very close to the two major southern centres. 

 

What about all the other MLAs on their side living in southern Saskatchewan. I wonder how they feel. I 

don't begrudge anyone schools of higher learning but let's look after the other centres as well. I would 

ask the government and the Minister of Education as I did the last session to give complete autonomy to 

our Regina university now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice that this government is proud of its already announced allocation of $100,000 to 

the Saskatchewan Arts Board. This government in a press report indicated, "We are hopeful of obtaining 

next summer in Regina the Montreal and Vancouver Symphonies and the Royal Winnipeg Ballet". This 

contribution is a good start. It is to be noted, however, that the government was not quite so generous in 

its contributions for the two auditoriums in Regina and Saskatoon. These auditoriums . . . 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Gave more than the CCF allotted. 

 

Mr. Baker: — These auditoriums are basic for the development of our arts in this province. Culture 

cannot be bought but proper facilities must be provided to promote cultural growth. For over a year I 

had to prod many in authority until some form of agreement was reached. Yes, and had procrastination 

continued much longer these projects would have never been undertaken. Some people made it most 

difficult. If it were not for the Auditorium Board in Regina and some of us elected to local governments 

there would probably be no auditorium in either city, Regina or Saskatoon. If this government really is 

interested in the arts I would suggest to them that they give each city another $800,000 to complete the 

project properly. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You're great at spending our money, Henry. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

710 

 

Mr. Baker: — We've had ours for years. We saved it up for 20 years for you. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . spending it alright. 

 

Mr. Baker: — This can be justified because of the rapid increase in costs which have come about 

because of governments similar to that across the way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was extremely disturbed to note the item "South Saskatchewan Base Hospital, Regina, no 

funds." Here you have the major city in Saskatchewan with two hospitals. Beds are in short supply for 

the citizens of Regina and the whole of the southern part of this province. You realize, Mr. Speaker, that 

the beds in these two hospitals are utilized 50 per cent by people other than from Regina. We want the 

people to come here but we also want to given them a good and timely accommodation, not to wait for 

months to get a bed. Could the government be waiting to put another tax on the municipalities to pay for 

it? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Waiting for you to . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — We are now paying $72 a year hospitalization and health tax. Saskatoon has three 

hospitals for a smaller population and they got one, the University Hospital for free under a CCF 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — Surely you can see the need. Let's get moving on the third hospital for Regina to be 

totally paid out of the hospital and medicare tax fund. This is another definite priority that is needed in 

this budget. 

 

This government is continuing to contribute varying amounts to rural regions far in excess of the 75 

cents per capita granted to the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. While places like Prince Albert, the home 

of the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) get well over $2 per person . . . 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Depressed area. 

 

Mr. Baker: — . . . we in Regina have tried to correct this inequality of the past years and had hoped that 

this government would, with its abundant revenue, see fit to make an adjustment. The citizens of Regina 

will continue to pay an unjust share. This will be the situation even though the Minister of Health 

apparently agrees with me that we are not being treated fairly. 

 

Also I fail to see the inclusion in medicare of the chiropractic services. We unanimously passed this 

resolution at the last session. Why wasn't it included in this year's estimates? When is the government 

going to direct its attention to this important matter as well as to other services provided by many other 

professional groups? 

 

Much has been said about our mental hospitals. There really appears to be no hope for the needy under 

this government. They seem to be reverting to their cold-blooded policies. No hope for 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

711 

the mentally ill who are being released just like cattle from mental institutions. Before 1944 they tell me 

the staff there turned the hoses on these mental patients sealed up in cells without clothing. When the 

CCF took over each one was given maximum care and put into a bed and rooms in which to live and 

receive the same care as any hospital patient. Yes, it was an excellent program. Look at the Weyburn 

hospital now. Out of, I believe, nearly 1,800 patients, it seems to me that they reduced this by nearly 

1,000. Where are these patients being sent to? I'll tell you. They are being hovelled in places where most 

would not want to be. Not everybody will accept them into housing establishments. The place for most 

of these people is still the care they received at our Saskatchewan hospitals. Heaven have mercy on 

those who are tampering with the souls of these unfortunates. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. Mr. Steuart, (Minister of Health) has indicated outside this 

house that urban centres are not adequately treated and so I ask the government to provide, as I said 

earlier, the same grants as we find in rural regions. 

 

I would now refer to the monies to be voted for welfare. The government has been expounding at great 

length on the status of its new program. On January 17, 1966, it was reported in the newspaper that the 

Canada Assistance Act and the announced Provincial Act will mean a saving for the provincial welfare 

department of $1,500,000. No announcement was made to my knowledge as to the saving to be given to 

the municipalities in order to reduce property taxation. At last I know why. Just look at the total for 

welfare on page 61 of the estimates, 1965-66 — $19,220,000; 66-67, $18,656,000, a decrease in the new 

budget by $566,000 over last year. Now, look at the increase per capita contribution by the urban and 

rural municipalities of this province, on the same page, 1965-66, $533,000, for 66-67, approximately 

$1,149,000 — an increase in payments by municipalities in the new budget of $616,000. Mr. Speaker, it 

is unusual to collect an additional sum from the rural and urban municipalities to decrease spending by 

the Social Welfare Department of the province of Saskatchewan. It is not only unusual but it also proves 

the point made last year, that taxes in most ways are again being loaded on to the municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget is unsound in many ways. I indicated earlier that citizens of Regina definitely 

can expect to have to pay more by way of property tax for social aid. One ray of hope does exist, the 

new act does provide if any area in the province is not within the confines of a unit the minister will 

designate a regional office of the Department of Social Welfare as the administrative unit to provide 

assistance. Please take note that if any way the new program costs the citizens of Regina more I will 

urge the council of our city to return the complete program to the Saskatchewan government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens will, if these estimates are approved, have to pay the indicated increase per 

capita by way of increased property taxation. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is done when this government 

receives from the federal government funds for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan in the amount of 

1965-66 — $4,967,000; 1966-67 — $9,112,000 — an increase over last year that they are receiving is 

$4,550,000. If the estimates were sound the cost to the municipalities would be reduced from that 

$1,149,000 which they are charged to nil. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

712 

 

Mr. Speaker, all municipalities, urban and rural, have been given by the legislature of the province of 

Saskatchewan specific functions to carry out. Our great province has and is steadily developing. This 

province has a tremendous future providing the citizens are given the opportunity to put all resources to 

work. I would like to return to the mill rate in the city of Regina with regard to municipal rate and 

educational taxes from 1959 to 65. The municipal rate from 1959 to 1965 increased by slightly over two 

mills. If you turn to the education costs during those six or seven years you will find that the mill rate in 

1959 was 33.32 mills, in 1965 it was 45.38 mills, an increase of 12.06 mills in the last six or seven 

years. Mr. Speaker, this is the source of complaint municipal officials are continually faced with; the 

ever-increasing demands for education. In fact the municipal mill rate must be held or decreased to 

lighten the load on property taxes for education. It is of interest to note, however, that approximately 

one-half of the 12 mill increase was incurred in the last two years. I needn't tell you who the government 

has been in the last two years. It is not tax reduction, it is a process of transferring the tax responsibility 

from provinces to the municipalities. 

 

Last year I did suggest the raising of the minimum wage over a two year period to $1.40 per hour. I 

advocated $1.25 for 1965 and $1.40 in the year 1966. I don't know what the government will be doing in 

this regard. In 1965 wages and prices climbed more steeply than for a number of years. Between 

September, 1964 and September, 1965, the consumer price index rose from 135.6 to 139.1, an increase 

of 2.6 per cent. Average hourly earnings in the same period for manufacturing increased by 4.9 per cent. 

In other words, all the workers benefited was by 2.3 per cent. 

 

I would like to say there appears to be nothing to provide the one day minimum sick leave per month to 

organized or unorganised labor . . . Where is the support to get bargaining rights for federal employees? 

Where is the act to give portability to protect pensions? Portability to pensions regardless of place of 

employment? Where is the income continuous pay plan for all the people of this province who become 

ill and unable to earn? These are some of the things that count as priorities, Mr. Speaker, and I think that 

this budget has been somewhat negligent in providing these. 

 

It has been an accepted fact that the government across the way has the habit of stealing points in our 

program. Yes, they have taken one of my points, the Home-owner grant and I appreciate them doing 

that. We don't mind them taking our points in our program but let's do them right. We have provided 

much for the citizens of this province. We on this side of the house strive and usually are the first in the 

provisions of services for our citizens. You on the government side of the house provided the needed 

services only after much pressure by the citizens. I might say too, if it wasn't for the 26 CCF members 

on this side of the house much of the good welfare legislation or security legislation that we have on the 

statute books would be either removed or watered down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — We must not permit governments to set the stage for future booms and busts. Social 

democracy will give a planned economy, an economy that will continue to give security and build on a 

sound economic base. The present budget does not take care of the security of our people. It does not list 

the priorities in their 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

713 

proper order. I must say that we are not receiving any unconditional grants for cities and the urban 

municipalities. On account of these things I must at this time support the amendment to the motion in 

order that we may bring this province back to a solid footing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising first of all I want to congratulate you on the 

wonderful way you have conducted yourself. I also want to welcome Mr. Bradshaw to Saskatchewan 

and to our legislature. I hope that his stay here will be a pleasant one and that he will take home many 

pleasant memories. 

 

I also want to welcome the two new members to this house. As I was told, I wouldn't wish them the 

same thing that some of the others have wished them because I can remember that when I came in on a 

by-election in 1959 and the former member for Moosomin said: "I hope your stay here will be a pleasant 

and a short one". I want to say that I have been re-elected now three times and I hope my good people 

will see fit to send me here longer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Vote against purple gas . . . 

 

Mr. Thibault: — First of all I would like to say a few words about the member for Athabasca (Mr. 

Guy). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Last year I told him that he failed and I think he has failed again this year. I think the 

Speaker of the house at times should take him into the woodshed and dish him out a little bit of manners 

because as I listened to him the other day when the member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) was 

speaking, he was continuously interrupting. I am sure that he was not around when his mother dished 

out the manners. 

 

With that I intend to continue with my speech. I also want to wish his seat mate would try and teach him 

a little better. Now I want to keep on with my remarks, this was really off the cuff. 

 

I want to compliment the people of my constituency especially for sending a large number of students to 

this legislature. I want to say that every year there are about three, four, and sometimes five busloads of 

wonderful people and they do enjoy these trips down here. I want to compliment the people on both 

sides of the house for putting on a good display while these students are here. I want to say that I 

certainly appreciate it. 

 

I also want to make mention of another person who deserves mention. This is a fine young man, age 57 

who came from Norway when he was 19 years of age. Some time ago he went to Saskatoon and 

competed in a ski competition with all ages over 18 years and came first in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — This young man at the age of 57, who is a farmer, put on skis for the first time at the 

age of four and at the age of six 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

714 

 

he was in school competitions and took prizes in Norway. He returned to Norway, visited his parents in 

1952, and he took in the world Olympics of which he had in his younger days been a torch bearer. Now 

I'm always worried every time he goes to a ski competition that he is going to break some of his bones, 

but he loves it and he certainly recommends it to our young people. Last year he designed and helped to 

build a ski jump west of Domremy. Today it is one of the nicest ski jumps in the northern part of the 

province. I would invite anyone who wants to try a ski jump, even the old fellows. He has provided a 

tow rope to take the older gentlemen up to the top of the hill. He said it was pretty hard walking up the 

hill in Saskatoon but down in Minatinas, west of Domremy, we have a tow rope to take the people up. 

Now you see why this fine gentleman is worthwhile mentioning, I would say he is a champion for he 

took the Provincial Championship six times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now, I want to say a few words about the work that is being done in my constituency 

for the mentally retarded children. I believe the lady member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) had an 

opportunity to see what is being done in Kinistino. With a great deal of work by Mr. and Mrs. Polinsky, 

who look after the home, and the co-operation of the Kinistino school unit and a lot of local effort, quite 

a bit is being done for the retarded children in that area. I hope that the collection that is being made now 

in the drive throughout Canada for helping the retarded children will meet with a lot of success. But I 

say at this time that it should not be left to charitable organizations only to look after these youngsters. I 

think the government should play a larger part. You know what I mean by that and I will not dwell on 

that too long. 

 

Now I want to compliment the Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant) for having continued to work on no. 3 

highway. It is proceeding a little slowly but it looks as if he will get there some day. I am sure the people 

of Kinistino will appreciate it. I hope he will take it all the way across the river down into the Minister of 

Public Health's (Mr. Steuart) constituency, and I am sure our people will be glad about that too. 

 

Now, I also want to say a few words about a local government. The local governments in my 

constituency are a group of very co-operative people. Whether I sit on this side of the house or whether I 

sit on the other side of the house, I can assure the members of the government that these people will 

co-operate with the programs that are for the welfare of the province as a whole. 

 

I also want to thank the people of Kinistino for having sent me here to represent them. I want to say at 

this time that it is a pleasure to serve the kind of people that I represent. 

 

Now, I would like to say a few words about the grid road system. You all know that the grid road 

program was started back in 1956 after the local government conference that was held. I would say that 

it was a good program, it's a program that took the cars off the blocks. I remember when our cars had to 

stay on blocks for five months of the year on account of no roads. This is the program that took the cars 

off the blocks. But I would say we can't stop there. When I hear them say you had 20 years, when we 

started our 20 years there was nothing to work on. We had to start from the beginning and lay the 

foundation. I am glad that the grid road program is going to be continued. When you want to 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

715 

talk about increases for grid roads I want to point out that last year on grid roads there was a tightening 

and this year you have reached the point where you were the year before. So you cannot blow too much. 

I say you are going in the right direction but it's too bad that you had to back up one year before you 

could go ahead. I must say that we can certainly co-operate when the Department of Municipal Affairs 

renews improving these grid roads. But I also want to say that I am also in favor of taking some of these 

grid roads into the highway system. 

 

I want to mention a few roads that I believe should be taken into the highway system. There is the 

Wakaw road that takes in several summer resorts along Wakaw Lake. The first five miles next to 

Wakaw should really be oiled if you want to do something with it. There are a lot of people from 

Saskatoon and many parts of the province who do spend time and holidays on the edge of Wakaw Lake. 

This road is in great need of improvement in spite of it being built as a grid road under the CCF 

government. I think more should be done. 

 

Another road that should get a little attention is the so-called 44 trail as it is commonly known in my 

constituency. There is also the road going west of Domremy to the river. Now I am going to mention 

one that will interest the member for Humboldt (Mr. Brecker). I believe there should be a second branch 

of no. 20 highway to serve the places along the east side of the three lakes, Basin Lake, Lake Lenore and 

Middle Lake. For communities of Lake Lenore, Pathlow, St. Brieux, Muenster, there is an area there 

where a grid road is built, I think it should be taken into the highway system because there is a heavy 

amount of traffic and it is very costly to maintain. 

 

Now I would like to mention another one and that is the extension of no. 20 north to connect up with no. 

3 and on. I know the member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) would be interested in this also but you 

cannot do it all in one year but I would like to see you have it in your plans. Last year we had a program 

introduced into the house where grid roads would be taken into the highway program, into the highway 

system. I was quite happy about this, I thought it was a step in the right direction. Although I believe the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) is a very fine gentleman he has been contaminated a bit by 

the Premier. Out of 20 projects that were advertised in the Saskatchewan Gazette of July 16th, as near as 

I could figure, 14 of these projects were placed in Liberal seats, six in CCF seats. I could be wrong but 

that is as far as I could estimate and they are all listed. Now I want to say that perhaps it is only a 

coincidence but I am strongly in favor of treating everybody with the same degree of fairness. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the member a question. What . . . 

 

Mr. Thibault: — No, I will take questions after I'm finished. I'm not the type of guy that gets up and 

keeps interrupting people, I stay sitting down, and sometimes it's hard to sit down, I'm telling you it's 

tough. You feel like bouncing up. I sympathize with some of the members across the way. But when I 

am up here unless I have insulted somebody terribly, well I say get up and tell me so. Well, now so 

much for the grid roads. 

 

I want to say a few words about the work that I have done last summer on the Highway Safety 

Committee. It is very enjoyable and I like this type of work. I find that it is a way of working 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

716 

 

where you can get members on both sides of the house to sit down and leave the politics aside and work 

for the common good. Now, I want to compliment the members that worked on that committee. There is 

a lot more work to be done and I am not going to say too much about it. I think it can achieve a lot if 

only we can complete the work that has been started. I think that many problems of our country could be 

dealt with through legislative committees, I think we would get a heck of a lot further than making 

politics out of everything and that is what seems to occur in the legislature. Legislative committees are 

one area that I have always felt, and I have served on them on several occasions, is worthwhile; it is not 

a waste of time. Well, I recommend to the government to have a close look at more legislative 

committees when they are faced with serious problems. Now, I had a few talks when we worked on this 

committee about old age people who lose their license because they can drive no more. This is one 

aspect that I wanted to mention today. It has been mentioned by the member for Kelsey (Mr. J.H. 

Brockelbank), and I think it's worthwhile keeping it in mind. It's a pretty tough proposition for a police 

officer to remove the license from an elderly man and say "Now you can't drive anymore". I think in all 

fairness these elderly people are entitled to a free pass on our Saskatchewan Transportation System. 

Most of the time these buses are riding with a lot of room left in them. Certainly it wouldn't be too much 

to give these elderly citizens a free pass. It wouldn't cost the country anything and I am sure they would 

enjoy their twilight years much better. 

 

Now I think I am going to go to the policies of the Minister of Social Welfare. I have called him other 

things besides that, but not in the house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — No that's not in his department by the way, I think it's the Department of the Minister 

of Public Health (Mr. Steuart). It's the distribution of natural gas that I wanted to talk about. Sometime 

ago I saw in the press where he is going to offer gas to Rosthern, Hague and Duck Lake and Osler at a 

higher price than other people have to pay. Well, after bragging about the large surpluses that they have 

made with the Power Corporation, it is pretty hard to justify this higher rate. I think when we set out to 

distribute power and gas in this province we had in mind to take gas to everyone and equalize the cost. If 

we had adopted this attitude of charging this little group and so on, the farmers that are two miles away 

from the power line would never have got power. We would have had a very little, tightly knitted 

network that would bring in a lot of money and a poor service. I also want to say that there are places in 

my constituency that would like natural gas and I am sure they are prepared to pay the extra cost to get 

that natural gas. But I want to say as far as I am concerned when we form the government again we will 

make it right with these people. That's what we'll do. 

 

Hon. D. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Power too? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — That's right. If you want to talk about power I have advocated the refund of the $500 

after the Power Corporation had completed the distribution of power, you can go to my constituency and 

they will tell you the same thing. I said when the program is finished we should think of starting to 

refund the money that was 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

717 

put in there. That's been my stand and it still is. I don't beat around the bush at all, I tell you exactly what 

I think. Now, so much for power and gas, I think that it is the only fair thing to do is treat everybody 

with the same degree of fairness. When we start putting up a certain price on one group, another price on 

the other, then we'll start developing classes. It appears that the people across the way like classes. You 

know the Socialists like to have everybody more or less eat at the same table. 

 

We sometimes hear about population. I am always intrigued at hearing that the population is at an 

all-time high. Now let's brag about the population being at an all-time high. If you look at 1963, the 

population increased by 10,000, in 1964 by 8,000, in 1965 somewhere around 7,000. It's a record every 

year, even if it had increased 1,000 a year, it would still be an all-time high. But when you look at the 

birth rate, and I have looked after my share on that, we see that the birth rate for 1963 was 23,543, then 

in 1964, 23,623, and in 1965, 20,526. When you consider death and immigration we find that in 1963, 

7,500 people left the province and in 1965 it went up to over 9,000 people who left the province and in 

1965 it went up to over 10,000 people had left the province. We hear the Premier say that he has turned 

the tables around and people are staying here. Now I want to tell him that they are leaving this province 

faster than they have ever left before. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Just the Socialists, I think. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — No, that's since you got in. If you want to look at the death rate, it's amazing. You 

know we want to talk about medical care so if you want to read the table on page 3, and you can look at 

61, 62, 63, 64, you will find some amusing figures but I will not delve into them here and now because 

it's all there. And they are Liberal figures because this has been issued since you guys are in power. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Did all the Socialists drop dead? 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — What's your source? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Talking about the Home-owner grants . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Going to vote for it? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Yes, I am going to vote for it, because I feel like a man a while ago who said the idea 

originated on this side of the house. The idea originated with Mayor Baker last year, it was the first time 

it was mentioned. But I'll give you the real reasons why I'll vote for it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Henry took the credit for that, eh? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I'll give you the real reason why I'll vote for it, because it will go a little way in paying 

the increase in insurance rates. In some cases they have gone up as high as 150 per cent. Now, it will 

also go a little way in paying the increase in the rates that 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

718 

 

were raised in the geriatric centre in Melfort. The rates there have gone up from $10 a month for these 

patients to $50 a month. 

 

Mr. H.A. Broten (Watrous): — 500 per cent . . . 

 

Mr. Thibault: — 500 per cent? When I went to school it was 400. That's socialist arithmetic, I suppose. 

Now, it will also help those old age pensioners that were treated so rudely by the Liberal government at 

Ottawa when they denied them $25 a month increase in their old age pension, which amounts to $300 a 

year. It will certainly feel good when they give them $50, it will help. Fifty bucks, it will help the 

housewife to pay the increase on detergents. It's also going to help the farmer and everyone who has to 

burn gas to pay that one per cent. It will help also to pay the increase in the grazing lease. It will also 

help them to pay the $72 a year for their medical care card which was raised, and you know as well as I 

do, it was not necessary. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Just put it back to your rate. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Oh, wait, there is some more. And when we look at the way the federal government is 

handling our customers for wheat and see the drop of over 10 cents a bushel, which means that the 

farmer that sells 1,000 bushels of wheat has lost $120. Certainly he will be glad when he gets 50 bucks. 

Now he'll also be happy when he comes to pay his repair bills at the rate machinery is going up. That 

will help also and by golly everything is okay, we get fifty bucks. Now I've got to give credit to the 

Conservatives; they really devoted themselves to build up markets throughout the world. But I don't 

blame Western Canada for not returning a Liberal member to Ottawa. The only way they could get 

representation was to appoint a defeated renegade to draw an old age pension in the Senate. That's the 

way they can have representation from Western Canada. Well, this is what we have got now. I hope that 

the Liberal government will treat our customers in such a way that they will be glad to come and deal 

with the Canadian people. 

 

Now I want to talk about the insurance rates. This is amusing and I think that the best way that I can 

give you the picture of insurance rates is with this letter I got here this morning. I used a photostat so if 

I've got to table it I won't mind. It comes from Crystal Springs and it says: 

 

Dear Arthur: I went the other day to see about my insurance policy and have been informed that my 

rates on my house and contents on the farm have been increased from 40 cents to $1 for three years. 

An increase of 150 per cent. This is a long way from the 5¢ per 100 increase that Mr. Boldt said over 

the radio. 

 

I don't know if Mr. Boldt knows the back door from the front door of that office, but we have been 

getting all kinds of rates lately. I wish you would table these rates in the house, so we would know 

what's going on. I want to quote the letter again: 

 

I wrote to the Insurance Office about it and, of course, I got back a very nice reply. How it can justify 

60¢ increase and claim it will present a very fair assessment of my policy, I don't see it. 

 

Mr. Kreutzwieser. 

 

But it is amusing when you read the letter that was answered. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

719 

They said it makes our rates comparable with the rates in other provinces. I am not going to read it all 

because it takes too much time. Here is a photostat, you can have it if you want to. 

 

I just wonder why these rates should have gone up. 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): — A Liberal government. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I want to point out now what the rates were back in 1962. This should be interesting; 

these are the SGIO rates. In Lloydminster you had SGIO, $21; Alberta $34.50, that's back in 1962. 

those, well, those are the rates. Now when you compare Regina, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Saskatoon 

and Yorkton their rates were $17.50. In Manitoba for Brandon, St. Boniface, Winnipeg, including 

suburbs $27.50, Alberta $39.50. But when you get to just recently you find that the rates in 

Saskatchewan are very comparable with Alberta and Manitoba, and in some instances just a little higher. 

Now I can very well see that you can tell our people it's aimed at paying one of the political debts that 

have been accumulated. And for no other reason. I think that you ought to know where some of these 

political debts are going to be paid. There is in Maclean Magazine on October 24, 1959, where there was 

a $50,000 campaign fund offered, and had they lost they said they would have got their money back. 

That was on condition that Mr. Thatcher had the nomination over the new member for Maple Creek 

(Mr. Cameron). I wouldn't be surprised that that is where some of the political debts are being paid off 

with our insurance today. 

 

But now we have come to automobile rates. I'm not going to quarrel too much with raising the rates on 

the offenders but I want to say that there is one area that I would like to see the minister change his 

attitude and it's towards the young people under the age of 25. The way he has treated these young 

people is just like the teacher in the classroom. She can't find out who did wrong so she goes ahead and 

spanks the whole class. That's what he has done here. I know we have a lot of young people that are 

doing their best to drive cars properly. Sure I will admit that a certain number of them are not behaving 

right and are in accidents on several occasions. But to punish the whole bunch by a blanket increase on 

this group I hope the minister will reconsider his position because I think it's wrong. Being on that 

Highway Safety Committee we have gone into this a lot. We have got to devise ways and means to 

encourage our young people to be accident free, not by putting two strikes against them before they 

start. This is wrong and I hope the minister will reconsider his position on this one. 

 

Now as far as Legislative Secretaries, I want to say a few words about them. I think some of them did 

work okay, but generally speaking I think it was a sort of sneaky way to raise the indemnity of the 

backbenchers about $1,000 a year. By rotating it around they will pretty well all come out with extra 

money on that side. They seem to believe that the members on this side have no work to do. We have 

work to do also. But it was a way of increasing their indemnity. When I see the rotating taking place 

now, there is no other answer for it than what I said a moment ago. I noticed it in the by-elections, I've 

been there, and I noticed how these secretary assistants were very handy to the government. 

 

I want to say a few words about social welfare. Since the 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

720 

 

minister was not in when I spoke about it, I think that the description by the member for Regina North 

(Mr. Whalen) the other day was true. If they are true, and I believe they are, the Minister of Social 

Welfare had better find out a little more about his department. The increases in Melfort, I know of one 

particular case where a mother is suffering from multiple sclerosis, with five children, when the father 

was hit with $50 a month to leave his wife there, for how long we don't know, this is not right. To go 

from $10 to $50 a month, I just don't know what these people are thinking of, and yet you want to brag 

that they are cutting the income tax and they are cutting the cost of social welfare. If this is the kind of 

cut you make in social welfare I would never employ you as the Minister of Social Welfare if I were the 

head of the government. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — . . . wouldn't work for you . . . 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I want to say a few words about civil rights. I don't think I have to dwell on it very 

long. We heard about the orders from the minister in charge of the Power Corporation when he told the 

people working for the Power Corporation to "stay out of politics". I can remember when we were the 

government and on several occasions I had serious arguments with people who were working for the 

Power Corporation, I would get told off and after awhile they would come back and say "Do you think I 

could lose my job?" and I would say "no.". I said "I don't agree with what you say but I'll defend your 

right to be able to say what you want to say" and that is they way it should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I know a little while ago when the power line between Squaw Rapids and Beatty 

broke down, the power was out for over seven hours, in approximately 30 to 50 degree below zero 

weather. These boys for the Power Corporation were out and worked until they had this power going. 

That is where I'm a little afraid that he Power Corporation is cutting the crew down a little too small, not 

keeping enough reserve in the case of an emergency. These boys did very well but some places were out 

of power in this cold weather as long as seven hours. The next morning on "Speak up" a lady phoned 

CKBI and she felt pretty strongly about it. She wanted to thank the power boys for having done such a 

wonderful job in doing all they could to bring power back to the people. But she ended up by saying "I 

feel sorry that in a free country these people have lost their civil rights". How true. I say, there is another 

thing that this government must have another look at, to re-assure these people that they are free to go to 

the political meetings they want to attend or the church they want to attend, or wherever they want to go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I don't like to see things like that take place in a country where we call ourselves free. 

We are not when we have governments like that in power. 

 

I am satisfied that all the members across the way don't go along with that line of thinking, but some of 

the backbenchers are going to have to get up and tell Big No. One just where to get off at some of these 

days. I am sure now that I have wasted about almost three-quarters of an hour . . . 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

721 

An Hon. Member: — Wasted is right. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — . . . because as I say, work would be better done in committees. This is why I call it 

waste. 

 

I want to say that you can see by now by my remarks that I will support the amendment and I will not 

support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I think I 

should take the opportunity of congratulating everyone who has participated so far in the debate. I would 

like to particularly congratulate the hon. member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault). I really believe that he 

has done a much better job than the official critic. I would be remiss though if I did not mention the 

great progress that has taken place in the province and how it has been done these last two years. 

 

First, I think that the promotion and the encouragement of the industrial development in this province 

has definitely gone a long way. It has helped and assisted in the reduction of the sales tax from five to 

four per cent. Two, it has made it possible to give assistance for snow removal on grid roads. Three, it 

has made it possible to provide Home-owner grants which is a reduction in the taxes to homeowners of 

this province. You very well know that for a number of years the taxes in the province of Saskatchewan 

per capita have been higher than any other place in Canada. So the industrial development in this 

province has assisted in giving greater assistance to our universities and our schools. Five, it has 

provided or made the provisions to give more maintenance on grid roads. Again I should never forget to 

repeat over and over again that the industrial development in this province has provided and made 

possible more jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course, a change of government has also provided a thrift-conscious administration. This has saved 

the taxpayers of this province a considerable amount of money and has released more money for 

additional services, something quite evident in the budget. 

 

The highways have been greatly extended in the province and it is very noticeable as we travel around. I 

think the government should be commended for the attitude it has taken towards the youth of our 

province. I think that one of the greatest assets the people have in Saskatchewan is our youth. We realize 

that by 1970 almost 53 per cent of the population of our country will be below the ages of 25. 

 

It has established a non-political land lease policy. It has been at last established where political hatchet 

men are not in the field assisting . . . 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Like in Moosomin? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — That's right. Like in Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Very non-political. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

722 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It has taken out of the province creeping socialism which had been and was gradually 

trying to destroy the local institutions, our local governments. You know, this has been proven time and 

time again since the general election. But I think we should start to review it slightly. We had the Prince 

Albert by-election. Of course, the CCF were quite broken-hearted at that time. Then we had the general 

election and boy they were really broken-hearted then. Moosomin, more broken hearts. Bengough, the 

pay-off. They dropped the boodle and they broke the record. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — You bought votes. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — And speaking of the broken record, it does remind me of a situation that I got involved 

in last year. I mentioned the question of a car. They are so broken that they are repeating this car 

question over and over again. It's rather amusing, like a broken record. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — . . . broken . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I believe that the government should be commended for having established a good 

hospital policy where the hospitals are not being closed arbitrarily by the administration. The CCF 

government had established a few years ago a hospital study which had indicated very definitely that a 

number of hospitals were to be closed. I think that this government should be commended on the policy 

that it has established now. The government will not arbitrarily close any hospitals in this province. 

 

I don't believe that enough credit has been given to the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) for having 

introduced the Direct Sellers Act. 

 

Another thing that the change of government has done; it has produced a better feeling in the public. Just 

the other day, coming in from Moose Jaw I had the occasion to pick up a person during the storm. On 

the way in we were discussing the question of highways and the question of a four-lane highway. This 

gentleman was saying, "Well, it does take a little bit of my land but at least we are treated one heck of a 

lot better with the present government than we were ever treated in the past under road policies". 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I could go on and on with many of the things that this government has done. Purple 

gas has been mentioned over and over again but I don't believe that it can be mentioned enough. Mineral 

tax exemptions, exemption for the first $1,000 for our young people on household goods, all things are 

for the good life and with a Liberal government you have a good life. 

 

Then you find the gentlemen opposite, Mr. Speaker, have oftentimes been criticizing the present 

administration for raising the hospitalization and health tax. What is the record, Mr. Speaker? In 1952 

the maximum family tax for hospitalization at that time was $330, after the election it went up to $40. 

Then of course, in '59 that was the year before the election it went down to $35. After the election it 

went up. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

723 

An Hon. Member: — You're wrong. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — No, not wrong because this is from the Department of Health. These records have 

been shown very clearly. In 1959 the maximum family tax was $35. In 1961 and 1962, that is after the 

election it went up to $48, or a total with the health tax of $72, 1964 they dropped it down to $52. It is 

quite obvious, they dropped it and after the election they would raise it. Each time they dropped it was 

only an attempt as a political bribe. Then they would go ahead and put it on again where it should be. 

This is a fact and this has been brought up on several occasions but they just seem to forget about this. 

 

The member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) the other day seemed to be attempting to mislead this 

house in saying that the Fisherman's Co-operative that was carrying operations on in the Cumberland 

House area was being dissolved. I have made a check of this department this noon and I find that there is 

no suggestion whatever of its being dissolved. Attempts are made time and time again, Mr. Speaker, by 

members opposite to try to distort the facts. The hon. member for Regina, a man by the name of Baker, 

seemed to have made that attempt a moment ago saying that all great labor legislation, everything that 

has ever happened in this house, has taken place under the previous administration. He said we never 

had no minimum wage. The first minimum wage in this province was brought in sometime in 1917. The 

first bargaining agreement in this province took place in 1906. These are many of the things that they try 

to distort. I don't think that they are lying. I wouldn't say that. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Tell us about the legislation of 1906. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It may not have been legislation but there was a bargaining agreement, it was 

permitted as it should be. It was an agreement between management and labor and that is the way it 

should be, without inference by anybody else. It was recognized at that time. 

 

Mr. Davies: — Permitted I think is the word all right. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — In trying to discredit the government the hon. member from Regina (Mr. Baker) was 

mentioning about the minimum wage. I said the first minimum wage established in this province was 

sometime around 1917. Last year this government being fully conscious of the needs did introduce an 

increase in the minimum wage. It has been mentioned in this house that this will be done again. This 

indicates that the government is very, very conscious of the fact of the working people of this province. 

 

Ever since the opening of this legislature some days ago I have been listening very carefully to the 

opinions voiced on both sides of the house regarding the accomplishments during this last twenty-two 

months, also regarding the task ahead of us. I was particularly interested to hear the critical remarks of 

which there have been a few concerning matters dealing directly or indirectly with the Department of 

Labour and the programs and policies of the department. I think that it is only fair that we should deal 

with the efforts of the Department of Labour since I am the minister 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

724 

 

of that department. It is generally believed that the spark of truth comes from the clash of different views 

and different opinions. People from different backgrounds often judge the same situation differently. I 

would have liked to think that when these different viewpoints are presented in an assembly like this that 

the results would be and should be a good clear picture. They say a picture will really bring out the 

weaknesses and bring in good recommendations. Only too often members across the way have had a 

tendency to distort the true facts and pictures insofar as what has been going on in the Department of 

Labour. However, I would be less than honest if I pretended that so far the Department of Labour has 

received some credit. Everybody knows that the purpose of the Saskatchewan Department of Labour is 

to administer certain legislation, certain statutes. This task may have been simple in the past but it is 

getting to be less so in an economy that is becoming more complex. 

 

The industrial expansion which has been mentioned time and time again and has taken place in our 

province has brought about an increase in our non-agricultural work force. Unfortunately we do not have 

the detailed statistics of our labor force by occupations. We continue to hope that the Dominion Bureau 

of Statistics will eventually decide to publish the much needed information on an annual basis. 

Nevertheless, we know that at the present time two out of every three members of the Saskatchewan 

labor force are engaged in a non-agricultural occupation. This, of course, means that our labor 

legislation is becoming much more important and its administration much more involved. 

 

There are some people who seem to think that the word labor applies only to manual labor. This has 

never been entirely true. Today it is less true than ever. In my opinion and the opinion of a lot of people, 

labor means work and work is what everybody must do if he is to make an honest living. Some people 

work in mines, others in factories, shops, laboratories, hospitals, schools, offices, and a variety of other 

places. We talk of unskilled labor, semi-skilled labor and professional work. No matter how we classify 

this type of work, they are all the product of human effort and consequently its labor. Our labor 

legislation, therefore, concerns directly or indirectly, the lives of all citizens of Saskatchewan, except for 

those matters which the constitution has left under federal jurisdiction. 

 

I am proud to be able to say that the Department of Labour has functioned very well in the last 

twenty-two months. And I am confident that it will continue to function equally as well in the future. I 

would say perhaps even better. With a staff that is slightly smaller than that which we found in 1964 we 

have been able to provide good services for the citizens of Saskatchewan; indeed every branch of the 

department has done this. Our industrial relations office has spared no effort to prevent industrial 

disputes from erupting but when this did actually occur our industrial relations officers have provided 

valuable conciliation service. As a result the proportion of working time lost in man days and man hours 

through industrial disputes in our province has remained at a minimum though some strikes have been 

much prolonged. Our staff is still working on that in the effort and hope to have favourable results in the 

very near future. 

 

We believe that the field of labor management relations constitutes more than just a mere process of the 

collective bargaining. We believe that it forms an integral part of a free enterprise system and under this 

system we recognize the advantages of allowing both labor and management to function in an 

atmosphere free from excessive government control and this is 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

725 

as it should be. On the other hand though whenever parties wish to have our assistance we are glad to 

offer it in the interests of harmonious relations, prosperity and steady progress. 

 

Our labor standards branch has continued to ensure the observation of labor standards throughout the 

province and the results of this work are reflected in the increased number of inspections. The records of 

our safety branch, safety services, continue to be good. The boilers and pressure vessels branch 

continues to do a good job and so do the electrical and gas branches. The same may be said of our fire 

and theatres branch as well as our research branch. It is probably not all that is desired. There is a lot 

more. If we would be content with what we have then we fail to be progressive. We are looking forward 

to much more progress in these things. 

 

Under our apprenticeship training program, a total of 1,417 indentured apprentices appeared on record 

on March 31st, 1964. A year later this has increased to 1,576. This represents an increase of 159 or 10 

per cent. A significant increase is in prospect for the current fiscal year, both in respect of indentures and 

in respect of the number of apprentices receiving training. There are many reasons for the growth of this 

type of training as well: Good employment opportunities for skilled tradesmen which has been provided 

by the industrial development, comfortable wages, for the demand of labor on the market, and a 

substantial allowance paid by the government of Saskatchewan to apprenticeship training. Indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, of all provinces, Saskatchewan is equalled only by Manitoba in the amount of allowances. This 

was increased last year, Mr. Speaker, by this administration. We could say in effect, that we pay the 

highest training allowances in Canada with Manitoba being equal. This is paid to head of families taking 

training away from home. However, the allowances are paid in Manitoba to parents of two or more 

children. They get the $50 per week training allowance where they have two ore more children. In 

Saskatchewan we pay it whether they have children or not. 

 

In view of this expansion, we consider it important to make sure that existing facilities are used as 

efficiently as they can be. Winter is a popular time, of course, with employers, in regard to training 

because apprentices can be released more easily during the slack period of business. However, since 

classroom space for trainees is at a premium at this present time, the point has been reached when some 

training courses may have to be scheduled for spring and summer months. This is where we will require 

the co-operation of everyone in this respect. 

 

While I am presenting these facts about the Department of Labour, I will take this opportunity of 

expressing my appreciation of the loyalty and devotion to duty of all government employees. They are 

the ones who are helping to give good service to the people of Saskatchewan. I would like at this time 

particularly to pay a special tribute to the Department of Labour because I am dealing with them at this 

moment. 

 

Members of this legislature have received copies of the annual report of the Department of Labour, 

which was tabled a few days ago. I don't think I need waste time in repeating here at length what you 

can read in the report itself. However, I want to draw to your attention table six on page eight which 

shows the number of unplaced applicants with local offices of the national employment service in 

Saskatchewan. You will see from this table that there has been a substantial decrease over the last 22 

months in 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

726 

 

the number of people seeking jobs through the National Employment Office. The figures for the month 

of December are particularly illuminating. Take for example, in 1963 the number of unplaced job 

applicants was 18,281. In December of 1964, it was 17,261. In December 1965, it had dropped down to 

13,574. This was a tremendous drop in so short a time. Average unemployment in 1956 was actually the 

lowest since 1957. These statistics do reflect a buoyant condition of the provincial economy which is 

accompanied by a high level of wages and a general improvement in working conditions, much of which 

has been gained through the bargaining process. 

 

Recently a member of this house asked a question regarding the hours of work in Saskatchewan. He 

wanted to know the number of people working 40 hours per week, the number of people working less 

than 40 hours per week, and so on. You have probably seen, Mr. Speaker, the answer to this question 

which was given in the votes and proceedings. It is worth pointing out that a very considerable number 

of employees in Saskatchewan, at the present time, work 40 hours or less per week. This favourable 

situation is not the product of any fancy legislation. It is not the product of arbitrary decisions by the 

administration. It is the product of increased productivity and better labor-management relations. 

 

I do not have to tell you that productivity tends to increase as a result of higher technology, a well 

trained work force, and good industrial relations. It is as a result of this higher productivity that wages 

and salaries tend to rise. Thus in 1965, wages and salaries in Saskatchewan were 4.1 per cent higher, on 

the average, than they were in 1964. There was an increase in that year as well. In this connection, I am 

happy to report that the salaries of the government employees which were increased once in 1964, have 

been increased in 1965 and will be augmented a third time in the fall of the current year. 

 

In a speech that I gave at the beginning of October, 1965, before the annual convention of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour in North Battleford, I pointed out that in August, 1965, there were 

20,000 more people employed in Saskatchewan than was the case 12 months earlier. Following that 

speech, some doubts, Mr. Speaker, were expressed in the press about the accuracy of my estimate. I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, at this time that nothing has happened since August of 1965 that might alter the 

estimate presented at that time. On the contrary, the employment index published by the DBS shows that 

in 1965 employment in Saskatchewan has been about 4.5 per cent higher again than it was in 1964. As a 

matter of fact, the increase in the employment index between 1964 and 1965 is the highest on record. 

These statistics show beyond a doubt that we are on the right path. Living standards in our province are 

rising holding forth the promise of greater progress in the near future. That is because of our industrial 

development which has been promoted by this government. 

 

The committee, Mr. Speaker, that was appointed about a year ago to study the advisability of revising 

the Trade Union Act has held a number of hearings in Regina and Saskatoon. Several briefs have been 

presented to it, which are being studied at the present time. When the committee completes its report, 

members of the legislature will have an opportunity to examine it. The government is anxious indeed to 

have the views of all population strata and economic groups, all areas of our economy, inasmuch as our 

labor legislation is concerned. Labor legislation, Mr. Speaker, in order to be good must strive to 

harmonize the interests of the majority 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

727 

of the people in our province. I hope to have the report sometime in the near future. 

 

I need not speak at great length about the intention of the government to consider proposals for an 

increase in the minimum wage. I did mention that a moment ago. While I firmly believe that we should 

establish a minimum level, the level of wages is ultimately determined by the amount of goods and 

services produced by the national economy. The level of wages generally is levelled out on the basis of 

the industrial expansion that takes place. We established an increase last year; it is the intention of the 

government to ask the minimum wage board to have another look at it so we can bring another 

expansion this year. 

 

The most important problem before us, however, remains that of training and upgrading of our labor 

force in such a way as to equip it for coping with the ever changing conditions produced by automation. 

It is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that as the work process becomes more and more mechanized in our 

society, it will be necessary for all people to spend an increasing proportion of their working lives in 

working and taking education. We must leave no stone unturned in our search for ways and means to 

learn. We must also apply ourselves more diligently than in the past to the task of preparing instructors, 

capable of transmitting the available stock of knowledge that we have to the rising generation. It might 

turn out that this is one of the most difficult tasks which face us to find the necessary instructors in the 

field of technology. The most skilful of all teachers cannot teach what they do not know. This means 

that we need instructors who are fully familiar with the subjects they are to teach. This may mean in 

turn, that a training and upgrading is required for instructors at all levels, starting with kindergarten and 

ending with the university. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan through the government that they have 

given themselves, are fully capable of finding a correct solution to the problem of training and 

education, in trades and otherwise. They have been faced with other problems which they have solved 

successfully. Perhaps the most important prerequisite for this is harmonious labor-management 

relations, creating a climate in which the selfish motives of management and labor would give way to a 

more objective approach, placing the good of the nation over and above the advantage of individual 

categories of our citizens, no matter how they are defined. 

 

While I do not want to belabor the topic with which you are all familiar, I may be allowed to refer to the 

abandonment of rail lines, Mr. Speaker, and the cancellation of passenger trains as typical examples of a 

problem affecting the citizens of Saskatchewan. Such problems, Mr. Speaker, require for their solution 

the co-ordinated efforts of all our population. It is more important at this time, Mr. Speaker, that 

everyone works together while we are in the process of growing faster than we have ever grown, to 

work together. 

 

There are, of course, Mr. Speaker, a variety of other problems to which we should, and we will, give our 

attention. There is the problem of the older workers who are the first to feel the pressures arising from 

automation and cybernation. There are the problems associated with the increasing participation of 

women in our labor force. Last year, Mr. Speaker, we established a women's bureau. We have made a 

fair amount of studies. We have had meetings and gatherings with quite a few people in this respect. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

728 

 

Where do we go from there? Other problems with which we are likely going to have to deal are those 

related to the mobility of our workers, their movement from one locality to another, from one plant to 

another, and from one occupation to another. We shall deal with these problems, Mr. Speaker, as we go 

along. 

 

We should realize that what most people want is not merely security or comfort or luxury, although they 

are glad to have these. People want to live a meaningful life. If we cannot help our people, Mr. Speaker, 

especially our young people, to find a deeper meaning and some greater objective, they may have to 

settle for more shallow and more trivial things. This we want to avoid. We want to give them an 

education. We want to give them technical training and vocational training for our labor force. We want 

to give them an acceptable minimum wage, progressive reduction of working hours, income protection. 

This has been indicated, Mr. Speaker, in the budget. It is quite obvious that I will not support the 

amendment but I will support the motion. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before the hon. minister takes his seat would 

he permit a few short questions? I take it the minister will accept a few questions. 

 

The minister spoke for some length and it seemed like he was touching on policy this afternoon. I was 

wondering if he was enunciating "the vigorous work force policy" as mentioned in the Budget Speech. 

That is my first question. I also want to ask a question about the women's branch in the Department of 

Labour. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — At this point rather than go through the whole process, again, Mr. Speaker, actually 

indicating what the women's branch in the Department of Labour is concerned, I am sure that this house 

would have a greater opportunity to go into all the details when the estimates are down and we can go 

into a cross questioning program. The Women's Branch of the Labour Standards, I'll give it just briefly, 

at this moment are concerning themselves with looking or dividing the work load in the Labour 

Standards Branch. Much of the work that has been done under labor standards was at one time done by 

the whole branch. We are looking at the advisability of making some sort of a study on the question of 

baby care while the ladies are working. This is something that the branch is looking into. We have 

invited all the women's organizations to give any suggestions they may have. This government, Mr. 

Speaker, believes that it is not up to the government to do something that it, the government, thinks but 

to get this information from the public and the women's organization which they deal with and on this 

basis we shall act. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I don't believe the hon. gentleman has answered 

my questions really about the "vigorous work force policy" and about the women's bureau. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I draw the attention of the members of the house to the customary procedure. 

When members have taken their seat after having made a speech and if anybody wishes to direct a 

question to them, if they choose to accept the question they do so, the member did that and accepted the 

questions the member wished to ask and he replied to them. But at the end of a debate we can't enter into 

a question and answer period. The member asked his two 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

729 

questions by courtesy of the previous speaker and the previous speaker has answered them. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I believe I answered the question on the women's bureau. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. L.M. Larson (Pelly): — It hadn't been my intention to participate in this debate to any great length. 

However there are some points that I wish to make and I choose this occasion to do so. 

 

Before I go into the main remarks that I want to make, I want to do something very unusual in this 

house. I have a few compliments and a few bouquets to hand out. I want to say to the hon. Minister of 

Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) that we appreciate very much some of the work that was done in 

Madge Lake park. He saw fit to appropriate money for a very badly needed road into a hay meadow. 

This was very much appreciated. Other work on the park grounds was equally appreciated, and I want at 

this time to thank the hon. minister for having heeded the suggestion that I put to him. Thank you very 

much. 

 

I want to say a word of appreciation to the Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant). I wish the results of work 

done would have been entirely satisfactory. However, we do appreciate the work that was started and 

some of the projects that were completed. Some very severe hardships were occasioned by the work on 

no. 5 highway due to weather conditions. This made travel almost impossible. The department, however, 

did the best they could, but the job was left unfinished. It is my hope that the minister will be able to 

complete this work that is badly needed. On the project on no. 49 highway the oiling is very much 

appreciated. Certainly it appears now as if some additional work ought to have been done on the road 

bed before the oiling or hard surfacing project was undertaken. It might well turn out that the oiling will 

be of not too much value inasmuch as the road bed is not standing up. However, the work and the dust 

free conditions are being enjoyed by the people that travel. Again we appreciate what was done. 

 

Now, the gas extension to Hyas, Norquay and Pelly is again serving a very useful need in that area. 

 

Returning for a moment to the highway situation I am aware that the minister has had some difficulty 

with the highway going south from Togo. Representations have been made to have this road reclaimed 

into the highway system. I have not been too happy with some of the proceedings. I have been left out 

completely. I have not been consulted. Delegations have come to see the minister to make presentations 

and I have been left out. I have some very, what I think, worthwhile information to offer and yet I have 

not been consulted to come in on any of this discussion. 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — You should be on this side of the house. 

 

Mr. Larson: — Now grid roads. Yes, I realize that I probably would be appreciated on that side of the 

house although I feel I am much 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

730 

 

more appreciated over here. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — Yes, they need your type. 

 

Mr. Larson: — Now, with regard to grid roads. My constituency is one of those that have not had full 

advantage of the grid road program. Much more needs to be done. I would appreciate the extension of 

the grid road program to where it probably could serve some of the very needed areas. I would 

appreciate the grid road extension program that is being inaugurated being extended to us. I am hoping 

that we will not be left out. No. 8 highway is another project that is very badly in need of attention. With 

some grid road connections it could serve the whole north-east area to complete a highway land grid 

road program that certainly would be of great value to us all. At the outset this is a very high producing 

area with tremendous traffic and tremendous amount of movement. The park attracts a very great 

number of people in the summertime. The refinery at Kamsack occasions a tremendous amount of heavy 

traffic. This demands that grid roads and highways are essential and we certainly will be looking 

forward to some improvements in the road structure in this particular corner of the province. 

Unfortunately we are not as favorably located apparently as some areas. However, I do plead that we do 

get some attention as it is very urgently needed. 

 

Now, as a general comment, I want to say at the outset that the general tone and character of the budget 

left, in my opinion, rather much to be desired. I thought, too, that it presented a rather dangerous outline 

of the general thinking of the political party that is now the government of this province. I find complete 

return to the free enterprise, dog-eat-dog system that is being so loudly propagated rather dangerous to 

comprehend. I find myself in general agreement, however, that some of the statements the Provincial 

Treasurer made when he said "This budget which I am placing before this house this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker, endeavors to present a clear picture of the present financial position of the province and the 

plans of the government for the coming fiscal year". I agree that this is, Mr. Speaker, a noble statement 

and is in keeping with the responsibilities and the duties of the Provincial Treasurer both to this house 

and to the people of the province. The people of Saskatchewan have become accustomed to this kind of 

outline and this kind of analysis. From the previous government this was forthcoming and many people 

have come to look upon the Budget Speech as a barometer and perhaps a guide for many of their plans 

and activities during the year. 

 

This is as it should be. This is what is expected and should in fact be demanded of the Treasurer 

whoever he may be or whatever political party he may represent. Anything less is just not good enough. 

Anything less calls for an accounting. The accounting made by the Provincial Treasurer, of course, was 

not long in coming. The first factor the Treasurer and Premier had in mind was the political stocks of the 

Liberal party. The other factor the Treasurer put rather heavy emphasis on was as I have mentioned, his 

love and great allegiance to the free and private enterprise system of doing things. 

 

In my opinion, the whole speech was another of the familiar blasts that this province has become rather 

used to and I feel has suffered from during the last two years. He continued throughout his entire address 

to blast away and paint, in my opinion, a fictitious and imaginary picture of a free enterprise Utopia that 

bears little or no resemblance to the facts of life as they exist in Saskatchewan. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

731 

If the people of the province were to put the faith they ought in the provincial economy and the report 

and act accordingly, they would soon discover that they would be living in a fool's paradise and would 

soon pay the consequences and the penalty of the Treasurer's report. 

 

Now, it is not my intention to criticize what the budget contains, rather I want to make a few remarks 

about first, its shortcomings and secondly, some of the general directions the Liberal government is 

taking Saskatchewan and its people. 

 

I want first of all to make a few remarks about Saskatchewan's largest and in my opinion for a long time 

to come our most important industry. The Liberals of Saskatchewan, as well as at Ottawa, have for as 

long as I can remember given lip service to this industry. This is an industry that has done more on its 

own account, an industry that has had to adjust, to adapt, to change, and to survive and to proceed on its 

own inertia ever since the province came into being. I am, of course, Mr. Speaker, referring to the 

agricultural and the farming industry. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer was very proud to refer to agriculture in the one billion dollar bracket. I am 

just as proud of this as he is. I share his view that in the future it will assume even greater importance. 

That the Treasurer is not really too interested as to what the future holds for this great industry is all 

hidden in what he did not say about it. He has failed, for example, to point out to this house the very 

great benefits to Canada as a result of the efforts of the farmers. 

 

He failed to mention the very great improvement, for example, in Canada's financial position generally. 

The improvement in the balance of payments alone has lessened the embarrassment on the government 

at Ottawa. The amount of work created by the moving and handling of grain alone has been very 

substantial and very beneficial. These benefits have been felt from coast to coast of this country. It is 

being recognized as one of the more important things to hit our nation in the last few years. 

 

The number of workers who have been kept on jobs in industry to provide the goods that the farmers 

need and have been able to buy, he did not mention these. The immediate benefits of the number of cash 

registers in the province of Saskatchewan, ringing because of the efforts of the farmers was not indeed 

even mentioned. And above all, what the Premier and Treasurer failed to mention was the amount of 

good-will that the efforts of Saskatchewan farmers have brought to Canada as a nation and to the world 

as a whole, by producing and sending these vast amounts of good wholesome food to feed hungry and 

starving boys and girls as well as men and women in countries where our food has gone. 

 

It is now 5.30, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the assembly to adjourn until after supper. 

 

The assembly recessed until 7.30 p.m. o'clock. 

 

Mr. Larson: — Mr. Speaker, when you arose at 5.30 I was talking about some of the advantages to 

Canada as a whole occasioned by the contributions of the farmers and the farming industry of this 

province. I want now to spend a moment or two dealing with an urgent problem that exists in my 

constituency. I hope that the minister in charge of natural gas, (Mr. Steuart), will be kind enough to 

listen and to take into account what may be done about this particular problem. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

732 

 

The native Indians in my constituency are in the process of re-organizing themselves and their living 

conditions. They are setting up villages and moving their living quarters into groups where they hope to 

improve their lot. They are faced with a very serious problem insofar as heating is concerned. The 

reserve has been denuded of its trees and brought into agricultural production. This means that these 

people are now faced with a serious problem of heating their homes. With the advent of the villages it 

makes it possible to serve these areas with natural gas. It would be a simple matter to extend it to the 

villages, to the St. Phillips mission, where there is a school that is doing an excellent job, to continue on 

to the second village that is being built. This is an urgent matter insofar as these people are concerned. 

There is some real need. They don't have facilities to haul their wood. If they are going to rely on wood 

it has to be brought from the forest reserve which is some 20 miles away. I think this is a move that 

ought to go beyond realms of partisan politics. Certainly the need is here and certainly something must 

be done in the near future to help these people out of the very serious position and problem that they are 

facing. 

 

Now I want to go on, Mr. Speaker, and mention some of the utterings and mutterings that have come 

from the other side of the house. I have heard so many shouts of "You have had 20 years, what did you 

do?", and many similar remarks like this. But I want to refresh the very short and sometimes dull 

memory of some of the government members. It may be as well to remind them of some of the things of 

20 years ago. Lest the members opposite get so carried away with their own praises and eulogies, I want 

to reminisce for a few minutes. The story, Mr. Speaker, could become a best seller if it were published. 

The problem, of course, would be to get members opposite to read and take heed. It would bring back 

too many unpleasant memories of the Liberal "pork barrel" days. So I will talk a little bit about the last 

20 years. 

 

Well, of course, one of the first things that Premier Douglas discovered when he took office from the 

Liberals was a cupboard that was absolutely bare and without any funds. Instead of the healthy surplus 

of the present treasury, Mr. Douglas found bills, bills, and more unpaid bills; seed grain payments due, 

provincial bonds due and no money to pay them; farm mortgages due and payable and farmers being 

evicted from farms and homes. Well, there were plenty of financial institutions ready to renew loans at 

charges of unreasonable rates that were outrageous and unreasonable. The credit rating of the province 

was one of the worst in the whole Dominion of Canada. Compare this position of the province when the 

present Treasurer took over. He found Saskatchewan's credit rating one of the best in Canada. It's my 

hope that he is able and willing to keep it that way. 

 

Revenues at that time were another sad story. No oil to brag about. No mineral income; no industries; no 

power; no potash. There was no need to scramble and go to any and all lengths to claim credit for 

industries and development. There just was none. If crops on the farms failed everything else suffered 

and came to a virtual standstill. The main problems facing the government was how to keep solvent and 

meet commitments. No need to boast and look for headlines. No need to make fabulous and extravagant 

claims. The question facing the government 20 years ago was not what to claim credit for, but what to 

do first and where to start. 

 

The Liberals of today talk about industry. They forget that 20 years ago there wasn't enough power in 

Saskatchewan to run a well-equipped blacksmith shop, let alone an industry. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

733 

On page 14 of the submissions by the province to the special committee of the House of Commons, 

presented April 19, 1944, on Reconstruction and Re-establishment we find this comment on industry: 

 

Saskatchewan from the point of view of industrial development is in a poorer position than any other 

province in the Dominion of Canada with the possible exception of Prince Edward Island. 

 

Despite the fact that we had in 1939, 8.39 per cent of the population we had only 2.09 per cent of 

Canadian industrial production. Of power in the province the committee had this to say as reported on 

page 15: 

 

Speaking on rural electrification. The organization, meaning the SPC, now distributing power in 

Saskatchewan serves some 300 farms, but existing facilities 

 

it hastens to add 

 

could provide for approximately 2,000. 

 

Then it says this: 

 

About 13,000 farmers have modified electric power service in the form of windchargers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with the steady blast of wind that is emanating from the benches to your right, I am 

not sure that these farmers weren't on the right track. Thirteen thousand of them were certainly taking 

advantage of the Liberal wind of 20 years ago. The commission adds this to its report: 

 

Of the present power generated in Saskatchewan, in 1944, 75 per cent is consumed by the four larger 

cities. 

 

This was the deplorable position of power in 1944 that faced the government. And the boys sitting over 

on the other side today have the audacity to talk about the industrial development and industries. Twenty 

years ago we didn't have enough power or the lines to distribute it to serve as I have said a good-sized 

blacksmith shop. 

 

On education the commission made some very interesting remarks. It said this: 

 

Saskatchewan has more than 5,000 school districts each administered and financed through the powers 

of a local board. 

 

Then it adds this comment: 

 

The rural district is an inadequate financial unit. The rural school is almost invariably a one room 

school inadequately equipped and financed. Saskatchewan rural schools almost invariably need 

general repairs, painting, redecorating, heating plant extensions or renewals as well as extensions to 

out buildings. 

 

The problem is aggravated in Saskatchewan by cumulative deterioration of plant and equipment caused 

by the failure of annual maintenance throughout the 1930s. Under the heading "Estimates of Urgent 

School Building Needs in the Provinces" the C.N.E.A. lists 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

734 

 

$3,000,000 to improve school plant and equipment in Saskatchewan. 

 

I only want to mention two more aspects of the report to illustrate to my short-memoried friends the 

position of 20 years ago. On highways you find this picture and I quote again: 

 

According to the Department of Highways and Transportation there are 8,390 miles of provincial 

highways in the province that should be improved or built in the post-war period if the highway 

system is to equal the standards set by other parts of the Dominion. Of the present 8,009 miles of 

provincial highways only 23.4 miles have been constructed to standard hard surface requirements. 

Approximately 627 miles have not been graded to a standard above that of an ordinary municipal road. 

 

The commission points an even more despicable picture of the conditions of municipal roads. 

 

I want to quote one more very important item from the report of 1944. This deals with forest resources. I 

ask the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) to pay particular attention and to use his good 

judgment to guide him in his future actions. I quote from page 6: 

 

Depletion of Saskatchewan's forest resources has been rapid, particularly in the last ten years and it is 

estimated that almost 25 per cent of the accessible forest area has been logged off or burned off over 

the past years. On these areas the residual stand and reproduction of valuable tree species is 

insufficient to provide a future stand of merchandisable timber within a reasonable time. If our present 

rate of consumption of timber continues our virgin and mature stands of white spruce and fir will be 

exhausted in ten years. 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, are some of the conditions the government of 20 years ago found in this province. 

These are the net end results of the glorious free enterprise system that the Premier, in the words of his 

budget, is going to nurture and spoon feed. These, Mr. Speaker, are the results of Liberal "Pork Barrel" 

politics. 

 

I want now to refresh the memory of my friends on the other side of what the CCF did to combat these 

very grave and disastrous conditions, and to compare their positions when they took office in 1964. 

 

I want now to list a few of the achievements of the last 20 years. The list is a long one and I won't quote 

them all. Here are a few notable ones among them as well as the reactions of the Liberal party to them. 

 

Hospitalization. You'll remember the howls and wails of Liberal members at that time. School 

re-organizations from chaos has been changed to what is now considered one of the best in Canada. 

Again to howls and wails of Liberal members. 

 

Conservation and planned program of the use of timber and natural resources for the benefit of the 

people of the province instead of being destroyed by a few for more profits. 

 

A highway program from, as the commission reported, "Canada's worst" to at least equal to the very best 

in Canada; invented and 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

735 

started the first grid road program of its kind in Canada. 

 

Started the first comprehensive insurance program that has given the best insurance rates in Canada, in 

spite of the attempts of the present minister to discredit it. 

 

Oil development, that has been nothing short of spectacular. 

 

Potash was discovered and was being developed while the Liberals were busying themselves with 

mutterings, disgruntled hemming and hawings. 

 

Power was being developed at a rate that even the wildest dreamers thought impossible. 

 

Air ambulance service, the only one of its kind in Canada. The human benefits of this one service alone 

have been immeasurable. 

 

Transportation services through the Saskatchewan Transportation Company have brought services to 

those who never dreamt they would have them. 

 

As a result of power and gas development industry came to the province for the first time in our history. 

Even now the Liberals are trying desperately to claim credit for them several years after they have been 

accepted and taken for granted. 

 

The medicare program and plan must stand as the outstanding achievement of the past 20 years. That 

plan, Mr. Speaker, was brought in during a performance of the Liberal party that must go down in 

history as being unmatched anywhere in Canada. The door of this assembly no doubt, Mr. Speaker, still 

bears the scars of the Premier's toe. In his indignation and wrath he was prepared to stop at nothing to 

prevent the program from coming into effect. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, sewer and water brought to farms, senior citizens' homes, geriatric centres, aid to 

indigents and the likes. It is noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, to note the performance of the Liberal party 

during this period. They have at all times, done everything in their power to either halt entirely or stop 

any or all of these programs. Their speeches in this house and outside read like a fairy tale. They 

preached doom and gloom at every opportunity. They wrung their hands in despair, and now when they 

find themselves in power are proceeding as fast as possible to wreck and destroy all the programs they 

think they can get away with. 

 

I want now, Mr. Speaker, if I may, to spend a few moments dealing with a few aspects of the budget 

itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the hon. members across the way will smart from some of 

these remarks and reminders. I want to repeat again that I don't want to criticize what is proposed to be 

done, rather I want to criticize and point out what I think ought to be done. 

 

In checking into the estimates of the 1,000,000,000 agriculture industry and the Department of 

Agriculture estimates, I find some of these shortcomings. There is little now, Mr. Speaker, and indeed 

some deletions. With the exception of new personnel and 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

736 

 

an increase in money for the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project, I find an actual curtailment of 

personnel. Two people less in the Field Services Branch, one less in the Land Utilization Branch, one 

less in the Family Farm Improvement Branch and five less in the Animal Industry Branch. The best that 

could be done in the other areas is to hold the line. I find that a little better than $2,000,000 increase is 

mostly absorbed in general and usual increases of the various branches and salaries and general rising 

operating costs. If the money estimated in the Veterinarian Service Branch, as well as the grass seeding 

and new breaking grants are paid out and spent, it will be welcomed. I find it rather hard to understand 

why the government is not budgeting for some of the items that the agriculture industry is badly in need 

of. 

 

There is a very great need in the field of plant breeding and seed development. Very much more and 

intensive research is required. If agriculture is to meet the demands of the future it must have higher 

yielding varieties as well as better disease resistance. A great vacuum in this area exists. Fertilizer 

development and uses are another field where we have hardly scratched the surface. The soils testing 

branch at the university will do a valuable job of soil analysis, but this does not even begin to do the job 

of testing and developing new fertilizers that may be required. Farmers spend literally millions of dollars 

on fertilizers, but are only able to buy the standard 11-48 or the high nitrogen varieties. This is a great 

need in this area. 

 

On the field of livestock production much more needs to be done. We are continually being told of the 

potential in this field. Yet there is a minimum of expenditures for this purpose. New ways and 

techniques must be developed to aid producers in better feeds, better health care, and very badly needed 

is better livestock management methods. A real sore spot in the livestock production is the lack of 

available capital to develop suitable operations. The better breeding stocks are not easily available 

because of lack of finances to procure this breeding stock. As a result much of the livestock, particularly 

cattle, is of inferior breeding. Much more than is being made available by way of present finances must 

be found if this industry is to develop and grow enough to meet future needs. 

 

I regret very much that the government has not see fit to reinstate and improve the work of AMA. 

Farmers are spending millions of dollars on machinery and experience has shown that very often they 

are being sold machines that do not meet their needs and have major flaws. I will not bore the assembly 

with details of cases, but I invite the minister to do some checking and find out what the situation is 

really like. I am sure he hasn't a clue of some of the problems encountered by farmers. I note by the 

agricultural estimates, Mr. Speaker, that the Agricultural Representatives Services Branch is going to 

only hold the line. I had hoped the minister would have been able to announce a whole new program in 

this field. 

 

Now, I have every respect for the agricultural representatives and the work they do and have done in the 

past, but I ask the minister if he is unaware of the needs and the exciting possibilities in this area. Instead 

of having the talents and the skills of these men confined to 4H clubs, field days, livestock days and 

distributing pamphlets they ought to assume a much more professional role in each district and 

community. 

 

To really understand the agricultural picture these trained 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

737 

men ought to be used by the department to studies of communities and their needs, do extensive 

planning programs with the farmers, be freed from their routine tasks to do management organizational 

work. I have only listed a few of the rather long list of duties that are in great need of doing. To meet the 

demand of the industry it is my belief that a complete reorganization of the Agricultural Representatives 

Services Branches is overdue. I suggest this to the minister, realizing full well that he is a new man in 

this department and may not as yet have had time to get too well acquainted and to meet the needs of his 

department. 

 

I have one more comment to make to the new minister. It has been obvious to me for several years that 

the Department of Agriculture, which I want to repeat again, Mr. Speaker, is in charge of the provinces 

largest and most important industry has not yet got its fair share of attention and expenditures. This 

department always seems to come in last. It looks to me as if after all other departments have had their 

slice of the budget pie, agriculture gets what happens to be left. This, I submit, is not good enough. A 

new look and a fresh approach will have to be taken if we are to hold our own, let alone meet the 

challenges of the future. I make no apologies, Mr. Speaker, for speaking out on these needs of the 

agriculture industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I want to make a few general observations. After the most splendid 

analysis of the budget made by the member for Regina, there isn't much left to be said. However, there 

are some aspects I want to comment on. 

 

On looking at the summary of estimated budgetary revenues I want to say this . The Treasurer and 

members opposite are continually harping about tax reductions. Yet in their estimates the actual amount 

of money they hope to extract from the people's pockets is up by some $47,000,000 or better. Education 

and Sales tax up — $6,800,000; gasoline tax up — $4,700,000; individual income tax up — 

$10,200,000; corporation income tax up — $4,300,000; tobacco tax up — $250,000; license and permits 

up — $8,700,000; receipts from other governments up — $4,600,000. 

 

I find it very hard, Mr. Speaker, to understand this kind of statement. The Treasurer either was in one of 

his exuberant and extravagant moods when he drafted this document or he doesn't himself really believe 

what he is saying when he talks about tax cuts. The budget, Mr. Speaker, is either a bloated headline 

catching document to try to convince the people of Saskatchewan that the Treasurer has accomplished 

the magic miracle of spending more, while at the same time cutting taxes, or an admission that is not 

published to the general public that our taxes are in fact going to cost us more money and that all the 

Treasurer has done is shifted a few and juggled a few others. 

 

It is obvious the Treasurer can't have it both ways. I think this house and the people are entitled to know 

what it really is. 

 

There is one item I find of particular interest, Mr. Speaker, — on page six of the estimates I find an item 

entitled "Other Receipts From Government Enterprise and Other Funds", estimated $3,778,300, in this 

budget compared to $756,740.00 last year. I shall be looking, Mr. Speaker, with interest to the answer 

on this item. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the budget 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

738 

 

as presented by the Provincial Treasurer is bloated with wishful thinking so far as expected revenues are 

concerned. It seems to me that it's open-ended as far as expenditures go. It seems to me that taxes have 

been juggled and as a result the budget will give no relief to the needy. It seems to me further that while 

the exempting of turkey saddles from the sales tax will be appreciated by the female species, it will do 

very little to enhance the agricultural industry as a whole. 

 

I, therefore, Mr. Speaker, will be supporting the amendment, but cannot support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks in participating in this debate must 

be to offer to the Provincial Treasurer my congratulations on the presentation of his second budget. 

Differences of opinion as to the content and the general form that the budget takes, as well as differences 

on emphasis on priorities, certainly exist between us. I notice that his general and detailed knowledge of 

what I consider a very complex and massive document indicates to me at any rate that he had done a 

very substantial amount of homework, and I hasten to offer my congratulations for his performance on 

Friday, last. At the same time I also want to say how very impressed I was with the thorough and, what I 

consider, most comprehensive job that was done by the hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), 

when he presented his party's criticism of the budget. It struck me, Mr. Speaker, most forcibly that for 

those in search of tangible evidence of the underlying differences between the Liberal party and the 

NDP that no two speeches could have given more evidence than did these two given by the Premier and 

the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). This, of course, is as it should be. 

 

I noticed the other day, that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) seemed in his address to take 

affront at the fact that his party, as the government, should be subjected to such a searching and 

far-ranging probe, not only into the weaknesses of government policy but also of existing programs. 

Why this minister, the Minister of Public Works, who, probably more than any other member of this 

house, is noted for his blind acceptance of Liberal dogma and his often rather total rejection of opposing 

ideas, should take exception to criticism is beyond me, because he is noteworthy for his criticism in this 

house. The member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) is well known in this house and outside of it, as the 

leader of those who attempt during debate to drown out the words of those who are expressing views 

and ideas that he doesn't understand. This, of course, Mr. Speaker, is almost a daily occurrence for this 

member, because from what I have observed there is a very substantial percentage of the debate that 

goes far beyond his comprehension. This is why he seems so noisy on many occasions as he is 

attempting to do right now. I am rather amused, Mr. Speaker, sitting across from him as I do, I was 

rather amused this year that when the tables were turned on him, to see him stand in his place and 

whimper like a puppy about the criticism that he hears. He reminds me very much, Mr. Speaker, of the 

village bully who stands there and blubbers and cries when he finally gets the licking he deserves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, one of the main purposes of allowing 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

739 

eight days for debate on the budget is that members on both sides of the house can present their views, 

and as far as possible unobstructed views by the dribbling and snivelling of the member from Athabasca 

(Mr. Guy). 

 

Mr. A. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that I stung the member so quickly and so early on in the 

debate, because if he holds his horses, we will send some more bees over for his bonnet shortly. 

 

Mr. Guy: — My reflexes are good. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — They would need to be for you to keep out of trouble the way you do. I am sure that 

this is the purpose of the eight days allowed for the Budget Debate. If some of the members present their 

views with extraordinary vigor and thought and clarity then surely this must be a matter of 

congratulations, not condemnation. Believing that, Mr. Speaker, is what prompts me to congratulate 

both the Premier and the financial critic for the NDP. I must confess though, Mr. Speaker, that I envy 

these two their rather extensive research staff, because for any member to tackle what I consider the 

enormous task of evaluating and the offering a constructive critique of a budget of this size without 

qualified help, I confess is almost frightening to contemplate. I trust, therefore, Mr. Speaker, that my 

own efforts in this regard will be granted a certain degree of tolerance based on the knowledge that at 

best only a relatively few specific items can be dealt with as extensively as I would like. 

 

Now the question of effecting economies in government is something we heard a great deal about in the 

last session of a year ago. The Liberals pledged that they were going to effect substantial savings in all 

departments of government and in fact much of the emphasis during debates in that last session centered 

on the feverish activity claimed by various cabinet ministers in cutting costs. Now this year we have 

heard nothing about economies but instead the emphasis is shifted to substantial increases in spending in 

all departments. There is one exception to this, however. The Minister of Welfare must have taken the 

Premier's command last year to cut back very seriously indeed. Because at a time, Mr. Speaker, when 

virtually every department of government has abandoned the pretense of cutting back and launched on a 

program of massive spending, the Minister of Welfare continues producing cuts in the face of expanding 

demands for service. 

 

Here we encounter some very strange contradictions indeed. In some areas of assistance, that is in the 

supplementary allowance, old age assistance, disabled persons allowance, and blind persons allowance, 

the difference between the estimates for 1965-66 and 1966-67 is almost staggering. A total in '65-66 of 

$7,208,190, and in '66-67 $1,942,520, a difference of $5,265,670. The estimate for this coming year, 

Mr. Speaker, in those four areas is only 27 per cent of what it was in the year just ending. On the face of 

it, it would seem that it would be fair to suggest, if you just take a fast look at these figures, that welfare 

savings are being made at the expense of our pioneer citizens, our disabled or crippled neighbours and 

the blind. However, we have to look a little further than this to see if such a charge is really true. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

740 

 

I want to turn to the annual report of the Department of Welfare for the year '64 and '65 which was 

tabled in the house just recently. In this report, which I have here, we find some very interesting, rather 

revealing statements from which we can draw our own conclusions about the truth of the statement I 

made just a moment ago. I have studied this report very carefully and I find that in dealing with these 

four areas of assistance that I mentioned, the minister outlines three main reasons why there has been a 

drop in the amounts being spent. The first reason he gives, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of people who were 

eligible before have died. This is his excuse for a decline in the number of supplemental allowances 

being paid to those receiving old age security and blind persons allowance. 

 

On page 15 of this report he mentions a total of 3,442 people receiving this supplemental allowance and 

then he goes on to say: 

 

This represents a decline of over 500 in recipients of the means test supplement mostly because of 

deaths. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, as these people die very few applicants become eligible in spite of the fact 

that our population continues to grow, albeit slowly. In spite of what our friends opposite say, our 

percentage of people in need remains at a fairly constant level. There can be only one conclusion from 

that statement, Mr. Speaker, that many who are eligible are being denied eligibility and that to me is a 

sordid method of saving money, I must say. 

 

The second reason that he gives in his report for decline in recipients is that we have had good crops. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it certainly is true that the member for Rosthern has been blessed with good crops, 

not just recently but throughout most of his life. No doubt, Mr. Speaker, the affluence that this has 

brought him accounts for his impatience with those who haven't had the divine fortune that he has had. I 

think it is fair to say that the overwhelming majority of people in need of these types of assistance have 

no connection whatsoever with either farming or the direct benefits from farming. So the minister's 

report just doesn't hold water. 

 

When we look at the report a little bit closer, it starts to become apparent what the third reason for a 

decline in the number of recipients is. The report states in a rather indirect fashion that there is a growing 

demand for assistance. Now, I want to quote what he says under the old age assistance section. He says: 

 

The monthly average number of new applications, however, rose from 140 in 1963-64 to 148 in 

1964-65. 

 

A clear cut indication that there is a growing demand. Under the disabled persons allowance, again he 

says: 

 

The number of recipients showed a net increase of 123 in this fiscal year. The monthly average 

number of new applications, 38, was slightly higher than the previous year, 34. 

 

Now that indicates to me, Mr. Speaker, that there is a growing demand for these services and then we 

see cut-backs, a clear cut indication to me that a continuing number of people are requiring assistance. 

These numbers are not remaining static but they are growing. These aren't a group of people, Mr. 

Speaker, a separate 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

741 

group who either die or else become wealthy farmers and, therefore, are taken off the lists. Following 

that logic to its conclusion the minister shortly wouldn't have any problems at all because they would all 

die off or become wealthy farmers. Far from it. The answer is much more subtle and devious than that 

and consequently, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, much more devastating to those people who are seeking 

help. The clue lies in the sharp increase in numbers of case loads waiting action. I want to give you some 

of the figures that he refers to in his report. Under the old age assistance, he says, "the pending case load 

also rose in this period from 512 to 567 cases." 

 

Five hundred and sixty-seven cases in this province, Mr. Speaker, at the time of writing this report of 

people waiting to see whether the minister or his department would approve this assistance or not. The 

same thing in the Disabled Persons Allowance. It says there is "an average of 189 cases pending per 

month compared with 151 per month the previous year". In other words, Mr. Speaker, we are having an 

increase in the number of people who are sitting on the doorstep waiting to be told whether they are 

going to have assistance or not. 

 

Now, very naturally I have no way of knowing all of the reasons for there being so many case loads 

pending. I would assume perhaps there are staff problems, and so on. But I do, however, have some very 

grave misgivings that the policy being followed by that department is one of resistance to granting of 

assistance so that applicants will, in many cases, give up in sheer frustration, and, therefore neither their 

names nor the amounts they require would appear on the records in the department. All the evidence 

points to this as the means that are being used to effect economies. 

 

As was mentioned in the report, our share of some of these programs will be reduced this year because 

of inclusion in the Canada Pension Plan. Let's not make this an excuse for denying the help that 

thousands of our people need now. It's no use waiting until the Canada Pension Plan starts cutting in. 

Some people may go hungry for a long time while they are waiting. If our economy is as buoyant and 

the future as bright as has been predicted, surely we can share much more of it with those who are more 

unfortunate than we are at the moment. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the general area of tax levies that were outlined by the 

Premier in his presentation. He began with the stated premise, that the Treasury must keep spending at a 

maximum if our economy is to advance. He mentioned essential services such as highways, and health, 

and education. If what he intends to imply is that the expansion of these services that he mentioned 

require the maximum that we can afford, then I most certainly agree with him. But on the other hand, I 

believe that it is also an equal responsibility of government during times of economic buoyancy to take 

as many steps as possible to reduce the total tax burden, because if this isn't done a continuing spiral of 

increased spending by government can only lead to the ultimate domination by government of the 

earning capacity of the taxpayer. Unfortunately it seems to be the common practice of governments 

everywhere to spend as fast as they receive and often faster than they receive. If they feel safe in doing 

so, and tax revenues are insufficient to meet in insatiable demands made on governments, tax increases 

are the order of the day. 

 

Now, I trust, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier had some satisfaction the other day in linking my name with 

the government of 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

742 

 

Ontario and their recent action in instituting substantial tax increases. But I noticed, however, that he 

was much more reticent in allying himself with the two Liberal governments of Quebec and New 

Brunswick, who also followed suit. But surely, Mr. Speaker, this is not the question at hand of what one 

government has done as opposed to another. We have in Saskatchewan a situation that has contrived to 

present to the government in this past year what I would refer to as an embarrassing surplus. At any rate, 

it is embarrassing if you take a look at the estimated revenue of one year ago. 

 

We thought, Mr. Speaker, in my party, as did the present Premier, that the NDP on my right here were 

the last of the big time spenders when it involved the taxpayers' dollar. The budget for 1965-66, 

including supplementary estimates, represents a 14 per cent increase over the last NDP budget presented 

to this house and the budget for the coming year, a further 10 per cent making a total increase in 

expenditures of $54,000,000 or 25 per cent higher than the 1965-65 NDP budget. Let them laugh that 

one away, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about big time spenders. They do things in a big way. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . reduce taxes. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Yes, well, we'll get to that in a moment. I checked through the record, Mr. Speaker, 

and I found that one year ago the Premier said that he was basing his estimated revenue largely on two 

factors. First and foremost, he referred to agriculture and the returns that would be produced from this 

very basic industry by way of tax revenues. 

 

Secondly, he referred to a continuing steady growth in what he referred to as the industrial and mineral 

development of our province. With these two major areas of revenue as his base, and estimating that 

they would produce, as he said, at an average rate of growth, the government found that they had a 

surplus close to $26,000,000 in spite of an estimated surplus of only $235,000. In other words over one 

hundred times as much of a surplus as had been estimated. 

 

Now, I was interested to note again this year, the Premier is basing his proposed estimate of surplus on 

the same barometers that he used last year. Yet he tells us that prospects in agriculture will continue 

better than average in the coming year. He says that good moisture conditions, increasing prices, and 

sure markets will probably produce the net results of obtaining for farmers, a gross production well in 

excess of the $1,000,000,000 figure set in 1965. 

 

Increased activity in the mining field too he tells us, and potash development, as well as a continuing 

demand for our oil should show a substantial growth in the field of natural resources development as 

well. It would seem to me at any rate that our surplus for the forthcoming year may well be in excess of 

the surplus that was registered last year. The point I am trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is that with 

conditions as favourable as they are, with revenues reaching an all-time high, with almost a certainty of 

government revenues being far in excess of that projected in the Budget Debate and the estimates, then 

surely this would have been a time to have introduced some tax reductions that would have had an 

immediate and far-reaching impact on our economy. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

743 

It is quite true that some tax reductions have been outlined, chiefly in the field of income tax and in the 

so-called Home-owner grants. The provincial income tax surcharge, I note, is to be reduced from six per 

cent to five per cent for an alleged saving of $1,100,000 to the taxpayer. On examination, however, we 

find that revenues from this source for the coming year will amount to $32,500,000 from individuals and 

$15,400,000 from corporations, an overall increase of some $15,000,000 over 1965-66 estimates. This 

government can very well afford, Mr. Speaker, to forego $1,000,000 of additional revenue when it 

expects to collect an additional $15,000,000 in any event. The one per cent reduction in the income tax 

surcharge that the Saskatchewan residents pay together with the Home-owner grants added together 

amount to just over $9,000,000. 

 

Certainly there are arguments in favor of both of these areas of tax reductions and I have felt for some 

time, Mr. Speaker, that it was necessary for our government to bring Saskatchewan into line with our 

neighboring provinces insofar as income tax is concerned. The Home-owner grant, however, may be 

something of another matter. Concerned as I am about the tremendous need for reducing the cost of the 

property tax on the property owner, I must confess that I have some serious misgivings about the 

apparent method that is going to be used to effect a step in this direction. It would seem to me at any rate 

that an increase in the conditional grants to municipalities for the purpose of tax abatement on property 

would have removed this item in the budget from the smack of political patronage. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — How are you going to vote, Martin? 

 

Mr. Pederson: — I am going to vote for it, but I am certainly going to try in Committee of the Whole to 

get the method of sending it out changed. 

 

I realize it is very tempting for parties in power to use the direct payment method. No doubt, the Premier 

had this in mind when he intimated that it was going to be done this way. Other governments have done 

it, and I must admit that sending $8,000,000 worth of cheques to homeowners in this province, coming 

as they will from the Premier's own benevolent little hand, will no doubt have an impact on certain 

people when they receive it. The impact I refer to, of course, will not be felt only in their wallet, but in 

their votes as well. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Premier's question, I am going to 

support it because I believe in reduction of taxes for property owners but I hope that the Premier and his 

members opposite will give serious consideration to disbursing this money in a fashion that is other than 

political in its overtones. 

 

As members of this house are well aware, the party that I represent have strongly supported and 

promoted the idea that some method must be devised whereby a sharp reduction in the tax load carried 

by the property owner could be effected. I have long been of the opinion, Mr. Speaker, that the method 

of raising revenue through property tax for items other than services to property, is outdated and 

outmoded. It also, in my opinion, is a method that contravenes in many cases the broad principle that 

taxes should be levelled according to the ability to pay and not merely because an individual has 

substantial property registered in his name without actual ownership being involved. I believe that in 

many instances, Mr. Speaker, people are paying taxes on property which is 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

744 

 

assessed at ten, fifteen and twenty thousand dollars when, in fact, their total equity in this property is no 

more than maybe $500, and they are being taxed as if they are wealthy owners of an equity valued at 

so-and-so many dollars. This has become or caused to become a very serious problem in our taxation 

circles. I think that it's time that anything that tended to perpetuate this was removed. I will have some 

more to say on this item, as I intimated a moment ago, when the estimates come before the house. I hope 

at that time, as I said a moment ago, that the government might consider a change in the tentative plans 

that they have outlined for making this money, this Home-owner grant, available as a tax rebate. 

 

I want to examine for a moment the tax cuts offered by this budget. The Provincial Treasurer expects 

sales tax revenues to amount to $43,300,000 in 1965-66. He then proceeds to budget for an additional 

$3,000,000 from this source in the next fiscal year, after providing for exemptions on several farm items. 

The 13 exempt items, however, are more than offset by adding the tax on cleansing agents for a net 

increase in tax of $100,000. I notice the Premier in his discussion of his highway program tells us that 

his government has moved 23,900,000 cubic yards of dirt in the past year. It is interesting to note the 

importance that the Treasurer places on government dirt-moving projects on the one hand and the 

decision to tax the housewives of this province for their dirt-moving projects on the other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Perhaps the fact that, I've noticed in recent weeks, a new detergent called "Bold" has 

appeared on the market has prompted the Premier to impose a tax on that little rascal, in the hope that it 

will prompt the old "Boldt" to clean up the dirty problems in his department as quickly as possible. I 

don't know if this is what was behind it or not . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — . . . but difficult to understand, Mr. Speaker, as I find the Premier's action in this area, 

it is even more difficult to understand the two strange areas he chose in which to increase taxes. In spite 

of many of the rather humorous aspects of the thirteen farm items that have been deleted from the list of 

those requiring a sales tax, I feel quite satisfied that they were merely obscure items that were removed 

from the list for housekeeping purposes. But when the Treasurer turns around and for apparently the 

same reason, that is for housekeeping reasons, includes soaps and cleansing agents in the list for the four 

per cent tax, I find it a high degree of inconsistency. I am not suggesting for one moment, Mr. Speaker, 

that wealthy people wash less than poor people, but I think that the Premier would find that the largest 

families tend to occur in the lower income groups and consequently their consumption of these products 

is far in excess of that of people in the higher income groups. Of the total $100,000 accruing to the 

budget through this item, Mr. Speaker, I would hazard a guess that at least 75 per cent of it will come 

from the pockets of the lower brackets of wage earners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Surely if the inclusion of these items were merely a 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

745 

housekeeping measure, then it would have been better to have allowed them to remain as they were if it 

was necessary to increase revenues, as the Treasurer has indicated, then add a further small percentage 

of tax to items such as liquor and tobacco. I am amazed that my friend across the way doesn't raise his 

eyebrows on that one. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we find that the Premier has suggested that, because the rural 

municipalities have been asking for one cent of the gasoline tax to be earmarked for municipal road 

construction, this has prompted him to increase the tax by one cent a gallon in order to meet this request. 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that having allowed the use of purple gas for farm trucks last year, that the 

Premier has weighed the cost of using gas by those other than farmers in such a fashion as to create a 

good deal of resentment between the farming community and the non-farming community. There were 

suggestions in this house last year that the tax revenue from the sale of purple gasoline should be 

earmarked for the use of municipalities, for road construction. This was rejected, and monies continued 

to be taken from public revenue insofar as grants to the municipalities for roads were concerned. 

 

This year again, the general public who spend the vast majority of their gasoline tax revenue on the 

provincial highways of this province, that's where most of it is spent, are being called upon to subsidize 

municipal road construction. Now, being a farmer myself, and realizing how important these municipal 

roads are to farmers, I am very reluctant to criticize any increase in revenue for either grid or municipal 

road construction. However, in fairness, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is wrong to obtain this increase in 

construction at the expense of those people who rarely, if ever, use municipal roads. These then, Mr. 

Speaker, are the inconsistencies that I see in the actions of the Provincial Treasurer as he outlined in his 

budget and insofar as the tax increases and decreases are concerned. 

 

I want to come back, Mr. Speaker, to the question of projected surpluses as well as the actual surplus 

from last year. The estimates that were placed before this legislature a year ago, and which were passed 

by the members of this assembly were of the order of $221,000,000. These expenditures provided for a 

very substantial and far-reaching increase in expenditures in virtually every department of government. I 

believe that that was as it should be. They allowed for a vastly increased highway building program, a 

reasonable increase to education, and a substantial increase both to the Department of Public Health and 

the Department of Social Welfare. Yet with the buoyant economy, and the surplus of $26,000,000 that it 

produced, the government enlarged on these already heavily extended programs to the tune of about 

another $20,000,000. Surely this could have been regarded in my opinion at any rate as exceptional 

spending in that year and should not be considered as normal spending even in the face of a rapid need 

to increase many of the services that we require. 

 

What I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that having budgeted for record revenues last year, and earmarking those 

revenues for expenditure and then finding a substantial surplus and earmarking most of it for 

expenditure, the government has now decided that extraordinary spending such as this should be the 

order of the day. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a more orderly increase, a slightly more modest increase, in 

the budgets for each department, would be more in keeping with the wishes of the people of this 

province. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

746 

 

It is quite true, Mr. Speaker, that we enjoy having the advantages of top class, first class highways, but 

surely it is not the purpose of government to direct abnormal revenues to this department or any other 

department, without earmarking a substantial percentage of extraordinary revenue to be used for tax 

reduction purposes. Perhaps the Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant), Mr. Speaker, would be pleased to 

have a suggestion that I have for him where he can save about $500,000 in his department. I noticed 

during the Bengough by-election that the Liberal party promised to build and oil a new highway from 

no. 13 to Kayville. Well, now that Hazen Argue has been looked after by his appointment, there won't 

be such a pressing need to build this road through the barren wastes of the Argue cow-pasture. Far 

better, I would suggest, to build, in the next year or two, a new highway to connect east or west of 

Kayville, which would serve several communities instead of the one promised by the Liberals in an ad in 

the Assiniboia Times. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — . . . Tory promises . . . 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Well, I'll tell you I wish I had the opportunity to promise like you did, Davey, we'd 

have done all right. 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — You just wanted a seconder. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — You did very well. I suggest that the only value of the road to Kayville that the 

Liberals promised was to provide a high speed exit out the back door for Saskatchewan's most 

unpopular politician. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — And, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the fact that Senator Argue and the Premier have always 

been such bosom pals, and as one newspaper put it, old roomies together in Ottawa, prompted the 

Premier to plot this escape route for his friend in the direction of south, towards his friends in the State 

of Montana. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Still are good friends too. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Well, I'm very pleased to hear that, very pleased to hear that. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that a disproportionately small amount of surplus revenue has been used to effect 

tax reductions as compared to the amounts earmarked for increased spending by the various 

departments. I would have thought that, in the face of this very substantial surplus that developed, the 

Premier might very well have instituted a further reduction in the four per cent sales tax. I realize that 

even a one per cent drop would mean, according to the estimates, a reduction in the tax yield of 

something like $11,500,000. Surely, however, this is not too great an item to consider removing from 

the back of virtually every taxpayer who exists in this province when we contemplate the increase of 

almost $49,000,000 in revenues estimated this year as opposed to estimates of one year ago. In short, 

Mr. Speaker, instead of 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

747 

launching a crash program, such as we have in some of the departments of government where massive 

increases in spending are indicated, would it not have been better to have proceeded at a slightly more 

modest pace and extended to the hard-pressed consumer in this province, a further reduction in the 

miserable four per cent tax that he is compelled to pay. 

 

I want to draw to the attention of the government, Mr. Speaker, their very strong condemnation of this 

tax while they were in opposition and again during the election campaign of 1964. It would seem now 

that they are in government, and I want to paraphrase the phrase the Premier used over and over again 

the other day, that they were more than reluctant to act the way they talked. 

 

While I am still on the subject of taxation, Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct the consideration of 

government to the proposition that further tax exemptions insofar as income tax is concerned should be 

uppermost in the minds of the government and the Provincial Treasurer when they are having 

discussions on tax problems with their counterparts in Ottawa. Specifically, items such as property tax, 

or in lieu of property tax, a certain percentage of rental payments should be exempt from taxation. In 

effect, what we have in this country is a system of a tax on a tax. The multiplicity of taxes being paid on 

income that the wage-earner never sees is increasing almost yearly. I have noticed, Mr. Speaker, that in 

the United States they do have these types of exemptions. The income tax then, Mr. Speaker, in my 

opinion, becomes based more fairly on the actual earnings of the taxpayer. 

 

The Conservative party disapproves in principle of the concept of double taxation. Although we realize 

how difficult it is to eradicate this very dubious practice completely, nevertheless we feel, Mr. Speaker, 

that it is something that should be kept in mind, and removal of double taxation should take place as 

often and as quickly as possible. 

 

I had two or three other items, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to deal with, specifically, crown 

corporations, and one or two other matters, but I would like to hold them over until tomorrow and with 

the indulgence of the house, I would beg leave of the assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

MOTION: DISCLOSURE OF CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) moved: 

 

That this assembly urges that legislation be laid before this assembly to provide that contributions to 

provincial political parties, to candidates for office in provincial elections and to organizations 

participating in provincial elections be disclosed to the public, including contributions as follows: (a) 

all contributions by corporations; (b) all contributions by trade unions, trade associations and like 

bodies; and (c) all contributions by individuals over a specified figure per annum. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the object of this resolution is to provide that legislation be laid before this 

assembly, defining a procedure whereby the source of all contributions for provincial 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

748 

 

political parties purposes shall be readily traceable. I believe that the Canadian people and, indeed, the 

Canadian parliament was recently shocked to find that the Canadian political structures were being 

effectively infiltrated by money from the underworld. 

 

The government of the day recognized that there was a problem, and moved to establish a committee on 

election expenses. Members of the committee established in October, 1964, are Francois Nobert, a 

former president of the Quebec Liberal federation, M.J. Coldwell, former national leader of the CCF 

party, and MP for 23 years, and Arthur Smith, conservative MP from 1957 to 1963, Gordon R. Dryden, 

a lawyer and a Liberal campaign committee man, Professor Norman Ward, of the University of 

Saskatchewan, Political Scientist, teacher and author. 

 

I hope that this committee of hon. gentlemen soon presents a report. It is also my sincere hope that the 

main recommendations of the committee shall concern themselves with the getting and spending of 

funds for political parties. 

 

In my view, the history of Canadian electoral reform has been a slow and painful experience. Bill 90 

was introduced into the House of Commons in 1938, by C.G. Power, now more commonly known as 

Senator Chubby Power. The bill was attempting to provide that the source and distribution of all 

contributions for federal political purposes should be readily traceable, and further to limit to 

membership in the House of Commons. The committee reported the bill in 1939 and it was subsequently 

pigeonholed. Ten years later in 1949, the bill was incorporated into an Act to Amend The Dominion 

Election Act. The bill at that time received second reading and expired. 

 

Some years ago in a letter to the Reverend Gerard Dion of the faculty of Social Sciences at Laval 

University, Mr. Power's concluding paragraph read as follows: 

 

There is no doubt whatsoever in my mind but that sooner or later someone will have to take this matter 

energetically in hand in order to put an end to the constantly rising spiral of political expenditures in 

connection with electoral campaigns in Canada. 

 

Yours sincerely, Charles G. Power 

 

Our political party has made numerous futile attempts to bring about electoral reform in the House of 

Commons. In 1961, Murdo Martin, CCF for Timmins, Ontario, had this to say in sponsoring a bill on 

the subject: 

 

It was not in giving money to a political party that the evil lay, rather it was the secrecy of the 

donations. 

 

Our party has tried to set an example in Canadian political life. Our example has been one of disclosure 

of amounts of funds spent in promoting candidates to membership in the House of Commons. We have 

at all times attempted to be frank with the electorate about our financial relationships. At differing times 

persons from other political parties have attempted to alert the Canadian electorate to the danger signs 

for democracy. For example, extracts from a series of articles entitled, "Political Campaign Funds" by 

Jack Cahill from the Ottawa Journal in April 1964, had this to say: 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

749 

Former Conservative party national organizer, Alister Grosart, said election expenses should be 

drastically limited and parties made to declare the source of their funds. 

 

Former Liberal national organizer, James Scott, says: 

 

The war chest systems should be abolished because it is destructive to our concept of a democracy and 

to our free parliamentary system . . . 

 

The Quebec Election Act has been amended to include a section on disclosing and limiting election 

expenses. Premier Lesage is quoted on May 29, 1965, in the Globe and Mail as saying: 

 

I have laid my cards on the table because never again do I want money to be a steamroller behind 

which a party can march to power. 

 

The Ontario Provincial Legislature had introduced by Ken Bryden, the member for provincial 

parliament, for Toronto-Woodbine, a Bill No. 15, to amend The Election Act to allow publication and 

auditing of campaign contributions and expenditures. Ontario Liberals favor contributed amounts over 

$100 having their source disclosed. The Ontario New Democrats want full disclosure. 

 

I agree money contributions or donations-in-kind are necessary, I feel, as do many others, that money 

used in sufficiently large amounts can distort the democratic process. The public has a right to know 

where the money is coming from. That abuses have existed is common knowledge. That the disclosure 

of the source of funds will allow the voters to more intelligently judge where their ballot should be 

marked is common sense. 

 

We all heard the remarks delivered in this chamber yesterday about the extent of organized crime in 

Canada. The Attorneys General of Canada are concerned as are the police forces. The mask of 

respectability worn by organized crime consists of not only posing as legitimate businessmen, but also 

consists of buying insurance by donating to a political party or politician. The result of inordinate 

pressure of large sums on a person of low moral fibre, whether policeman or politician, is a foregone 

conclusion. 

 

This resolution does not make provisions for allotting free radio and television time or free postal 

privileges; it does not provide for political donations to be income tax deductible; it does not specify a 

ceiling on the amount an individual or group may donate to a party in goods, services or cash. Finally 

this bill does not place any limit on the amount a party or politician can spend in any given time. 

 

I may be attacked for only going half way in this resolution. For the time being, if the source of funds is 

disclosed, I am prepared to give the citizens of Saskatchewan the final judgment as to whether a party or 

a politician has spent too much money in any one year or election. I would say that the average person 

donates only a small amount to a party in any year or election. Consequently the last provision of the 

resolution protects his identity. 

 

Democracy in Canada rests at the crossroads. Many legislators in other provinces and Ottawa are 

attempting to bring about reform. In bringing about electoral reform to protect democracy in Canada, 

they will need all the moral and legislative support there is available. With these brief remarks I move, 

seconded by 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

750 

 

the hon. member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) the foregoing resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on the motion as 

has been moved by the member for Saskatoon (Mr. Brockelbank), I want first of all to congratulate him 

on his presentation of the case that he laid before the legislature. I do want to say, as he indicated to this 

house, that there have been such measures brought before the legislative bodies in this country and in 

other places. I think that if you look back at most of the discussions you will find that most of those 

resolutions have been found to be very impractical. I am quite certain that if this motion was carried and 

tried to be put into effect it would be very impractical too. 

 

The reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is that may organizations in this country, in this province, 

organizations of various types do not reveal contributions of any kind that are made to them, and yet 

there is no slur or attacks on those organizations because the don't reveal the donor or the giver to that 

particular organization. I know many churches and I am sure there are other organizations that will not 

reveal the names of their contributors and do not think it is the proper thing to do in their particular 

organizations to reveal who contributes to their particular church, probably at the request of the 

individual. 

 

In the twenty years that I have been taking an active part in politics I have read the expense accounts of 

the candidates sitting across the way and of every member of their party that ever ran in my 

constituency. I know their campaign expenses weren't correct, because in most cases they spent at least 

double what the Liberal party spent in each campaign and they showed less. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — I could prove that, on just the radio and television that was used alone; in my 

constituency the candidate couldn't have been putting down his full expenses because of the amount of 

television time used alone. I didn't use any and he was on for many, many broadcasts and I know the 

cost of radio and television. My young friend across the way tries to indicate that they are purer than 

anyone else in this country in politics, and they reveal where their political contributions come from. I 

think he was being a little on the naive side, I think he knows as well that people contribute to churches 

and political parties through collections. How about the money on the collection plate? A man could put 

a thousand dollar bill on there, and who is going to tell us when the meeting is over who put it there? 

Who is going to control that kind of contribution? 

 

The democratic giving of the people that the party across the way is always talking about would be 

stopped. The people would be prevented from giving on the collection plate because they would have to 

reveal who they were, to the political party and to their neighbors. The mover indicates that the voter has 

to put down whom he donated to. That is stating what his politics are, but he says the individual has the 

right to support any political party. He would actually be reducing the democratic rights of every citizen 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

751 

in this county if we said they would have to put their name on a roll and say this is the political party 

that I give my financial contribution to. Is that what my friends are asking? Is that what the people of 

this country desire to have everyone asking? Is that what the people of this country desire to have 

everyone know exactly how they vote? The ballot system in this country is secret. The political party 

you support in this country is supposed to be a secret, and there are many individuals in Canada who 

believe they have a right to vote as they desire, for the party they desire. The day we start insisting that 

our citizens be labelled and regimented by the government of the day in any sense, whether it is 

financial or otherwise, then that day we will lose a lot of our democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, there are many ways in which political expenses could be controlled, 

without controlling the individual in our country, and without regimenting the individual. There are 

many ways in which limitations can be placed on many of the expenses. For television, or radio, they 

could have the right to place limitations on expenditures that are made by political parties. If we want to 

control the financing, the expenditures on elections in Canada, there are many ways in which we can do 

it, without trying to control the individual citizen and say whether he can give to a political party and 

whether that contribution has to be revealed or not. I say, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't matter whether that 

individual happens to be a corporation, whether he happens to be a member of a trade union, whether he 

happens to be a member of the Farmers Union, or whether he happens to be an individual, if he desires 

to contribute to t political party, the day that he has to put it down on paper this is going to decrease the 

democratic rights of every citizen of this country. 

 

I just want to say that in past years, I referred a few moments ago to the fact that some political parties 

are always willing to assert that they are the only ones that have any virtues, but when I remember back 

to a gentleman who sat in this house for a short while, and I look at the picture I have before me, I 

wonder if he would like to reveal where he got all his financial contributions from to run some of his 

election campaigns. Here is the picture from the bar magazine "Mon Page Bonjour" the management 

magazine serving the Canadian hospitality interests, shown above the Canada Colony lunch in Florida, 

left to right, Mrs. Brian Cathcart, Mr. Dave Price, Mr. and Mrs. Clarence Fines of Saskatchewan, down 

in Florida. I am quite certain that if he had had to reveal where his campaign funds, in the years he was 

here, had come from, we would have had the same address that he wasn't prepared to do so. I would like 

to say here there is no way, and I defy my friends to indicate anyway in which you can prove or tell how 

much any individual gives whether he put it down on paper, whether he has given any more or whether 

he hasn't given it. I think that when you regiment an individual, a corporation, a trade union, or any other 

one in this country and state that they must reveal whom they support, financially or politically, by so 

doing, as I stated before, it is regimenting the democracy of our country. So I am saying here I think we 

should consider many other ways in which we can limit the expenses at election time, in which we can 

control the heavy expenses that I know about. I know we have been fighting election campaigns, I know 

that members across the way have, but there are many ways in which this can be done without limiting 

the democratic rights of people in our country to support the political party that they desire to support. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

752 

 

So I say here tonight that I cannot support a motion which would regiment the voters and the people of 

this country to marking down on a piece of paper when they have the freedom and right to support any 

political party, financially or otherwise, to put a statement down on a paper for any government agency 

indicating whom they support. So, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I cannot support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words after the effort by the 

Minister of Public Works, (Mr. Gardiner). He said a lot of words and built up quite a lot of straw men 

and valiantly knocked them down, but he didn't deal with the real issue. The real issue is the whole 

question of the possibility and the rights of people or corporations to actually buy political parties. The 

fact of the matter is that the member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) doesn't want the people to know where 

the Liberal party gets its campaign funds. This is what they don't want. Every once in a while it comes 

out. It came out over thirty years ago in regard to Beauharnois, the big steal of the water power rights on 

the St. Lawrence River, when three quarters of a million was given to the Liberal party. The same kind 

of things came out at the time of the customs investigation and the customs scandal in the twenties, of 

people that were actually buying the Liberal political party. They bought the Conservative party too, 

they didn't pay the same price, they didn't think it was worth the price. 

 

Hon. D. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — Your group . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — No, people don't try to buy our political party. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I don't think it would be worth it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Whether it is worth it or not isn't the question; it is beside the point, 

because it isn't for sale. If we want to prevent this kind of scandals in the future in Canada . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — How about Hoffa? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Yes, and Hoffa, the man the Liberals brought into Canada. Mr. Speaker, 

there is only one way to make sure that political parties do toe the line, and I don't care who it is. They 

should Toe the lie line, it doesn't matter what party they are, and political parties should have to show 

where they get their campaign funds. Now you can have an exemption for contributions of up to $50, or 

something like that, because everybody recognizes that nobody is going to buy a political party for $50. 

Some corporations give $1,000 or $10,000 or $100,000. The people in this democracy are supposed to 

go to the polls on election day and choose between political parties. They are entitled to know who has 

the strings on what political party. This is the situation, who is supporting them? This has been the 

trouble in Canada in the past, and there has been no greater sinner than the Liberal party that has always 

professed it gets money from the rich on the pretense that it will protect the poor from the rich and 

protect the rich from the poor, this is the game. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

753 

Now, ordinary people should know how much mining companies, oil companies, or any other 

corporation, and how much trade unions give to political parties as well. Then they will be in a much 

better position to judge, but in my opinion, I know that the hon. member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner) 

isn't a hypocrite, but his argument sounded awfully hypocritical and very thin and very weak. 

 

I hope that this house passes this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — I had not intended to participate in this debate. I shall only take 

about two minutes, however, some of the sanctimonious talk that I hear tonight made me decide that I 

should say a few words. You know, Mr. Speaker, I am in a rather unique position in this house. At one 

time I happened to be in the CCF party. The Socialists talk about where they obtained their campaign 

money. There has been no one in Canada who milked the breweries and the liquor interests like my 

friends opposite, the CCF. Don't let these Socialists say in a sanctimonious way that they obtain their 

money only from the little man. Such statements make me sick, because I know different. I know where 

they obtain their money. They obtain funds in precisely the same way as other political parties. Now it is 

quite true that a lot of business companies are not too enthused about giving money to the Socialists. 

 

My hon. young friend from Saskatoon said that we should pass this resolution tonight. Why didn't the 

Socialists in the 20 years they had in office, introduce legislation requiring revelation of amounts and 

sources of contributions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — The hon. Premier who has just shouted for two or 

three minutes as he said he was going to, has just given an admirable example of the advice sometimes 

given that when the argument is weak "Shout like hell" and that is exactly what he has been doing. He 

may be able to speak for himself, Mr. Speaker, he may be able to speak for himself as to how he got his 

money when he was successful in persuading people to elect him, but he cannot speak for other 

members of that party, who were elected during some of those same years, who stayed true and honest 

to those principles for which they were elected, and who have continued to be elected to their seats. I 

submit that the hon. member who has just taken his seat cannot prove in any way whatsoever the 

allegations that he has attempted to make, that this movement got into the breweries, and to the liquor 

interests, and got all the money they could. That statement may have applied insofar as his own personal 

campaign expenses are concerned. They have not applied so far as this party was concerned in the past, 

in the present nor in the future. I issue that as a challenge. 

 

The truth is further illustrated by the attitudes which members across there are taking to this resolution 

now. If they are not concerned about revealing the source of their campaign funds, they can prove it in a 

very simple way. All they have to do is to get up and vote for this resolution. The only reason they may 

refrain from so doing is that they don't want to reveal to the public how they get the money to operate 

their campaign. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

754 

 

May I add to that, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this party has been an active political force for over 30 

years. One of the cardinal principles laid down at the founding of this party has been that we will get our 

money from the great numbers of people who individually decide to support us. That has been an 

important principle. It is, I submit, the only safe way in which to select a party that is going to be a 

government. We are responsible to those who finance us, and those people are large numbers of 

individuals in this province and across this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I repeat again, that of all the oratory, shouting, allegations, and accusations that have 

come from across there, these can mean nothing, if the hon. members across there decide to vote against 

this resolution. They can assert their confidence that their sources of funds are right and proper, they can 

assert their willingness to let the public know from whence comes their funds by voting for this 

resolution. They can do it in no other way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, the Premier was kind enough to refer to our 

associations when he and I were both members of the Socialist party in Canada, and when I was the 

national treasurer and responsible for the raising of funds. When the Premier and I first met, he was 

quite impressed to meet the national treasurer. I would suggest that it was his assumption that this would 

be a person worth knowing, but he came to realize that the national treasurer's main function was to get 

money for our political party. Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Premier to make good the serious charge he 

has made tonight that while I was the national treasurer, I solicited funds exactly the same way the old 

parties did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would rather imagine that the Liberals really expected Mr. Thatcher as the Premier would 

have some inside information that would be embarrassing. I challenge the Premier to name any one 

person in Canada who made any contributions to the CCF while I was the national treasurer, who made 

a contribution for ulterior motives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — I am sure the Premier will agree that although he was the wealthiest person in our 

party for some time . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — For some time, yes. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he was recognized as the wealthiest person, but I am sure he will 

agree with me that he never gave on a year to year basis more than I gave to our party, as long as he was 

with us. I am in the fortunate position that I never asked anyone in Canada to give on a more generous 

basis than I contributed myself. My indemnity was $4,000 a year in those days, Mr. Speaker, it really 

doesn't take a lot of money to run a political party. I have said this to some of the Liberal friends of the 

Premier and myself in Ottawa, who were cabinet ministers when we were both in the House of 

Commons. Walter Harris, who represented Bruce county, my old home county, if he had taken my 

advice he would still be in the public life of Canada. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

755 

One of the fundamental differences between the government over there and our party here is our party 

presented a new concept in public life in Canada, namely, that the rank and file of the people, if they 

want to, can elect a government. Mr. Speaker, I have been a candidate a great many times, but my 

elections were paid for by our members without costing a great deal of money. The member for Melville 

(Mr. Gardiner) complained about the reporting of election expenses. Money was spent for radio and TV 

in his constituency, but paid by the provincial organization and not by the candidate. The provincial 

organizations of all parties always spent money for radio and newspaper publicity. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

again I challenge the Premier to identify the liquor interest which were ever canvassed or gave money to 

the CCF during the time that I was the national treasurer of the party. I challenge the Premier if he has 

an information that I haven't got, that he shouldn't be using his privileges in this chamber to make these 

reckless charges which I am sure he will not make tomorrow, so that people charged will have a chance 

to defend themselves. 

 

I wasn't expecting to take part in this debate, but since we are on it, I have a relative comment from 

Hansard of April 27th, 1965, in which Mr. Douglas Fisher was speaking. He was quoting from an article 

in the Toronto Star, December 17th, written by Peter Newman, who is a very close friend of the Prime 

Minister of Canada. Newman was explaining how people get to the Senate. I expected to have a chance 

to debate the abolition of the Senate tonight but later on I will have a chance. Mr. Peter Newman listed 

several wealthy men recently appointed to the Senate, including Senator Louis P. Gelinas, the chief fund 

raiser for the Liberal party in the province of Quebec, and a graduate of the University of Montreal. Mr. 

Fisher went on to say that Senator Gelinas appeared before the Dorion inquiry. We all know that one of 

the charges being investigated by the Dorion inquiry was to the effect that some $50,000 was going to 

be ear-marked for Liberal party funds. This was a contribution that Mrs. Rivard was going to make. 

Now the chairman of the committee drew the attention of Mr. Fisher that this was discussing the matter, 

at least somebody was discussing a matter which was before the courts, and Mr. Fisher said: 

 

On a point of order, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with you completely, that this matter and the evidence is 

subjudice, in view of the fact that the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice have bandied letters 

back and forth with the Judge and that inquiry. If you insist that I cannot discuss this point, because it 

is your interpretation that the subject is subjudice, I am afraid I have only one alternative, and that is to 

challenge your ruling. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — I'm sorry I wasn't expecting this, I could have had the Dorion Commission report but 

here is a senator who was the bag man for the Liberal party and we will not know for some time exactly 

what his involvement will be, but there is no doubt about it that Rivard had $50,000 for campaign funds 

for the Liberal party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wasn't planning on speaking here, but Hansard for the House of Commons in connection 

with the Beauharnois scandal is worth reading. I better dig this up to involve the senators because three 

senators were involved in this Beauharnois scandal . . . 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

756 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — When was that? 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Oh, this was away back. This was the last time that there has been an inquiry strictly 

to try to identify where campaign funds originate. R.O. Sweezey, President of Beauharnois was asked 

about the size of political contributions made — if I remember correctly — $650,000 to the Liberal 

party and $125,000 to the Conservative party. I must hasten to explain to my friend from Arm River 

(Mr. Pederson) that it wasn't clearly established that the Conservative party ever got this $125,000 but a 

cancelled cheque for this amount to John Aird, Jr. was produced. The money was paid to Mr. Aird, who 

represented himself as the man who secured money for the Conservatives. Mr. Sweezey was a young 

engineer in those days. He was asked, and he was most co-operative, "Didn't you consider these were 

large sums of money to give to political parties?" "Yes". "Why did you give so much?" "Well, I 

consulted some of my business associates, they said "Don't be stingy, you will find that you will receive 

might good returns, and don't put all your money or eggs in one basket, don't overlook the opposition. 

Put the big money where the big business is, and put some money so that you would have friends in 

court". After paying over $700,000 for campaign funds Beauharnois was able to fleece the people of 

Canada to the extent of over $30,000,000. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pretty good return on your investment. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — It was a very good return. This was before the days of the CCF when there was a 

Progressive party in the House of Commons. Mr. Sweezey was asked "Did you give any to the 

Progressives?' The answer was "No, I wasn't canvassed for any money, and didn't give any money to 

them", and so, Mr. Speaker, this is the last time than an inquiry was made which disclosed campaign 

contributions. I would submit to the Premier of this province that the techniques which he has 

introduced into the Liberal party from his Socialist background is helping to build up the Liberal 

organization. Now, I know it is rather rough when there is only one member in the Canora constituency 

who is a member according to the most recent reports of their membership. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — There were 280 this morning. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — Well, that is good news. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We are working hard. 

 

Mr. Nicholson: — But I want to say to the other members opposite that this is one Socialist principle 

that the Premier has introduced that is sound. The Premier didn't really have to go down east while he 

was Leader of the Opposition, and represent this province as a depressed area, and say to the people 

down there that unless you send funds we will never get rid of the Socialist outfit out there. He has 

within his membership adequate financial resources to pay for radio, newspaper and other facilities 

which are necessary during an election campaign. So, Mr. Speaker, to conclude I want to say that it was 

my honor and privilege to be the national treasurer for a good deal of the time that the Premier was a 

member of our party. I defy him to identify a single person, or corporation 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

757 

in all Canada, that was interviewed by me, that made a contribution who would be unwilling to have the 

details made public. 

 

Now, it is true there are some people who, for very good reason, are not able to be active politically. It is 

a great pity that in Saskatchewan at the present time there are citizens who have been denied their 

fundamental rights to have political opinions and to express them. In most parts of the democratic world 

you do not have this threat hanging over the citizens of democracies. This is one Saskatchewan handicap 

at present. So I hope that the Premier will make outside this house the reckless charges he has made 

here, so that people who have been accused of wrongdoing should have a chance to defend themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I must confess that I have sat here absolutely 

fascinated by the chit-chat going on from both sides while these two groups are trying to explain how 

they have been dividing up the spoils over the years. I happen to be the poor cousin around here, and I 

can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that not only am I not worried about divulging where my money comes from, 

I can go even further and say I wish I had some to divulge. I find a great deal of difficulty . . . 

 

Mr. A. Guy (Athabasca): — What, no memberships? 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Yes, we get the odd membership, but that pays the postage once in a while. I find a 

great deal of difficulty getting money on any occasion and I wish to heaven in this conversation, or this 

debate that is going on, that somebody would let slip the secret of the success of both of these rather 

powerful groups that I am surrounded by. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Just hard work. 

 

Mr. Pederson: — Well, I have worked fairly hard, Mr. Premier, but . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We'll give you the list . . . 

 

Mr. Pederson: — . . . it doesn't seem that I am working in the right offices, perhaps. I must confess that 

the senior member from Saskatoon, (Mr. Nicholson) fascinated me when he went back to the days 

before I was born and told me all about those Conservative rascals getting a hundred and some thousand, 

I'll have to speak to some of the powers-that-be to see if they have kept some of that on tap for me, 

because heaven knows I haven't seen it. 

 

But seriously, Mr. Speaker, I find that there are many people who in the normal course of their political 

affiliation are most reluctant to have divulged, or give consent to divulge, either their names or the 

amount of their contribution. I don't attach any great significance to this, I don't think there is any dark 

mysterious reason for it. I believe that one of the great prerogatives of our citizens, a prerogative that has 

been granted to us through the secret ballot, is that the great mass of the people in this nation have the 

right, as far as their political beliefs are concerned, to be anonymous. This, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is 

probably one of the greatest reasons for not passing a resolution such as this one on the Order Paper 

today. I am not interested in 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

758 

 

either the immense scandals going on in other parts of this nation or what is done on the national level. I 

am concerned about the methods that are used for obtaining funds in this province. Except for very rare 

occasions where individual members for one reason or another do not adhere to the rules, I think that by 

and large this province and its members over the years have been relatively free of the type of scandals 

that have been referred to on both sides of the house. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pederson: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if we are to be thinking in terms of this resolution, that 

we are somewhat putting the cart before the horse. There has been a good deal of suggestion from time 

to time, and the time has come when both in the parliament of Canada and the legislature decide that 

public funds should be set aside to pay for the expenses of candidates seeking public office provided 

they received a certain percentage of the total vote. Until this is done, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe it is 

right, or proper, or possible, I also don't think it will work in practice for a resolution such as the one 

before us, to take effect. There will always be methods where people will be dishonest, can contravene 

any act such as is contemplated by this resolution. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is nothing to 

prevent a candidate either receiving under-the-table donations from a union, or under-the-table 

donations from big business. And there is no legal method of making them account for it, and, therefore, 

the resolution in itself would be voided and useless. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, until something is done on the level that I have mentioned, and all of us take a 

hard look at the provision of funds for all candidates seeking public office, so that not only the rich can 

manage to sway the electorate with massive amounts of programs, with massive amounts of advertising, 

and putting a ceiling on the amount that can be spent, a ceiling fixed by law over which no one may go, 

until these things are done then I think there is no point in this resolution whatsoever. I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have to take a hard, serious look at this problem because it has got out of hand. The 

cost of campaigns has become ridiculous; but just the same the divulgence of both the names and the 

amounts of money and the names of the people who are giving it, will not, in my opinion at any rate, 

serve any useful purpose and I certainly will oppose the resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I recognize too, as I think we all do, that the resolution 

doesn't provide a complete answer to the problem. It is put forward, and has been put forward by the 

hon. member for Saskatoon (Mr. Brockelbank) in an attempt to bring to the attention of this house and to 

the general public at least one method under which people would be identified with the political party of 

their choice. Now for any one of the members opposite to say that there isn't a need either for this kind 

of revelation as to where the funds are coming from, or some other kind of check as mentioned by the 

hon. member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) is just talking pure nonsense. It is just perpetuating what 

the Premier referred to when he said "Don't worry, Mr. Speaker, these NDPers like to get their foot in 

the trough too". Well, of course, if there is a trough, and there is bound to be, well for God's sake let's 

keep everybody's feet out of it and keep their feet clean. If anyone should know who furnishes the 

money for the CCF, the hon. Premier ought to know. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

759 

Mr. Thatcher: — I do too, I told the house. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — He knows, and the people in his constituency know and I know the farmers who 

contributed to his election, and gave $150 or $200, when he crossed the floor and deserted his party, 

when they had put up the money to elect him as a candidate of this party, they asked for their money 

back, but they didn't get it from the Premier. Mr. Speaker, I don't make any bones of this fact, none of us 

do, further we don't claim to wear halos, we don't claim that everyone that belongs to this movement is 

automatically a saint. There is good and evil in all parties, so the hon. Premier and the hon. Minister of 

Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) and the hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) don't need to keep talking 

about Clarence Fines. I don't give a damn where Fines is . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet: — . . . they hope that somehow there is an evil connotation with this name that is going to 

reflect on this side of the house. Certainly this is no argument against the resolution put forward by the 

hon. member for Saskatoon (Mr. Brockelbank). The hon. Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) says 

it would be terrible if anyone had to reveal if he gave a contribution to a particular party. I don't blame 

my hon. friends opposite for being concerned. Believe me if I had contributed to the Liberal party and 

then witnessed some of their actions afterward I would be ashamed of it too. But after all, Mr. Speaker, 

this resolution has real merit, and certainly doesn't call for the condemnation that is being put forward by 

hon. members opposite. 

 

This is a matter that is of great concern to all of us. We do know that in our kind of society and in our 

type of economic system, there are pressure groups, many of them greedy pressure groups, some of 

whom will stop at nothing to gain their won privileged ends. It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, that money talks, 

and money talks in political circles better than anywhere else. There are special privileges to be sought 

from government. If anything, Mr. Speaker, what should concern us is the degradation of our democratic 

system by having this control over our elected representatives. Something must be done. Personally, I 

would prefer a definite limit on election expenses and I will go along with the proposal that a public 

purse, perhaps, should take care of election expenses and forbid anyone else from contributing other 

than for ordinary membership fee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, when we look at this, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest, at least as a result of bringing this to the 

attention of the house, that we could set up a committee of this legislature to make an inquiry into the 

whole field of election expenses which are getting out of hand. Our media of communication is such that 

any so-called people's party has little or no chance of electing candidates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will certainly support this motion for the reason that it brings, not only to the 

attention of this house, but to the people of this province the thought that something very definite will 

have to be done as to how political parties obtain their money. Expenditures will have to be reckoned 

with too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

760 

 

Hon. D. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened to this political drivel 

all night, to the sanctimonious drivel coming from the opposite side of the house. The only reason this 

resolution was brought in at this time, Mr. Speaker, is that this is the first time in the history of the last 

twenty years that these people have had the courage to bring in this type of resolution. As long as they 

are in the opposition in Ottawa, as long as they are a defunct minority group in all the other provinces in 

Canada, they have the courage to bring it in. They wouldn't dare bring out this resolution when they 

were the government, but once they are out, then they proceed to bring it in. I am surprised at some of 

the statements here today, surprised at the sanctimonious appeal made by the member from Kelsey (Mr. 

Brockelbank) a former old Tory. I am surprised at some of the statements made about the Premier, to 

cast the reflection on him turning from the CCF to the Liberal party . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Did the hon. member say I was a former old Tory? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — If not Tory, what . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Well, you will have to guess again, I wasn't a Liberal either . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — But the part I am very concerned with is the sanctimonious approach taken by the 

people on the other side of the house, asking every organization, every individual to disclose their 

donation to political parties. In Saskatchewan today we have a situation where some people belonging to 

some unions are forced to pay political check-offs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nonsense. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — They certainly are. I noticed in the paper the other day one of the larger labor 

unions in Canada now is throwing its weight behind the NDP party. So I say, Mr. Speaker, if this 

situation develops where they have the labor unions and the people who belong to these unions have to 

pay political check-offs, and they are not in a position to divulge where these sources of political funds 

are coming from this can be used as an axe against them. Just to show you how it works regarding the 

strike in Moose Jaw this past winter, it was stated in the press just the other day the union is now taking 

action to fine one of the union members for not picketing. Just take a glance through one of the political 

papers and you can see the situation that the people of this province would be in. So the member for 

Saskatoon said there are citizens in Saskatchewan who are being deprived of taking part in politics, 

certainly they are being deprived of taking part in politics because if they belong to one of these 

organizations they have about the same lack of protection for their jobs as they would if they took a 

stand against some directives handed to them by some of the labor union bosses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that people of Saskatchewan are very interested in is, I am sure, that they 

hope they are never in a position where they have to be given the high-handed treatment that goes on in 

some of these industries. As I said 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

761 

previously, the rank and file of the Liberal party of Saskatchewan make no bones that they are donating 

to their own political party, but they have never brought an action where in order to hold a job they must 

subscribe to that political party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will certainly have no part of supporting this type of resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, when I seconded the motion, I didn't know it 

would cause such a debate, however, I want to bring something into this debate which so far has not 

been mentioned. I have a tremendous respect for British rights, traditions and the history of politics as it 

has developed over the years. I know the fight that went on throughout British history, as it did in other 

countries too, for democracy. As long as the battle was between the commons and the nobility you did 

not have this political situation. But we know after Charles I was beheaded and a party system 

developed that the only way you could govern was, of course, by a party system and parties must be 

financed, of course. Now, to me, politics is the art of government and I would like to say to this house 

that we must be democratic and moral. 

 

I think that if the Liberals and the people of Saskatchewan are to be really democratic they should have 

no feat in publicizing who contributed to a party, and that includes civil servants. I think when the time 

comes that our civil servants can donate to any political party in this province without fear that is the 

time when we are going to have democracy. 

 

I think that by hiding the names of those who contributed then there is a lack of morality. That is my 

opinion, I would rather it be known who is assisting to elect any candidate than to have it the way it is 

now, where money is being passed under the table. We know this has happened; it has been brought up 

in the legislature a number of times; it could happen again if some political party was offered another 

$50,000 to appoint, say, a leader. This could happen. But it should not happen in a true democracy. The 

reason I am supporting this motion is not because it is going to resolve campaign fund problems, so 

much, but because I believe it is going to be a step in the right direction to bring true morality to political 

parties and to bring democracy into our parliaments in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It was mentioned that money was obtained by the party that I represent from breweries, I have no such 

knowledge whatsoever of this being so. I know that, speaking for myself, at every election that I have 

had to fight, I have had to dig down in my own pocket, because we never collected enough from our 

supporters, I had to dig down because we are a poor constituency and I would rather have it that way. 

Mr. Speaker, in the last election, I was only able, my group were only able to pay for two five minute 

broadcasts on TV at midnight. This was not much publicity and the hon. member from Prince Albert 

(Mr. Steuart) knows it to be true. The Liberal party had all kinds of TV time, so I can throw the same 

kind of stuff back at my hon. friends opposite that they have been trying to throw at us. Making 

accusations is not the point, but this is the point, I would like this house to consider this, are you really 

democratic? Do we really respect the traditions and the freedom that the British people and the Canadian 

people have fought for in trying to 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

762 

 

achieve morality in government and a true democracy? If you do then you will give us support on this 

motion, or else you may amend it so that it will mean something for the future morality of politics in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I would have hoped that we would have been 

able to avoid in this debate the splutter and the bluster and the noise and the wind and the dust and the 

fog that began when my friend the Premier rose in this debate, because I think we have got away to 

some extent from the essence of the resolution itself. But since some of these things have been said by 

the speakers that rose on that side of the house after the Premier, let me say this, the word sanctimonious 

has been used rather freely. Well, I don't think there is anything, Mr. Speaker, by itself, in a man who 

was being sanctimonious if you can prove it! I notice my friend, the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane) speaks about trade unions and their donations to political parties. I want to say this to my 

friends on the other side of the house that I will challenge anyone of them to tell me about any one trade 

union in this province that has not arrived at a decision to make donations to a political party on the 

basis of their own democratic practice within that union. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — They support the ones that they are opposed to, to pay it to . . . 

 

Mr. Davies: — While we are being sanctimonious I want to say this to my friends that they are 

attempting to rob 55,000 public employees of this province of their right of political expression. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies: — They know that and this is a matter of record. This is a matter of the statement by my 

friend the Minister of Public Health, (Mr. Steuart) and other members of the government. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Oh, come on . . . 

 

Mr. Davies: — The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) asks "Why didn't you bring this in when 

you were in government?" Well I want to remind the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) that the 

kind of things that elicit this kind of resolution happened because of certain activities relative to his own 

party in eastern Canada. This has been cited over the length and breadth of Canada, that is the demand 

for a resolution of the kind we are putting forward in this house this evening. 

 

I want to say this, too, to my friend from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) that when it comes to the question 

of corporation donations, according to recent a past history, I don't think his party has done so badly. He 

has made the argument that there will always be dishonesty, therefore, there is no real reason or real use 

in trying to make legislation, or trying to achieve a means of avoiding dishonesty. Of course, if this were 

the case, Mr. Speaker, we would have no legislation at all. Now, if my friend the Minister of Public 

Works (Mr. Gardiner) decides his whole argument on the proposition that this is robbing an individual 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

763 

of his freedom because he cannot make his donation personally, then let him make an amendment to this 

resolution by the deletion of the last part of the resolution, which says: 

 

All contributions by individuals over a specified figure per annum. 

 

or we, or myself, can do it, to set it at $500 if you want that. 

 

Mr. G. Romuld (Canora): — Five cents would be better. 

 

Mr. Davies: — This is nothing but a means of getting around the real question that is within this 

resolution. That is an attempt to bring to all political parties in this country some measure of decency, 

some measure of honor, some measure of conducting our democratic institutions in a better manner than 

we have in the past. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — How about the fine one of your voters in Moose Jaw paid — $250 bucks? 

 

Mr. Davies: — I will say this, Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) comes 

again the wind and the fog and the bluster talking about a completely unrelated issue of a decision to 

fine someone who did not take part in a strike. So, Mr. Speaker, what has this got to do with the 

question, or resolution before the house? 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Political freedom. . . 

 

Mr. Davies: — The question after all, right or wrong, as it is, was discussed in a trade union meeting, 

was discussed by those members who they made their decision. I presume that worker would have his 

recourse as well within the union. But let's for heaven's sake, Mr. Speaker, avoid this kind of fog, and try 

and get down to the resolution. I say to the member over there, the member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner), 

if there is anything at all to his argument that this interferes with individual freedom, to make a motion 

to delete the last part. Outside of that, there is not one argument that has been raised on the other side of 

the house that makes any sense whatsoever. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, this has been a most 

interesting resolution and most interesting debate, but somehow along the line I think the intent of the 

resolution was lost sight of, and I want to read it to you: 

 

That this assembly urges that legislation be laid before this assembly to provide that contributions to 

provincial political parties, to candidates for office in provincial election and to organizations 

participating in provincial elections be disclosed to the public, including contributions as follows: (a) 

all contributions by corporations; (b) all contributions by trade unions, trade associations and like 

bodies; and (c) all contributions by individuals over a specified figure per annum. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

764 

 

But you notice it is confined to the contributions to the political parties. What about the contributions 

that come to the great federal political parties. These can be channelled down through to the provincial 

parties. What control is there over businesses in the east who contribute to the political parties, and keep 

that money from finding its way down into Saskatchewan. 

 

How does this control the great trade unions in the United States who last year said "We have got to 

raise hundreds and hundreds of thousands of dollars for the NDP in Canada." 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What is to prevent that money finding its way over here and getting into the elections 

in Saskatchewan. Tommy Douglas used to say that they were a "little man" party. Last year he said to 

the people of Canada, "We have now grown up, we have won your confidence, we are no longer the 

little man's party. We have $1,000,000 in our pockets to fight this election, these millions are not from 

nickels and dimes and two-bit pieces." 

 

Ask Mr. Douglas where he got his million bucks. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He wouldn't tell you. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And then the former national treasurer of the NDP party, said "When I was the 

national treasurer, he said I challenge the Premier to point out one corporation from which I asked for 

money that gave it because of an ulterior motive. He didn't say that they gave it because of an ulterior 

motive. 

 

Mr. Nicholson (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, would the hon. minister permit a question? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — This is the member who sat for some years both in the House of Commons and in 

this province. Again the member from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) has sat in this house since 1935, 

brought up the scandal of the Beauharnois and other so-called national scandals in political parties. His 

was the party that was supposed to have been born and raised and nurtured on the interest of the little 

people. They were going to protect the "little man" from being trampled on by the big corporations, yet 

for twenty years they sat here with the power to do these very things, but they didn't give a thought to 

doing it. 

 

I am going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, why they delayed it. They didn't anticipate they would be put out in 

1964, be defeated. They delayed it because of having their hand in the pot. In my constituency — and I 

can bring you the farmers — farmers came to me and showed me that they made application for a lease, 

and were told to present a membership card. They were forced to buy membership cards before they 

could get to talk about a lease. I know hotel keepers across this province where they came to their place 

of business and said "We want so much in dollars and cents in cash. If you don't come forward 

remember your hotel is licensed." But as the Premier says, they got their fingers into the trough and they 

liked it. Now they repent about their sins of omission . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They got their nose in it. 



 

March 3, 1966 

 

 

765 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . that they didn't remove this opportunity that may be available for others to do 

likewise. Now they say to themselves, "Why didn't we do it, why didn't we remove these evils." Now 

they bring in a resolution to rectify these gross evils. This cancerous growth which they fostered 

unknown to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This was their great motion, this is the motion which all the fine talk is about. Well, they boasted over 

the years of the purity of the party, of the number of dedicated school teachers that they had, and the 

number of dedicated people of the cloth that were in the party, of the gross evils of the society in which 

we live, and of their burning aim and dedication to build a new society for the people of Canada, but 

along the way they forgot to remove this cancerous sore. 

 

Now after 20 years when they are sitting in the opposition, why they no longer have the power to do it, 

they wish it to be done. They say now it should be done and they are going to ask the government to be 

so kind as to do it for them 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Where is your halo now? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — We believe that every man, as the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) pointed 

out should be free to contribute to any cause of his choice — be it church — fraternal — or any other 

organization. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It now being 10 o'clock, the house stands adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The house adjourned at 10.00 o'clock p.m. 

 


