



















































Hansard: September 07, 1966


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session – Fifteenth Legislature 
 

Wednesday, September 7th, 1966 

11:00 o’clock a.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the 

Seventh day of September, 1966, for the meeting of the Third session of the Fifteenth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour would open the session at eleven o‘clock 

a.m. today, Wednesday, the Seventh day of September, 1966. 

 

11:00 o‘clock a.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and having taken his seat upon the Throne, 

was pleased to open the Session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Third session of the Fifteenth Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Last week the employees of the gas division of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation went on strike. 

 

Therefore, you have been called to this session to give legislative effect to a bill to ensure the 

continuation of certain essential services. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the session, with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTION RE HOLIDAY PAY FOR SASKATCHEWAN 

POWER CORPORATION EMPLOYEES 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Is the government aware that the management of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation informed some union members in the head office that they could go home at noon on 

September 2nd (just before the strike started) and that they would get full pay for that day? 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — No. I doubt if the statement is correct. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Will the government investigate to find out if this was done? 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

2 

Mr. Thatcher: — I shall be pleased to look into the matter. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Will the corporation give a full day‘s pay to all employees for 

September 2nd if it is so generous as to offer it to some? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No. The government asked that the strike be postponed until Tuesday. The union 

refused and took the strikers out on Friday thereby depriving them of three days‘ holiday pay. 

 

QUESTION RE NEGOTIATIONS WITH INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF 

ELECTRICAL WORKERS IN THE SASKATCHEWAN POWER CORPORATION 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — What is present stage of negotiations with the International 

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation? 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Negotiations are proceeding satisfactorily. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — What increase in wages has that union asked for? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It has asked initially for 16 per cent. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — What has been offered by the corporation? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No offer has yet been made by the corporation. 

 

QUESTION RE INCREASE IN WAGES 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Since there has been no statement with respect to the 

amount of money representing the differences between the two parties, could the Premier inform me 

how many dollars is represented by each percentage increase in the wages of the employees currently on 

strike? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would suggest that this information be given when the bill is before the committee. I 

shall certainly make it available at that time. 

 

QUESTION RE COPIES OF BILL NO. 2 
 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — I wonder if we may have the leave of the House 

to proceed without copies of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Under duress. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

3 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — I can assure the House that copies of the Bill will be here 

very shortly. 

 

Mr. L.M. Larson (Pelly): — I object strenuously to the Legislature starting debate on second reading 

before a copy of the Bill is in the hands of the Members. I haven‘t seen the legislation and I would like 

to have it before me so that I know what we are talking about. 

 

SECOND READING 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 2 — An Act Respecting the 

Continuation of Services Essential to the Public. 

 

He said: 

 

This special session of the Legislature has been called for one immediate and urgent purpose, to find an 

appropriate method of settling a serious strike at the Saskatchewan Power Corporation which threatens 

the economy of the province. 

 

It has, however, a deeper, long-term purpose, the passing of legislation that will permit the Government 

to intervene in the future in any utility or hospital dispute which imperils Saskatchewan‘s economic 

health or the provision of necessary services to its people. 

 

It is this Government‘s conviction that the uncalled-for strike of the Oil, Chemical, and Atomic 

Workers‘ Union against the Saskatchewan Power Corporation raises grave questions about the degree of 

public responsibility displayed by the leaders of that union. It also poses a distinct and growing threat to 

the welfare of the public. 

 

I would remind any Member who doubts the validity of this statement to consider certain basic and 

inescapable facts. One hundred and eight thousand Saskatchewan families use natural gas to heat their 

homes. Schools, old-age homes, and hospitals depend on gas for heating or cooking, or both. Many of 

our vital industries, as well as our mines, depend on gas to operate turbines and supply steam. If that gas 

supply is shut off thousands of our citizens will be out of work. It must be obvious that, if by some 

chance the electrical workers took similar strike action, our whole economy would be at a standstill. 

 

Today, management for a short time can keep the gas utility in operation and no one is suffering. This 

would not be true if such a strike took place in winter. This is the very real danger we face today. It is in 

acknowledgement of this danger that our Government, after most careful consideration, has concluded 

that this strike presents an intolerable risk to the people of Saskatchewan. We cannot, in the public 

interest, continue to accept that risk. 

 

In reaching this conclusion, we have been acutely aware of the importance of preserving, within all 

reasonable limits, the rights of unions to exercise their own free judgments about their own affairs. 

However, it is our most careful judgement that, in this case, those limits have been flagrantly exceeded. 

 

I ask you to remember how this strike came about. Negotiations between the union leadership and 

management were carried on 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

4 

for the lengthy period of almost five months. The union‘s leaders, during this entire period, and despite 

the most persuasive evidence of the unreasonableness of their position, persisted wilfully in their 

demand for average increases of eight per cent. The corporation, taking into careful consideration its 

own debts and its public obligation, offered approximately four and one-half per cent, an increase that, 

by any reasonable standard, meets the test of equity or fairness to both sides. Then, the corporation went 

even further. In the interests of bringing about a speedy and congenial settlement, it hinted at its 

willingness to make additional, modest increases. The union leaders rebuffed this offer, demanded eight 

per cent or nothing, and then broke off negotiations after an abrupt and ill-conceived strike vote. 

 

Now, what we must ask is, why did the company not accede to the union leaders‘ demands? There is, 

after all, the glittering precedent set by the Federal Government in its lavish settlements with the 

longshoremen, the grain handlers, railwaymen, and so on, settlements that have been extravagant as to 

raise the spectre of inflation throughout the country. Is this the sort of precedent that the people of 

Saskatchewan, who have always been notable for their practical judgment and their self-sufficiency, 

want to see their Government follow? We think not. 

 

Is the federal example sufficient reason for this Government to brush aside any objection to what the 

union leadership has contended is a paltry eight per cent? We think not. 

 

Are the people of Saskatchewan indifferent to whether their Government keeps its own house in order 

and manages the affairs of the province in a practical and economical way? We think not. 

 

On the contrary, we who have the privilege and the responsibility of governing this province are 

altogether convinced that the provincial interest clearly dictates that excessive wage demands, patterned 

on extravagant settlements elsewhere, must be promptly and vigorously denied. 

 

We take this attitude for several reasons of importance. 

 

(1) It always must be borne in mind that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is a publicly-owned 

utility and the heavy burden of any excessive wage increases imposed upon that corporation will, 

inevitably, be borne by the public or the taxpayers generally. 

 

(2) Careful and eminently just comparisons by our officials show that SPC office workers already are 

among the highest paid workers in this province. At the same time wages of the gas workers compare 

most favourably with the wages paid in other segments of industry. In other words, as we see it, these 

workers are conspicuously at no disadvantage as far as their fellow citizens are concerned. 

 

(3) The overall financial position of the SPC is such that any uncalled-for invasion of its resources 

seriously weakens the position of this publicly-owned utility as a solvent, efficient business. In other 

words, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, despite what the union leadership may profess to believe, 

is not invulnerable to such attack. Surely, it is in the public interest that this utility, which has a 

staggering $530,000,000 debt, should be strengthened and made more self-sufficient. 

 

Let me remind the hon. Members, Mr. Speaker, that when this Government took office, 92 1/2 per cent 

of the Saskatchewan Power 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

5 

Corporation was owned by bond-holders, many of them Americans, and only 7 1/2 per cent of the 

company was owned by the people. And it‘s only in recent years, indeed only since this Government 

took office that this public utility has been able to generate any real profits whatever. Even last year, 

even with the improvement in management, the return on capital investment was a meagre two per cent. 

 

Now, this Government is determined through prudent management to improve the financial health of 

this utility. Our Government believes that it is absolutely essential that reasonable profits be used to 

increase the public‘s ownership of the corporation. Our Government does not believe that any 

unreasonable part of these profits should be dropped into any union‘s lap at the brusque demand of the 

union‘s leaders. On the contrary, I repeat, this utility is owned by the people of Saskatchewan, and they, 

the people, must pay the bill. It is the obligation of the Government to be, at all times, businesslike in the 

interests of the people. 

 

(4) I want to remind this House of the significant fact that gas and electricity rates are already 

substantially higher in Saskatchewan than in neighboring provinces. For example, gas rates in Alberta 

today are from 30 to 50 per cent lower than they are in Saskatchewan. This is a very real concern to 

us . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about Manitoba? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, if you want to talk about Manitoba, you have a further distance to go to 

transport it and it‘s a little higher. But Manitoba . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . Manitoba electricity rates are 70 per cent lower than they are in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now, this is of real concern to us because we, unlike our Socialist friends, want new 

industries to locate here and we want our gas and our electricity rates to be competitive. We know that, 

as we steadily improve the profit picture of SPC, we can do this by permitting our rates to come down 

and become more competitive. 

 

(5) This Government, let me emphasize, is unalterably opposed to unreasonable pressures from those 

who fail to concede, as in this matter, that there is more at stake than their own immediate gain. This 

Government will resist now, and at any time, all such unreasonable pressures. 

 

(6) In considering whether the demands of the union leadership are unreasonable, let us look at the 

agreements which other Government employees‘ organizations have signed for the coming year: the 

Civil Service signed for 4 per cent; the Telephone Union, about 3.5 per cent; the Brick Plant, about 3.2 

per cent; the Bus Company, about 3.5 per cent; the Sodium Sulphate Plant, a much more profitable 

company than SPC, signed for 3.2 per cent; 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

6 

the Insurance Company, for about 4 per cent. Now, compare those other increases with the 8 per cent 

which is being demanded today by the OCAW Union. We believe that in all fairness these agreements 

must be kept in mind when the present agreement with the Power employees is signed. 

 

(7) Finally, there is the feeling throughout the country that the rash of strikes in the past year can only 

feed the fires of inflation. And inflation helps no one. Not even the wage earners. If pay increases are not 

related to a real increase in the value of goods produced, our very national prosperity will be 

jeopardized. 

 

It is for these main reasons, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan firmly supports a Power 

Corporation decision to reject the demands of the OCAW. In taking this attitude, we are confident of 

province-wide support. We are confident of the good sense of the Saskatchewan public. We are 

confident of the public‘s desire for fair play. And we are especially confident of the farmers‘ support in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now, I would tell my hon. friend for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) that there is no group that 

has suffered so seriously in the last several years from strikes as has the farmer. The latest series really 

started I guess about a year ago, with the grain handlers‘ strike at Vancouver. A settlement was finally 

negotiated but many shipments were missed in the process. 

 

A few weeks later, right in the middle of harvest, hundreds of oil workers decided to strike at the risk of 

depriving the farmers of motive power. 

 

This spring it was the turn of the longshoremen of Montreal, Quebec, and Three Rivers, to walk out, and 

again seriously impede the free flow of grain to markets. Hundreds of ships were idle for days upon end 

waiting for grain cargoes. Surely the 30 per cent wage settlement which was used induce these men back 

to work was outrageous. As one federal Member said, it was like pouring gasoline on a fire. 

 

Then the railroaders across Canada went on strike, again right in the middle of harvest. Congestion arose 

at virtually every elevator in the prairie provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all of these strikes and in the present strike that we are discussing this morning, it is the 

farmer who pays a good portion of the bill when settlement is made. And I can tell my friends opposite 

that in my opinion the farmers generally are getting fed up with this prolonged serious of strikes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Certainly, the efforts of the CCF-NDF to convince him that he and labor should join 

hands politically in the Socialist party will be looked upon with even greater doubt. 

 

Now, I turn to the Bill before us. Details can be discussed in committee but there are two main 

provisions I should like to refer to. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

7 

The first, of course, is to provide for an Arbitration Committee, if other measures fail in achieving a 

settlement. Under the Bill, both the union and the company are required to appoint one representative to 

sit on that Committee of Arbitration. They then will try and agree upon a chairman who must be a judge 

of one of the courts. If they cannot agree then the chairman will be appointed by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. That three-man committee, having made a decision, will in effect be giving a 

binding decision, a decision binding on the union, a decision binding on the company. 

 

Now, the second major provision deals with a situation in which the employees covered by the Bill do 

not return to work within ten days after the date of settlement. Under such circumstances, and if the 

Government is satisfied that the union has not made every reasonable effort to have its members return 

to work, then that union may be decertified, and it will no longer be the legal bargaining agent of the 

employees. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in passing, I would point out to the House that this legislation is not unique. The 

provinces of British Columbia and Ontario have legislation which is very much identical. The provinces 

of Alberta and Manitoba have provisions which achieve precisely the same objective. So we are not 

doing anything today that other provinces haven‘t for the most part done. 

 

When my Socialist friends talk about compulsory arbitration I would remind the people of 

Saskatchewan that a similar crisis arose in 1955 under the CCF administration with the same union. The 

CCF Government of the day, under pressure, acted in almost precisely the same manner as we are doing 

today. They drafted a Bill providing for binding arbitration. They called the union leaders in and they 

said, ―You‘ll settle or you‘ll have this Bill‖. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier accept a question? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Certainly. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Will he indicate the date on which that Bill was suggested to this Legislature? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If you‘ll just wait one minute. You prepared the Bill and the union backed down so 

you did not bring it in. But you were prepared to bring it in. 

 

And another thing, Mr. Speaker, I am sure in this debate we are going to hear a lot from my hon. friends 

opposite that this 4.5 per cent is woefully inadequate, that under today‘s conditions this is a paltry 

increase. Well, I ask the union members of this province to note the actions of a Socialist government in 

Great Britain under the same circumstances. Mr. Wilson and his Socialist friends haven‘t offered 4.5 per 

cent; they have frozen all wages for a six months‘ period, no increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

8 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — What about your big business men? Freeze them. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — My hon. friend (Mr. Kramer) couldn‘t read the Bill if we had given it to him so I 

don‘t know what he is chirping up for. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are going through a period of widespread labor-management discord. People on 

this continent, in Canada and the United States and elsewhere, now realize that a single labor union, 

until its demands are met, can halt the country‘s railways, tie up its shipping, shut down its steel mills, 

silence the newspapers of a great city and bankrupt one of them in the process, walk out on patients 

suffering or dying hospitals, stop the export and marketing of farm products, ground 60 per cent of the 

nation‘s airlines, and prevent others from taking the jobs that its own members have refused to perform. 

The public have had to stand by, virtually helpless. We say that strikes of this nature can bring hardship 

and disruption to the economic fabric of the nation. 

 

There are those, and I am one of them, who believe that, in its own interest, the country eventually is 

going to have to introduce legislation to solve socially crippling labor disputes. Perhaps some 

mechanism such as a ‗labor court‘ would be the answer. This type of legislation is not new in the 

democratic world. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Hitler did it. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I heard the hon. Member for Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) chirping, ―Hitler did it‖. 

Hitler didn‘t do it; Sweden did it and that‘s the country all my friends are always talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — And in Sweden it has been extremely beneficial in preventing dangerous economic 

dislocations. Labor itself in Sweden has grudgingly admitted to a better social atmosphere with the 

change. It is in recognition of the profound value of such legislation to a democratic society that this 

Government is today introducing an Act to forestall paralyzing strikes in vital fields. 

 

In conclusion, I would like to make three things perfectly clear. 

 

(1) This legislation will never be used by our Government to bully, to oppress or intimidate any union 

that is engaged in legitimate negotiations to advance the reasonable interests of its members. 

 

(2) This legislation, moreover, will not be employed in the current dispute until this Government is 

assured that every other avenue of approach has been explored. 

 

(3) However, and I want to leave no doubt on this subject, this legislation most emphatically will be 

employed, in future, whenever the public interest is at stake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly I move, seconded by the hon. Member for Melville (Mr. 

Gardiner) that an Act Respecting the Continuation of Services Essential to the Public be now read a 

second time. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

9 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, after having listened to the Premier in 

what he suggested was to be an explanation of the Bill I think it becomes plain that not only did the 

Opposition Members not have an opportunity to read and study the Bill but the Premier did not have an 

opportunity to read and study it either. Certainly he made precious little attempt to explain what the Bill 

really says, what the Bill really will make possible, to this Legislature or to the public of Saskatchewan. 

He skated around making any definitive statement about the Bill itself. He did draw in some completely 

irrelevant matters with respect to Great Britain and Sweden. Either the Premier must know that the 

situations in those countries are different or else he chose to mislead the House and the public in 

suggesting that there is any similarity whatsoever between what this Bill proposes and the action taken 

and the action possible in those countries. 

 

May I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is indeed a strange title for this proposal which is put before us. It 

is called a Bill to ensure the continuation of certain essential services and I hope to demonstrate that this 

is indeed a misleading title for this particular legislation. 

 

I suggest that the question before us is, in main, this. It is a question of the Government‘s failure to cope 

with the situation which led up to the strike which is now in effect in the province of Saskatchewan. The 

question is the Government‘s failure to remove any danger or possibility of Saskatchewan people being 

refused essential services because of the inability to deal adequately with their working force. 

 

The Premier has suggested that the offers which the Power Corporation made met any tests of equity. If 

this is the case, if he is indeed confident that that is the situation, the obvious question for him to answer 

is, why then didn‘t it submit some other tests of equity? Why didn‘t they attempt some of the obvious 

moves of mediation or conciliation or voluntary arbitration rather than the kind of medicine it is now 

trying to shove down the throats, not just of the union concerned, but of many other people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I think it became very evident, Mr. Speaker, as we listened to the Premier, 

that one of the reasons behind this Bill is one more attempt on the part of Members opposite to make 

divisions within our country. This is one more attempt to stir up animosity and suspicion and hatred 

between farm groups and other groups, an attempt to make political capital of this situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier was quoted in the press sometime earlier as suggesting that this 

Bill would have teeth in it. May I say, Mr. Speaker, this Bill doesn‘t have teeth, it has fangs, dripping 

fangs, not pleasant to contemplate. This Bill asks the Legislature to put into the hands of the 

Government the right to 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

10 

make compulsory arbitration applicable to a large number of Saskatchewan working people and 

Saskatchewan employers. In turn, it puts the Government in the position to determine wage levels and 

other benefits for a very considerable segment of the people of our province. 

 

I submit this is not the power that ought to be put into the hands of any Government, and even more so it 

is not the power that ought to be in the hands of this Government that sits opposite. I am more convinced 

after having listened to the Premier‘s philosophy this morning. 

 

Let it be noted, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is not confined to workers who are currently on strike in the 

province of Saskatchewan in one industry. Nor is this Bill confined to those plus other employees of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Nor is this Bill confined to those workers who are on strike plus the 

other workers in the Power Corporation alone, plus the hospital workers. This Bill includes workers in 

geriatric and mental health centres; certainly other employees of many municipalities are covered; 

certainly other employees of the Provincial Government are covered; certainly the situation is there that 

the Government could say janitors are covered and stationary engineers are covered. The Premier shakes 

his head. Let him read the Bill which I think he has not as yet done. 

 

This Bill is wide, too wide, under any circumstances. It is wider even, I submit, than the Government 

perhaps believes it to be. The Bill isn‘t confined to those employees in those industries who may be 

actually out on strike any time now or in the future. Strike action, according to this Bill, is not necessary 

in order to trigger the Government‘s cannons supplied to them by this legislation. The Government can 

go into action whenever, and I quote, ―in the opinion of‖ the Premier and his Cabinet a state of 

emergency exists. It is not necessary that there be a strike. It is necessary only that in the opinion of the 

Premier and his Cabinet a state of emergency shall exist. 

 

A ―strike‖ is defined to include ―a slowdown or other concerted activity on the part of employees 

designed to restrict or limit output‖ in the opinion of the Premier and his Cabinet. 

 

So the Bill is not confined to the specific workers who are at the moment on strike. The Bill is not 

confined, so far as future application is concerned, to people who may be on strike. It is applicable for 

other reasons as well. 

 

The Bill has other objectionable fangs in addition to this. We find these when we look at some of the 

penalties for alleged wrongdoing and some of the definitions of wrongdoing. May I say this, Mr. 

Speaker, that if this Bill were applicable to the workforce on Canadian railways then every railway 

union in Canada today would stand in danger of being decertified. If this Bill were applicable to 

Canadian railways there isn‘t a railway union in Canada today which would not have its certification 

rights placed in jeopardy. Not only would they stand in danger of being decertified but they would stand 

in danger of being forever debarred from representing railway employees in the future. 

 

I quote from the Act again: 

 

The union, so decertified, shall no longer be eligible to represent any of the employees. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

11 

No longer. Permanently debarred. Decertified. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — By whom? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Read the Bill, Mr. Premier. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I helped write it. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, that I can believe, Mr. Speaker, but like the Premier in so many instances he never 

bothered to read again what he had written in the first place. 

 

The Act says the union so decertified shall no longer be eligible to represent any of the employees. 

Decertified by whom? By a Labor Relations Board? Not as I read the Bill. Decertified by the 

Government, decertified by the Government without any guaranteed right to argue the point, decertified 

by the Government without any opportunity for appeal. One can believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier 

wrote the Bill. 

 

To proceed, this Bill provides penalties not only because of actions which have been taken. It provides 

that an injunction may be issued and again I quote from the Bill: 

 

. . . if likely to act. 

 

Injunctions may be taken without any opportunity for the union to state its case. ―Big Brother‖, the 

Government, can go around reading minds, interpreting intentions and applying penalties. 

 

This Bill is compost heap of many of the most vicious, least democratic statutes in Canada. If it is not a 

contravention of the Canadian and Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, it is at least a total contradiction. 

 

This is an unnecessary session at which the Government expects us to settle a problem which should not 

have arisen. The solution offered is the wrong proposal introduced at the wrong time. This Liberal 

government has wanted compulsory arbitration and has contrived a situation which it hoped would be 

conducive to acceptance of such legislation. It did not dare to introduce such a Bill this spring. It is now 

attempting to exploit the emotion of a strike to make palatable that which would be otherwise 

unpalatable. 

 

On July 27, 1965, this Government appointed a Labour Management Review Committee. As recently as 

mid-March of 1966 this Committee‘s report on the Trade Union Act was sent to the Government. Does 

it recommend compulsory arbitration? It does not. Does it recommend study of compulsory arbitration? 

It does not. It had, I am convinced, some urging to so recommend. But it did not. If there had been need 

for the drastic action now proposed by the Government, surely the Committee would have made some 

recommendation, or at least some reference. It did not. It made reference to arbitration only ―when a 

collective bargaining agreement contains a provision for final settlement by arbitration‖, in other words, 

where voluntary arbitration was agreed to by the bargaining parties. There is no relationship, no 

similarity here to the present proposals. On the contrary, in its express of basic philosophy the 

Committee, in my opinion, warned the Government against imposing compulsory arbitration by law. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

12 

The Committee approached its task of making recommendations for making amendments to the Act, 

bearing in mind what seemed to its members as being matters of fundamental importance. First, the 

Committee was of the opinion that so far as it is possible labor negotiations should be left to 

management and the trade union to carry on with as little interference from outside as possible. 

Members found themselves in full agreement with the statement of principle as set forth in the 

following from the brief of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour: 

 

‗It is an expression in statutory form of the liberal view that, given the necessary protection of rights 

by the law, men should be free to work out their own affairs with government interfering as little as 

possible. In this respect, the Saskatchewan Act stands in marked contrast to other Canadian labour 

relations legislation, where the process of collective bargaining is hedged with a multitude of 

restrictions, and where government presumes the right to interfere in the process and subject the 

parties to advice and suggestions whether or not such interference, advice or suggestions are desired 

by either party‘. 

 

The Government‘s own Committee said: 

 

The Saskatchewan Act stands in marked contrast to other Canadian labour relations legislation. 

 

The Committee applauded this contrast. Now this same Government proposes to remove some of the 

most significant features of that contrast. Even to the advice of its own Committee the Government turns 

a deaf ear, to advice scarcely six months old. 

 

Now, the Government chooses the wrong time to do the wrong thing. It proposes compulsory 

arbitration, not just for gas and office employees of the SPC, also for hospital employees also for all 

other SPC employees, also for many others. It does so before insisting that normal attempts to settle the 

one existing problem be made. If there was need for a session, it should deal with one item, one only. 

That one is the current impasse between some employees of the SPC and the Corporation. If the 

Government wishes to propose more general legislation, withdrawing the right to strike for more 

employees in other occupations, let them do so at another time. 

 

We are expecting another session November. A November session is soon enough. If there is no 

November session, the Government could restrain its eagerness to open its Pandora‘s box of compulsory 

arbitration until the regular session. If it is never introduced it will be soon enough. If it is never 

introduced it will mean one less piece of legislation to be changed by the CCF when we return to office. 

 

Or does the Government anticipate that its inability or unwillingness to deal with other employee groups 

will produce more problems for which it has no solution other than removal of rights by some 

strong-arm method? 

 

I ask you to note that the union representing the remainder of power employees, ―a much more sensible 

union‖, quoting the Premier, has asked for a 16 per cent increase, sixteen per cent vs. eight per cent 

suggested by the union currently on strike. 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

13 

If we pass this legislation now both the corporation and the union will ask for more, or cling more 

doggedly to present positions than if the process of free collective bargaining were not to be interfered 

with. 

 

I also ask you to note that many agreements with hospital workers are due to expire by the end of the 

year. These situation should be faced using tested collective bargaining procedures, including as 

necessary all offices of mediation and conciliation and voluntary arbitration, before proposing the drastic 

remedy (a remedy by no means certain) of compulsory arbitration imposed by legislation. The 

Government‘s present legislative proposal, applicable to problems which have never occurred, to 

situations which have not arisen, interfere with traditional, hard-earned, highly respected rights of free 

collective bargaining. 

 

Proposals of Government legislation should be reduced to deal with the one, current situation, that alone. 

That should have been the maximum request for authority to abridge rights of working people which 

even a Government as insensitive to personal rights as this one should ask of this Legislature. 

 

But there is a prior question which must be asked. I have said this is an unnecessary session of the 

Legislature to attempt settlement of an unnecessary problem. To what extent has the Government tried 

the usual procedures to reach a settlement? The bare minimum of appearing at the negotiating table. To 

what extent has the Government exhausted the usual machinery, frequently successfully employed in 

reaching understanding and settlement, as to the sharing of responsibility and benefits of an industrial 

corporation? Not at all. Has conciliation been tried? No. Has mediation been tried? No. Has voluntary 

arbitration been suggested? No. 

 

The record shows that this Government has made minimum use of minimum procedures and ignored 

available machinery to extend negotiation procedures to conciliation or mediation. 

 

The record indicates more. Record: Negotiations began on March 18th. On August 16th management 

made its first wage offer, after five months of bargaining. Then in the short space of 15 days it improved 

its offer from zero to four per cent. Meanwhile, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool settled for 8 1/2 per cent 

in the first year, 4 1/2 per cent the next. Carpenters and joiners obtained ten per cent. Regina Board of 

Education (maintenance and caretaking), six per cent. Pioneer Electric, ten per cent. 

 

Then without insisting on conciliation or mediation or attempting voluntary arbitration, the Government 

called the Legislature and proposed compulsory arbitration as a continuing law, not just for this group of 

employees but for several others. 

 

I submit that this record is not accidental, it is deliberate. I submit it was part of the Government‘s 

contriving, in the hope that what is unpalatable in peace might become palatable in war, in the hope that 

the emotion of war would hide the Government‘s extension of authority into the area of innocent 

bystanders. 

 

On Friday, the Premier was quoted to say: 

 

Now they wish to test the Government‘s determination . . . and we are pleased to give them the 

chance. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

14 

The Premier is happy. Strange indeed are the springs of happiness from which some people drink, and 

drinking, become intoxicated from their chosen brew. 

 

The record again is one of a vendetta against this group of employees, a conspiracy designed to destroy 

a union. One has only to recall the Basken case, where an official of this union, on orders direct form the 

Premier‘s desk was denied his civil and human rights. Then add to this months of near non-negotiation 

and provocation. The only reason the Premier is happy, as he said he was, is that he thinks the 

Government provocation has been successful in promoting a situation which he hopes will make the 

unpalatable palatable. 

 

Somebody in the Government has been reading up on guerrilla warfare. Just as this Government chose 

in another instance to make an example of the City of Saskatoon and some of its staff, just as this 

Government castigated the United Church for daring to make some suggestions it did not like, just as 

this Government threatened the Prince Albert Indian-Métis Friendship Council if it did not replace an 

employee who wrote something the Government did not like, so this Government has centred its full 

political venom, its total anti-labor bias and its desire to be absolute monarch of all it surveys on this 

particular union. 

 

That‘s the main reason why this Legislature is now in session. Fortunately the people of Saskatchewan 

have a deep desire to see fair play. Fortunately they distrust such misuse of political power under the 

guise of pressing necessity. 

 

There is only one question this Legislature ought to face at this time: is it possible to arrange a 

resumption of work and services and at the same time preserve the principle of free collective 

bargaining? Quite clearly the Government Bill fails to provide an adequate or a considered reply. The 

Government‘s answer to this crucial question is that the question is unimportant. Its method is 

authoritarian; its effect is to contribute to more industrial strife; it diminishes the meaning and devastates 

the method of free collective bargaining. Not only should this Bill not pass this Legislature, it should 

never have been offered to this Legislature. 

 

How important is this right to free collective bargaining? How important is the right to withdraw 

services? Let‘s call some witnesses. Hon. Paul Martin, a Liberal Federal Cabinet Minister said (Hansard, 

August 30, 1966, page 7799) 

 

The right to strike is part of the Bill of Rights of this country. 

 

For some groups the Government of Saskatchewan seeks to abrogate Canada‘s Bill of Rights. How 

drastic is the step proposed in the present Bill? Hon. Jean Marchand said in a recent by-election speech 

(La Presse, August 22nd, 1966) speaking of the pending railroad strike: 

 

It is a serious thing, but let us not lose our heads. There are also human rights, and a government 

cannot do whatever it pleases. When one group is deprived of the right to strike who will say where it 

will stop? Today the railway employees, tomorrow the postal workers, and later, the right of 

association . . . 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

15 

Where will it stop in Saskatchewan? Today SPC workers and hospital workers and others. Tomorrow 

teachers, telephone workers? 

 

Rt. Hon. Louis St Laurent said: 

 

. . . in our country arbitration is accepted, even in emergency, only with the greatest reluctance. It 

does not seem to be a satisfactory substitute for other regular processes of determining pay scales. 

 

Hon. Mr. MacEachen (Globe Magazine, November 9, 1963) said: 

 

When you provide for arbitration it seems to reduce the necessity or desire to settle disputes before 

the arbitration stage. In some cases compulsory arbitration is advocated where the public interest is 

involved. I don‘t think there is any need whatsoever in Canada to consider compulsory arbitration 

in the settlement of disputes at the present time, for no other reason than the rigidity it imposes on 

the settlement process. 

 

Hon. Jean Marchand said: 

 

When one group is deprived of the right to strike who will say where it will stop, 

 

This Bill will deprive several groups. 

 

Rt. Hon. Louis St. Laurent said: 

 

It is not a satisfactory substitute for regular processes. 

 

This Bill substitutes the less satisfactory. 

 

Hon. Mr. MacEachen said: 

 

There‘s no need in Canada to consider compulsory arbitration. 

 

This Bill doesn‘t consider, it imposes, enshrines in law. 

 

Let‘s call some more witnesses. A meeting of 15 experts appointed by ILO reached conclusions 

(November to December, 1963) on labor-management relations in the public service. The Canadian 

delegate was vice-chairman. The ILO unanimously refused to accept a system of compulsory arbitration 

because there was no guarantee either of its impartiality or of its efficiency. This Government has 

obviously read all the offensive statutes in Canada. It hasn‘t read recommendations of the International 

Labour Office. If read they were ignored. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 12:30 to 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — When the 12:30 recess was called I was in the process of posing what seems to me to be 

another extremely important question that this Legislature ought to answer before it agrees to the 

passage of this Bill. That question was, is the method of compulsory arbitration successful in promoting 

good industrial relations? We, in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are certainly vitally and extremely 

interested in a good industrial climate. We should not forget, although I suggest that the Government 

seems to have 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

16 

forgotten on this occasion and on others that one of the very basic needs for industrial development and 

production for good industrial climate is that of a good work force, a work force which is trained, 

experienced, secure, interested, confident in their rights, and enjoying the confidence of their employers. 

Production after all, Mr. Speaker, is more than resources and more than dollars. Production is people. 

And those people are a very important part of the industrial climate; they determine to a considerable 

extent the success of an industrial development. I submit that compulsory arbitration, in the way that it is 

outlined here before us, interferes with and militates against every one of those aids to sound, solid, 

secure industrial development. 

 

The industry which comes most to mind in discussing this legislation is, of course, the power and gas 

industry in our province. These industries are particularly dependent on skilled and experienced 

personnel. Not only industrial development is at stake here but human life. The safety of personal 

property and of homes, these too are at stake. The industry is highly competitive, certainly it is 

becoming increasingly more competitive. The records show that already we have been and we are losing 

staff from these industries at a frightening rate, which will, in the end, jeopardize the success of these 

industries. One of the biggest factors I submit in this extraordinarily rapid rate of loss from these 

industries is the deterioration of morale in the staff, the erosion of good government-employee 

relationships. 

 

I submit that that loss is really just beginning, unless we can stem it. In the province of British Columbia 

there are some very large hydro electric installations. This is invariably going to increase greatly the 

need for skilled workers in these industries, and more and more Saskatchewan workers are likely to 

follow that trail westward. This Bill handicaps employers generally in their search for skilled and 

experienced people in our work force. 

 

The other group of people affected by this are the hospital workers. Everything I have said about the 

competition for skilled workers applies even more so to our hospital workers. There is across Canada a 

dramatic shortage of hospital workers; all of us should be painfully aware of it. If medicare comes across 

Canada – I regret that it is necessary to say ―if‖ – but if it does then the demand is certainly going to be 

even that much greater, and we in Saskatchewan can even less afford the handicap which this kind of 

legislation will put upon us. 

 

There is another question. Does compulsory arbitration really merit many of the songs which from time 

to time are sung in its praise? The Premier sang, although slightly off-key, some of those songs this 

morning. Well, let‘s take a look at some of the records and some of the opinions which are readily 

available with regard to the results, happy and otherwise, of compulsory arbitration. 

 

Australia is frequently referred to by the exponents of widespread compulsory arbitration, yet in a very 

recent year in Australia 14.7 per cent of their non-agricultural workers were involved in strikes. That 

same year only 6.8 per cent were involved in strikes in the United States. 

 

Now, it is true that the Australian strikes for the greater part were of shorter duration, but that wasn‘t 

true of all of them. 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

17 

For example, there was in that country a strike in the copper industry beginning in 1964. It continued 

during the rest of 1964 and into 1965, spanning a period in all of some eight months. Here was an 

important national industry in which there was a strike lasting for a period of eight months, in a country 

where strikes are banned a illegal, where compulsory arbitration is the order of the day and has been for 

some time. They have more strikes, although many of them not as long as those in other countries. So, 

by the record of what happened in that country, compulsory arbitration is certainly not infallible. 

 

Secondly, may I suggest that even many people who are not totally convinced that compulsory 

arbitration is really very bad do express many doubts and raise many questions about its effectiveness. 

Let me give to the Legislature, Mr. Speaker, a series of quotations which are taken from the Royal 

Commission report on Compulsory Arbitration and Disputes Affecting Hospitals and their Employees in 

the province of Ontario, published in July of 1964. First they comment on Australia‘s experience, and let 

me read this from the report: 

 

Although the record of strikes and lock-outs in Australia since the introduction of the arbitration 

system does not clearly indicate the system‘s contribution to industrial peace, the fact that a 

substantial amount of industrial conflict has occurred is at least sufficient to show that the highest 

hopes of the founders of arbitration may have been frustrated; industrial peace has certainly not been 

completely achieved. 

 

Compulsory arbitration is no overall panacea. 

 

Thirdly, the Commissioners themselves have this to say: 

 

There is consensus in Canada and the United States that the application of compulsory arbitration to 

settle contract disputes between labor and management in industry generally is repugnant to our free 

enterprise system and our free democratic institutions. 

 

Later the Commissioners add this: 

 

Both management and labor are in general agreement that compulsorily imposing a decision upon the 

parties as to wages and working conditions is inconsistent with the principles of a free democratic 

society. 

 

The Commission goes on to quote from a brief presented to it by the Ontario Federation of Labour. They 

quote words: 

 

We are of the opinion that the principle of compulsory arbitration is an encroachment on our 

democratic freedom and we are therefore opposed to government legislation making arbitration 

compulsory in all hospital or any other labor disputes. 

 

The Commission continued with these words, Mr. Speaker, saying that: 

 

Briefs from the Canadian Manufacturers Association and the Ontario Hospital Association were to 

the same effect. 

 

Later on the Commission adds: 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

18 

In short compulsory arbitration competes with instead of supplementing the bargaining process. 

 

I ask the Government to take note of that when they are considering what is going to happen to 

industrial relations as a result of this Bill, ―compulsory arbitration competes with rather than 

supplementing the bargaining process‖. 

 

This morning, Mr. Speaker, in introducing the Bill, the Premier referred us to the fact that British 

Columbia had some measures in some ways somewhat similar to this. And he seemed to feel that the 

fact that it had been passed in British Columbia gave some additional weight of argument in its favor. I 

suppose it is not unusual, Mr. Speaker, that a couple of people like the Premier of British Columbia and 

the Premier of Saskatchewan, a couple of old-time hucksters in the field of selling ice boxes and so on, 

should come to agreement with respect to matters like compulsory arbitration. But since he has raised 

the matter of British Columbia, may I quote an opinion form a source somewhat closer to home than 

those I have been reading. The Saskatchewan Teachers Federation presented a brief on April 4th, 1966. 

They commented under the headline there of ―Fixed deadlines and compulsory arbitration‖. And to add 

to their comment they quoted an excerpt from a statement of an official of the British Columbia 

Teachers Federation and I read that excerpt: 

 

Too frequently under British Columbia conditions the negotiation pattern is one of an obstinate group 

of teachers facing an obdurate school board, drifting through the mere passage of time into a hastily 

arranged hearing before a hurried and harried arbitration board which makes a poor best of a bad job 

under impossible conditions. 

 

They add: 

 

Such a procedure cannot solve the real problem. At best it postpones for a year the search for a 

solution. 

 

Let me attempt to summarize, Mr. Speaker. First, I submit again that the Government has failed to give, 

in the particular situation which concerns us most at the moment, the kind of leadership which could 

have produced the kind of bargaining which could have resulted in a settlement. I submit that the 

Government prefers the use of power to dictate rather than of discussion to decide. 

 

Secondly, the Government failed to insist that its corporation exhaust all the possibilities for a voluntary 

settlement before proposing interference by legislation. Conciliation, as I said earlier, was not used. 

Mediation was not used. There has been no attempt to persuade parties to use voluntary arbitration. 

There has been no attempt to introduce into the bargaining process some person or some group of 

persons, say three, nationally known for their skills in mediation, nationally respected for their 

impartiality and their integrity. These possibilities were neither tried nor explored. The Government 

prefers to rule rather than to govern. 

 

Thirdly, the Government has, in my opinion, again deliberately prodded, goaded, harassed, annoyed this 

particular union. The resulting relationship and the resulted morale of the staff were such that rightly or 

wrongly a strike vote was only a question of time. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

19 

Fourthly, having succeeded in this the Government is misusing the situation to introduce legislation 

imposing compulsory arbitration on other groups as well. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that if this particular 

Government is allowed to remain in office it‘s only a question of time until other employees find their 

rights similarly abridged and restricted. What we see in this legislation today is opening by a crack the 

door which the Government seeks to throw wide open. The camel‘s nose is in the ten; close behind is the 

rest of the camel. 

 

Fifth, if the Government insists on this type of legislation at this time, even though it hasn‘t completed 

the usual procedures to obtain settlement, the reference should be exclusively to the one situation in 

which there is an immediate problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‘t say that those of us in this party would never agree to or would never make use of 

compulsory arbitration, but this I do say, we would not do so until every last solitary possibility of 

voluntary settlement to a problem seriously affecting the public welfare had been exhausted . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And even then, Mr. Speaker, this should not be done at the whim of a little group of 

people sitting in the Cabinet office at the wish of the Government. This should be confined to action by 

the Legislature, and should not be done until after a meeting of this Legislature. The big exception 

which we take to this Bill is that it gives to the Government the power which governments should not 

have. It gives to the Government the right to act in this way in these cases on the basis of its own 

opinion, not on the basis of any facts. 

 

To add to that may I point out that during 20 years of government by this party there was not a single 

situation in which efforts which I have outlined were not in the end effective. It is true there were some 

strikes, it‘s true there was very frequent use of conciliation, it‘s true there was use on more than one 

occasion of voluntary arbitration by an agreed arbiter, but there wasn‘t compulsory arbitration. There 

need not be at this time, of this we are convinced. The Government should not, as it is doing here, put 

handcuffs on others in order to keep its own hands from shaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is too inclusive as to people and it excludes too many of the rights of people This 

Bill is premature. The opportunities for bargaining and settlement have not been exhausted and they still 

exist. The penalties in this Bill are much too sweeping. This Bill will indeed provoke industrial 

uncertainty and unrest throughout the province. This Bill will interfere with our ability to recruit the 

necessary work force. 

 

It is a Bill which restricts the freedom of employers and of employees alike. It puts the Government in a 

position to substantially control many wage levels and other benefits for many workers. It will 

encourage both employers and employees to take more extreme and more fixed positions during 

negotiations and consequently make settlements more difficult. There is no substantial evidence that 

such easy access to compulsory arbitration as proposed here has been successful any place. There is 

much evidence and much opinion that it is harmful, that at best it postpones problems. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

20 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that this Bill is not in the public interest. It is not in the interest of that part of our 

public which is employed in factories or in hospitals or in farms or in classrooms or in any other way. 

This Bill, as I intimated earlier, is evil. 

 

The proposal which I make on behalf of the CCF group would, in our opinion, make possible an orderly 

return of services in the present strike. It would at the same time protect the rights of free and healthy 

collective bargaining. In order to outline our proposal, Mr. Speaker, I propose to move an amendment to 

the motion. I have a copy for the Premier, if we had had more time we might have had copies for all the 

Members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move then: 

 

That all the words after ‗That‘ be struck out and the following substituted therefore: 

 

This House not now proceed with the second reading of this Bill but request the Government to 

substitute therefore a bill to deal specifically with the single dispute referred to in His Honour‘s 

address, such bill to: 

 

1. provide for the return to work of the Saskatchewan Power employees involved after the 

government has given consideration to the advisability of including in the bill provisions for 

interim wage increases retroactive to June, 1966; 

 

2. order the resumption of negotiations on all remaining outstanding issues, including wage and 

other monetary benefits; 

 

3. direct the parties to employ impartial mediation and conciliation procedures; 

 

4. direct the parties in the event these measures fail to bring agreement in 60 days, to consider 

submission of remaining matters in dispute to an agreed arbitrator for a binding decision; and 

 

5. if the parties fail to so agree that the matter then be submitted to arbitration within an additional 

ten days, direct that the dispute be referred to an arbitrator to be named by the Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the Assembly to so move, seconded by my seatmate the member from 

Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Under the Rules and Debate this qualifies as a reasoned amendment and I find it in 

order. It proposes an alternative proposition to that which is before the House and I quote from May, 

page 414: 

 

The object of an amendment may be either to modify a question in such a way as to increase its 

acceptability and to present to the House a different proposition as in alternative to the original 

question. 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

21 

The later purpose may be effected by moving to omit all or most of the words of the question after the 

first word ‗That‘ and to substitute in their place other words of a different import. In that case the 

debate that follows is not restricted to the amendment but includes the purpose both of the 

amendment and of the motion, both matters being under the consideration of the House as alternative 

propositions. 

 

I think the Members will agree that this qualifies as an alternative proposition and the debate continues 

on the motion and the amendment concurrently. 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, in listening this morning and again this afternoon 

with a good deal of interest to both the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) setting 

forth the views of their respective groups on the Bill that is before the House, although I wasn‘t prepared 

for the amendment that was introduced a moment ago, I would like to confine, because of that, my 

remarks chiefly to the Bill that is before the House rather than to the amendment. I will have a comment 

on the amendment at the conclusion of my address. 

 

I did notice in the remarks of both of these gentlemen a skirting of the real cause of much of the labor 

unrest that we see in our own province and across Canada. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this cannot be 

ignored in the context of the decision that we are being asked to make here during this particular session. 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that one of the underlying causes for much of the demands of labor today is this 

very serious question of inflation. I have heard a good deal said lately both from the Government in 

Ottawa and various other governmental authorities about the seriousness of the inflationary trend in 

Canada and of the spiralling costs to the consumer and to the consuming public. And I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that if there is one thing that the Premier of the province and the Prime Minister have in 

common, and I believe it is only one thing, it is that they talk about curbing spending, talk about cutting 

back and holding the line but fail to set an example themselves in government spending. It has struck me 

that in this present dispute the amount of increase that is being sought is not inconsistent with many of 

the increases that are being granted across this nation and it most certainly is small when you compare it 

to the drastic increases in spending that we have seen by this Government in the last two sessions that 

were announced through the budgets. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — How are you voting? 

 

Mr. Pederson: — I am going to get to that in a moment, Mr. Premier. Patience is a virtue that the 

Premier seldom possesses. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that until the Government can set an example of holding the line it has very little 

right to ask others to take a similar position. The right to impose what I would call a ―Do as I say, but 

not as I do‘ attitude on any section of the economy should, in my opinion, be forfeited by this 

Government if it is not prepared to act in a fashion that indicates its concern for this serious problem in 

the rise in costs, that I mentioned, to consumers. 

 

Now basically, Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to compulsory 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

22 

arbitration in labor disputes as a broad basic principle. However, I must hasten to add, before some of 

my friends here to the right get too enthusiastic over that statement, that I am more strongly opposed to 

the present prospect of thousands of people in this province within the next few days perhaps of being 

unable to heat their homes, and of many industries being unable to operate all because of the absence of 

natural gas. This gives me a great deal of concern. 

 

Compulsory arbitration I readily admit can be a vicious thing. It may solve an immediate crisis but its 

long term results could easily create more crises which could seriously undermine our economy and 

perhaps even destroy that traditional respect for the law which is such an important part of our 

democracy. After all, in my opinion, arbitrators are human beings and, whether they be appointed by the 

disputing employer and trade union or by the Government, their natural inclination will not be to make a 

finding which is just and proper, but rather to arrive at a decision which would be somewhere in 

between the union‘s last demand the company‘s last offer, and which hopefully will be relatively 

acceptable to both sides. By itself and on the surface of things this may seem like a reasonable solution 

to the problem and may not be too serious, but I notice that it has been said many times by people on 

both sides in this recent railway dispute that compulsory arbitration can only mean that there will be no 

real and genuine negotiations since both parties will refuse to make their real positions known because 

those real positions would be simply stepping stones which would ultimately be used by the compulsory 

arbitrator. 

 

In the present dispute between the OCAW and the SPC my understanding is that there is only four per 

cent between what the union demands and what the corporation offers. Both the union and the 

corporation management have known beforehand that their negotiations would end up in compulsory 

arbitration and we can bet our last dollar that rather than being just a four per cent difference at this time 

there will probably be at least a 14 per cent difference. 

 

The union knows beforehand that compulsory arbitration lies at the end of the row and rather than 

commence negotiations by asking for eight per cent or ten percent increase in wages and then gradually 

cutting them down during the course of negotiations it would commence by asking for 20 or 25 per cent 

and then flatly refuse to change its position during negotiations so that when it came to final and 

compulsory arbitration it would have a greater figure on balance. Union leaders, Mr. Speaker, don‘t 

have to be mathematical geniuses to be able to figure out that they would do far better under compulsory 

arbitration if the arbitrator is faced with the union demand of say 25 or 30 per cent and a company offer 

of three or four per cent than they would do if the union demand under normal arbitration was say, as in 

this dispute, eight per cent and the company offer four per cent. If this proposed legislation does become 

law and the present OCAW-SPC dispute ends up before a compulsory arbitrator, then I think we can all 

safely assume that the settlement will be something on the order of six per cent. Somewhere in between 

the union demand of eight and the company‘s offer of four per cent, and, of course, that may be a 

perfectly fair and equitable award in this particular dispute. I am not arguing about that. But what will 

the situation be two months from now or six months from now if negotiations between the electrical 

workers of the SPC also end up before a compulsory arbitrator. A six per cent increase in that case may 

be both 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

23 

unreasonable and unjust, I don‘t know that. But if the compulsory arbitrator makes an award in the 

present dispute of six per cent and then makes a different one dealing with the electrical workers later 

on, we‘re going to hear screams of justifiable rage and indignation and cries of injustice from either one 

side or the other, perhaps from both. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you cannot apply the situation in one particular case against another, but I 

think that one of the dangers of compulsory arbitration is that the tendency is to level and to strike an 

average which is used as a yardstick in future decisions. Ultimately, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this type 

of situation if repeated often enough must have a very serious effect on the remaining free collective 

bargaining agreements, until we arrive at the point where in effect the Government through its 

compulsory arbitrator fixes wages for all segments of the economy. I have heard a good deal of talk 

from my friends on this side that this might be a good idea, not perhaps in union matters but in general, 

to fix the prices that various people will get for their commodities. Some of my farmer friends on this 

side waxed very vehemently about the prices for farm machinery and they suggested they should be 

fixed. Well, this may suit the ideal of this party on this side but it certainly doesn‘t suit the ideals of the 

Conservative party. 

 

The other and equally serious danger, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that can result from this type of 

legislation is a rather shocking thing that we have seen in Canada for the past week or so where 

thousands of railway workers have either refused or have failed to return to work in open violation of the 

law of this country. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that Canadians have witnessed and have been witnessing in 

other cases a tremendous breakdown of the laws of our land. The ordinary man and woman is brought 

up to respect the law and to accept it. It‘s a well known fact that no law can please everyone. It is 

equally true that whether you agree with the law of the land or not it must be obeyed, and yet, as I have 

stated many times, there must be justice in order to expect compliance with the law. That is something, 

Mr. Speaker, the Government when introducing bills must at all times bear in mind. There must be 

justice and there must be the type of deterrent that will compel if necessary adherence to the law. I have 

noticed in this Bill the deterrent of decertification. This may in fact be a sufficient threat to bring about 

enforcement of the Act, but I want to warn the Government what it is letting itself in for. It must be 

prepared to act if the deterrent that has been put in the Act is not effective. In other words, the 

Government has to take some extremely drastic action if its orders through the arbitrator that is 

appointed are flouted and the law is broken. 

 

I don‘t have a perfect answer to this problem, I don‘t believe anybody has, certainly not as far as I have 

been able to determine. But I would strongly urge this Government to limit its present legislation to 

solving this present dispute that we are facing at the present time rather than having it apply to any 

number of disputes which may arise in the future. 

 

I believe that a special session was necessary, contrary to what some of my friends think. I believe that 

the situation is of an emergency nature and had to be attended to very quickly. Then, Mr. Speaker, let us 

deal with the emergency and not other proposals which may or may not arise in the future. I would urge 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

24 

this Government to consider as well as not only dealing with this particular dispute at the present time 

but following this up by the establishment of an all-party commission with representatives from labor 

and management who would sit down over the next few months to take a hard look at this entire 

problem and to come forward if possible with recommendations which can be the basis at some future 

session for sensible and realistic legislation and which will not have the inherent dangers that I have 

mentioned in the presently proposed legislation. 

 

I have heard that the State of Massachusetts has a plan supported by legislation which largely avoids 

these dangers that I have outlined. We hear much as we have done today about the absence of serious 

labor management disputes in Sweden. These are areas, Mr. Speaker, which could be studied by such a 

commission. Doubtless there are many others that could and would be studied and reported on to the 

ultimate benefit of this province. Here in Saskatchewan only a few months ago we saw what I consider a 

truly remarkable thing when labor and management arrived at a consensus, granted not a complete 

agreement, but certainly a consensus as to amendments to our Trade Union Act. Surely it is not 

impossible that the same sort of consensus could be arrived at as the solution to the very serious sort of 

problem we are presently facing. And Surely, Mr. Speaker, we owe it to both labor and management and 

to all of the people of this province to make and attempt to arrive at that sort of consensus. But having 

said all those things, I want to deal with the other side of the coin as well, because I have been equally 

disturbed by what I consider are some of the irresponsible activities in which unions have found 

themselves engaged. 

 

The right to strike I wish to remind unions carries with it a responsibility to the nation and to its citizens. 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that when that responsibility is ignored, as I believe it has been in many cases 

recently, then the right to strike must be removed. It is the only weapon left to the ordinary man and 

woman in the street and the people who pay the bill for this nation. In the opinion of many people, and I 

certainly count myself as one of them, strikes are more and more being waged against the innocent 

bystander rather than against management as claimed. 

 

When the railways went on strike a few weeks ago it was claimed they were striking against the railway. 

Well, let‘s examine that. Who are the railways? Paid employees to a large extent exactly like the fellows 

who went on strike. Who were the sufferers? The railroads? Most certainly not. Government subsidies 

provided by the taxpayers of the nation will pick up the shot. The sufferers were people like myself, the 

farmers, who had the fear of not being able to move their grain held over their heads; the fruit growers, 

struck at a time when they had to move their fruit; the potash industry, which would be tied up in a 

matter of days. 

 

What about the hospital strike in Quebec of recent months? Was it against the hospitals? What type of 

punishment was levied by the workers against the hospitals? Absolutely none, Mr. Speaker. Their strike 

was directed against those who were sick requiring the aid and assistance that a hospital could give 

them. 

 

What about the SPC today? Who are the SPC? Paid employees of the people of this province, and the 

unions are striking against not the management but against you and me who are the consumers of natural 

gas. These are the things, Mr. Speaker, that must be 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

25 

borne in mind and must be analyzed in talk about the responsible action on the part of unions. 

 

Are unions going to be allowed to continue to strike against everyone in the economy, those completely 

unable to defend themselves? Farmers over and over again, over the period of the last ten to fifteen 

years, have had to sit by and take it in the neck, when the grain handlers struck, when the Great Lakes 

went on strike, when the railways strike. Every time you sit out there in your combine you wonder how 

in heaven‘s name you are going to meet your gas bill while these fellows are parading up and down and 

holding up the works. Are they striking against the railroads or are they striking against me? 

 

I have heard a good deal of talk, some of my friends on this side are great boys as holding this up, about 

the power of big business as a horrible example of the misuse of power. And in many cases it is correct, 

their statements are correct. There have been misuses and many of them. 

 

But how often do we hear someone that has the courage to stand up and tackle this monolithic monster 

of irresponsible union activity? Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, there are literally hundreds of 

responsible, proper-run unions in this country, which are doing the job that they were designed to do, 

protecting their workers from undue influence, from discrimination and soon. But for everyone of them 

or perhaps I should amend that to every five of them there are one or two unions which don‘t care if they 

bring the nation to its knees as long as their demands are met. These are the things that have to be taken 

into consideration when we talk about responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk about the action of the SPC employees who are now on strike when I hear on the radio this 

morning, coming down, that they are picketing the power plants, an entirely separate organization, an 

entirely separate setup. Why are they doing that? Do they want to cut my power off too? That‘s all they 

are trying to do. What are they doing picketing the banks? Do they want to prohibit people from using 

the services of the banks? The answer is that they are picketing the banks because some people paid 

power bills at the banks. This type of irresponsibility, Mr. Speaker, does nothing to enhance the stature 

of unions and it does in fact, Mr. Speaker, lead to the type of legislation that has been placed before us 

today. I believe that the great weapon that is being used by unions today, many unions today, is the 

weapon of fear. Frighten the people and the nation badly enough and your demands will be met. 

 

I‘ve mentioned some of these types of frightening tactics that have been used by railway workers, by 

hospital workers in Quebec, in the grain handlers‘ strike and so on. I could name them by the dozen, 

where the people of the nation became so aroused and frightened because of the dire effects of the 

economy that they had to back down and demand of the government that they settle. In fact they remind 

me very much of the story of the very naughty little boy who went to school and was taken there on the 

first day by this mother who was very indulgent. When she had a talk with the teacher she said, ―Well 

now, my little boy is very sensitive. You mustn‘t raise your voice to him, you mustn‘t be mean to him, 

you mustn‘t do anything, but if he does misbehave just by chance, just slap the boy next to him and that 

will so frighten him and he will behave for the rest of the day‖. That‘s 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

26 

what unions are doing. They hope that if they slap the farmers and the ordinary people hard enough 

governments will take notice. Again I come back to make my point that I am talking about the type of 

irresponsible action by unions that strike not against those people that they are trying to strike against 

but those who are innocent bystanders in the fashion that I mentioned just a moment ago. 

 

I protest, Mr. Speaker, I believe I speak for thousands of people when I voice that protest of union 

disputes invading the private lives of our citizens. Over and over again these sorts of things have 

happened and I believe that the time has come to cry ‗Halt‘ to that type of a situation. 

 

I have had a look at the amendment that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) introduced. I 

only had a moment to read it while he was giving it to the House and I fund that this amendment deals 

also with too many aspects of the whole problem to be entertained seriously at this time. If he had 

stopped his amendment with a suggestion that this Bill be set aside and we deal only with the present 

dispute, I would support, but I cannot support it, Mr. Speaker, on those grounds and I will, with those 

reservations that I have made, support the main Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR! 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, in opening my remarks I would just 

like to extend my congratulations to the last speaker for his remarks in this debate. I believe that he has 

indicated to us all the seriousness of the position that we find ourselves in. This is a time when we have 

a responsibility as Members of this House to take into account the effect of the action that we are 

undertaking today on every man, woman, and child in the province of Saskatchewan. I want to express 

my appreciation and I am sure of the Government for the understanding way in which the hon. Member 

(Mr. Pederson) has accepted his position in this House and has offered his support of the Bill that is 

being presented to you today. I do want to say . . . 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — You have a change of plan. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — . . . Mr. Speaker, that I don‘t think there is anyone in this House, in spite of the levity 

of the Member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) who is very happy about the prospect of bringing in the 

legislation. I am going to state here that we are forced to bring in this legislation today because of the 

irresponsible activities of a very few individuals in our province and, I think, in our country generally. 

 

We have been somewhat late, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with this particular matter, much later than most 

of the provinces in this country of ours. When anyone speaks about the Government taking irresponsible 

action, surely when we have the example that can be placed before this House of at least five other 

provinces in Canada having somewhat similar legislation on their statute books and one other province 

which has taken this action in a single instance, then for members of this House to say that this is an 

irresponsible action, one that has not been given serious 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

27 

consideration, to make that charge in this House as a reason for not putting through the legislation I 

think is a false argument. The people of most of the provinces in Canada have accepted the fact that in 

certain instances the general public must be defended from abuse from not only labor but from labor and 

management. I don‘t think that this Act today is being levelled any more at the working people of our 

province than it is being pointed at management as well. Both management and labor have to accept 

their responsibilities in this province and in this nation, have to accept their responsibility to the men and 

women that make up our country as citizens of Canada. And so I say today that I am proud of the 

remarks that were made by the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) in this debate, indicating for once 

that surely we as members of the Legislature should be willing to give serious consideration to the needs 

of the average citizen in our province and also to defend his rights. After all, I feel that the people of our 

province have rights to have the gas that is provided in their homes; they have rights to have the 

electricity that has been provided in their homes and in the factories and in the places of business in this 

province. They have the right to turn on their taps and have the health-giving waters that flow from 

those taps at any day without those rights being challenged by a few individuals, as has taken place 

within the last two weeks. And so I say actually what we are doing today is recognizing the rights of Mr. 

and Mrs. Saskatchewan when we pass this measure. 

 

You know, when I look at the statute books of the Province of Saskatchewan, I find that on at least 20 

occasions there have been references made by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) to the 

restriction of the rights of the workers in the unions by this measure. I want to indicate here that we 

already have 20 pieces of legislation on the statute books of this province which restricted the rights of 

some individuals in order to give advantages to the laboring man and the worker in this province. Surely 

just once we should be able to bring into this House a measure which will give some protection to the 

average person in this province when we have on 20 occasions all of us voted that rights be taken away 

from individuals in this province so that labor might have certain opportunities. 

 

I am going to read them to you because every one of them has restricted the rights of someone in this 

province. In fact, almost every piece of that legislation has restricted ordinary conciliation and labor 

disputes; it has settled in almost every instance one which would be an ordinary argument point between 

management and labor when they went to the conciliation table. And so the Government of our province 

and the Government of most provinces have in their wisdom decided that legislation like this throughout 

the years has been necessary in order to protect the working man from abuses that might be brought on 

by his employer. 

 

We find that we have the Annual Holidays Act, the Apprenticeship and Tradesmen‘s Qualification Act 

which might not be termed in that sense, Blind Workmen‘s Compensation Act, the Department of 

Labour Act, in which there are many provisions, Employees‘ Wage Act, Employment Agencies Act, 

Equal Pay Act, Factories Act, Fair Employment Practices Act, Female Employment Act, Hours of Work 

Act, Industrial Standards Act, Minimum Wage Act, One Day‘s Rest in Seven Act, Trade Schools 

Regulation Act, the Trade Union Act itself, the Wages Recovery Act, Weekly Half-Holiday Act and the 

Workmen‘s Compensation Act. Everyone of these pieces of legislation has restricted the rights and the 

freedom of someone in our 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

28 

province in order to provide benefits to our working people. I say there is no one on this side of the 

House and certainly no one in this Legislature that would state that these Acts should not be on the 

statute books of this province. But I do say that the time has come to place on the statute books 

legislation which will protect the average person in this province from the abuses of both labor and 

management in labor disputes. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) in opening his remarks made reference to the fact that the 

Government had been unable to meet the problem that had been placed before us. I am going to state 

here that the Government has proven that it is prepared to take the steps to meet the problem that we 

face today. We are doing that in this Legislature. We are not waiting until the problem gets to the extent 

where the squeeze the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) said that this Act would provide, where the 

squeeze might be on the other foot, and the corporation or the Government of the people of this province 

would be forced, because of the fact that winter was upon us, to satisfy the demands that the union 

would make in order to make certain that the people of this province would be protected during the 

winter months. And of course, that is what would have happened had the Government taken the action 

that has been suggested by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) here this afternoon. This is exactly 

what would have happened. It was not the Government that ended the negotiations in this instance, it 

was not the Power Corporation, it was not management. Management was prepared to remain at the 

negotiation table, it was prepared to talk for the next two months if necessary at the negotiation table. It 

was the union officials that ended negotiations very summarily. The Power Corporation hadn‘t agreed 

that things had come to the point where they had to ask the Department of Labour for labor conciliation 

or for a conciliator to come into this problem. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) himself indicated that it had been a very short period in which 

negotiations had taken place and I agree with him. I agree with him that the union had not been prepared 

to sit down long enough with management in order to solve this problem. Instead they went out on strike 

very summarily just about two weeks after negotiations had actually started on the matter of salary. I 

want to mention here that, when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) referred to this fact and stated 

that the corporation had not made an offer with regard to wages to the employees until August 12th, this 

was under the usual practice that had been followed since about 1961 in the negotiations between the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the union involved. The practice had been that the union 

presented its brief at the beginning of negotiations; but from there on the brief was covered, various 

items were considered and it was almost automatic that it was usually towards the end of the 

negotiations before the offer was made to the Power Corporation as far as salary was concerned. On 

August 12th, it was felt that this position had been arrived at and other points in the agreement had been 

discussed and covered. So the matter of wages was brought forward and offer was made by the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation to the union at that time. 

 

I think what was missed by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) was the fact that the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation was the only party to the negotiations that had attempted, between then and the time 

that the strike was called, to alter its position in any way, shape or form in order to state that you had had 

some consideration to conciliation provided by the union as well 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

29 

as management. And so, all of a sudden the union decided that there were to be no further negotiations 

and it came in to a meeting and presented the Power Corporation with demands, stating that its members 

were to go out on strike and with the demands of what they wanted the Power Corporation to do in order 

to make this possible. When anyone states that the Power Corporation was not asked to close down its 

operation, which would have meant no gas for the people of this province 24 hours after this document 

has been delivered and the strike had begun, all he has to do is read this document that I have in my 

hand which gave orders. Someone has said, ―Read it‖, and I am prepared to do this. 

 

The union undertakes: 

 

(1) to provide the company with all union personnel for the purpose of effecting an expeditious, 
orderly and safe shutdown of the company‘s operations excepting such personnel as may be 

absent from work through union business; 

 

Anyone that says the union did not suggest shutting down the operations of the corporation is making a 

false statement. 

 

(2) to allow the company a period of 24 hours, from the time strike notice has been served upon the 
company in which to effect an orderly and safe shutdown of its operations; 

 

(3) to agree to permit free and unobstructed entrance to company premises and locations to personnel 
of the Canadian Corps of Commissionaires employed for the sole purpose of maintaining a safety 

vigil of the premises of the company in those locations where they are so employed as of this date. 

 

And when the provisions that the company was to undertake. This is what the union was going to do. 

 

The company was: 

 

(a) to commence procedures for an expeditious, orderly and safe shutdown of operations at a time 
specified by the union in accordance with section 2 (b); 

 

This was the 2(b) at the top of the letter. 

 

(b) to retain all employees on the payroll for a period of 24 hours from the time strike notice has been 
served upon the company by the union and to pay to such employees their regular rates of pay 

plus any overtime rates for any overtime that may be required in the 24 hours period for the sole 

purpose only of effecting a safe and orderly shutdown; 

 

(c) that in the shutdown operations all employees will be employed only in their respective 
classifications, departments and job locations; 

 

(d) to use no contract labor in the shutdown of its operations or during the strike of the union against 
the company; 

 

(e) to pay all employees their accrued earning due them 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

30 

as of the effective time and date of strike action within seven days following such time and date of 

strike action; 

 

(f) to extend the following option to employees who still have unused vacation credits: 
 

(i) leave such credits undisturbed for the period of the strike; 
 

(ii) upon written request by registered mail to pay to any employee who may be eligible and 
who so requests any and all vacation pay in respect of any unused vacation credit still 

outstanding . . . 

 

And, of course, they are supposed to do this with no staff, because the staff is all on strike. 

 

. . . such payment to be mailed to the employee within five days of the receipt of the request of the 

same. The vacation and seniority credits shall continue to accrue to all employees for the duration 

of the strike of the union against the company and to maintain the status of and guarantee the 

continue accumulation of all superannuation rights and credits of all employees in the bargaining 

unit for the duration of the strike and to collect from such employees after the strike by means of 

increased payroll deductions in easy instalments, all monies paid on behalf of such employees 

during the strike, to pay all premiums that fall dud during the strike in respect of all things as the 

present group insurance plan covering those employees in the bargaining unit and to collect from 

such employees after the strike by means of increased payroll deductions al monies paid on behalf 

of such employees in respect to the employee portion of contribution. 

 

These are the demands the union made. Of course, it was contradicted in the press when the union stated 

that it had never intended to see the shutdown of operations of the gas operations of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. This definitely gives the lie to this report that appeared in the press on behalf of the 

union that was concerned. It had every intention of the Power Corporation having to shut down all its 

operations and deprive the people of this province of the gas that they need to heat their homes, to help 

operate their businesses, to operate industries. Then, of course, the result of this strike, if allowed to 

continue by our Government, would be eventually to also shut down the electrical operations of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation which would have even more damaging results than those that will be 

effected through the shutdown of gas operations in our province. This, Mr. Speaker, is the intention of 

the union concerned in this particular labor dispute. I contend here today that the action of that union is 

summarily and very quickly ending negotiations and precipitating a strike of its employees has been 

against the best interests of the workers concerned themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I believe quite sincerely that the first duty of each of us as members of 

this Legislature is to protect the life, health and property of the people of our province. When these 

facets of our province are in danger it becomes our 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

31 

responsibility to take action to protect them. We are all aware that the cessation or an impending 

stoppage of services in the field of water, heat, or electricity or gas or hospital services could endanger 

life, health and property. Mr. Speaker, a government is elected to assume responsibilities. Today we are 

assuming our responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan by asking the Members of this House to 

support legislation which is aimed at one thing, the protection of the people from serious jeopardy by 

reason of a labor dispute which cannot be settled due to the stubborn attitude of bargaining agents on 

behalf of both labor and management. I believe we must place responsibility at both levels. I believe we 

must place much of the blame itself on the machinery of negotiations. 

 

The history of bargaining, particularly in the past number of years, does not leave a very good 

impression on anyone who has followed negotiations. It has finally come to the point in our day and age 

in labor disputes where it is a silly game and not a serious effort to sit down and determine what industry 

or management can pay and what effect the decision will have on the general good. One side picks a 

ridiculously high figure and the other a ridiculously low figure, hoping eventually to end up some place 

in the centre. Why management and labor cannot start by working together throughout the year to 

realize the best possible return for the worker, I do not know. This, of course, would not serve the 

interests of those on both sides who desire to ferment distrust between worker and management to 

promote their own peculiar ends and desires. 

 

In proposing the legislation before you, the Government is preparing to take on itself a duty which is 

rightly theirs. That duty is to determine when a labor dispute might place in serious jeopardy the people 

of our province. If the judgement of the Government is wrong in the use of such legislation, then this 

will be indicated by the people at the next election, in this province or wherever that government might 

be. 

 

This legislation, as any other, need never be used. I am prepared to suggest that it will never be used. In 

fact, if we look at our neighboring province of Alberta, very little has been said about their labor 

legislation, and yet the major part of the legislation that has been placed before you comes from the 

Alberta Act and not from B.C., and not from any other province but the province of Alberta. 

 

We have heard very little in the past, at least I have heard very little, about labor difficulties in Alberta. 

In fact, I understand that this Act has never had to be used because I think it works in spite of what some 

people here have said. I think it brings about more understanding a willingness of labor and management 

to try to solve their problems on a voluntary basis before they get into the spot where government has to 

come in and invoke compulsory arbitration. And I think today as we meet here that we may never see 

the day, any of us, when this legislation will be used, but it will be here to protect the interests of the 

people of this province in case an emergency arises. Some people say we should just confine it to this 

one labor dispute, but what if another one arose two months and we had to call Members back for that? 

Another one six months hence and had to pass another Bill. Why not place the responsibility in the 

hands of the people where it should be, the elected people of the province. Their people back home have 

elected them to accept responsibilities like this, to protect their interest as individuals in 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

32 

this province. So I say, we as Members have a right and a responsibility to accept some responsibilities 

for the health, life and the property of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. This is exactly what 

this Bill indicates. I believe this Bill will go a long way to freeing the individual from fear, not only the 

non-union person, but also the person who is a member of a union in this province because he will know 

that he has a final recourse which will actually cost him nothing, that will not result in a strike, no loss of 

pay. He has a recourse through the legislation passed by this Legislature in order to get a just result to 

his demands for increased pay. So I say, I don‘t think the working man has anything to fear from this 

legislation. I think he has much in the long run to gain. 

 

This Act, I suspect, will bring quicker settlements in the future, will not work as a weapon against the 

worker but as a weapon for both sides. In the past, as I indicated earlier, lip service has been given to 

voluntary conciliation, only to have both parties or one refuse the results of such conciliation. If we had 

undertaken voluntary conciliation in this instance and gone on for six to eight weeks with conciliations 

and then neither party, or one of the parties had refused to accept, we would have found ourselves in the 

middle of the month o f November when no one here can estimate what the weather conditions might be 

like. The stoppage of gas service at that time of the year for one day might have caused untold harm to 

many people in the province of Saskatchewan. That is one reason why the Government felt that if it was 

going to take this action, this was the time to take it, not at a time of the year when the people of this 

province might be seriously harmed because of actions and because of a strike held at that particular 

time. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Should have done this last April. 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — The dispute which has resulted in our being called together today has resulted from 

an attempt to have opposites meet. There has been an attitude of distrust between the union and 

management involved for over two years, not so much on the part of management but on the part of 

unions. With statements by the leaders of this union and their friends to the effect that they were going 

to take political action to see the end of the Government that is now in power, what else could you call it 

but a threat by that particular union against the Government of the day? So I say that there is every 

reason why today there is difficulty between the union and management and it was started originally by 

the leaders of the union concerned. From the beginning union representatives let it be known they were 

starting from eight per cent and would not move from that point. 

 

As I have already pointed out, negotiations commenced March 18th, 1966, and between that date and 

September 1st, 27 meeting were held between the union and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 

many of which were all-day meetings. No meetings were held in the period between April 26, 1996 and 

June 22, 1966, not at the request of management but at the request of the union, which was fighting for 

its own rights against a raid by an opposite union. So it took two months off from negotiation at its own 

request in order to try to save their own necks as union leaders in this province. During all this time up 

to September 1st, no serious effort has been made by the union to bargain at any time. In the same 

period 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

33 

management has made three concessions in the salary negotiations offers and intimated at the final 

meeting a further desire to continue negotiations with the prospect of still further changes on the part of 

management if the union would show any sincere desire to negotiate. 

 

If the union truly was interested in using the present voluntary methods of conciliation it did not so 

indicate. Surely if the present measures in the Trade Union Act are so sacred to the union movement in 

this province, why was it that the union before accepting strike as a weapon against the people of this 

province didn‘t itself ask for these conciliation proceedings under the Trade Union Act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Instead of calling for a voluntary conciliation board under the Act of this province, it 

ceased negotiations, made unreasonable demands which I have already read to you on the management, 

and then went on strike. This placed the company in an impossible position. It could only take 

conciliation proceedings itself under the Trade Union Act. What would this have accomplished? From 

its actions during negotiations the union has not shown any real desire to bargain. Any conciliation 

would have used up possibly six to eight weeks and, if both sides did not agree with the result, brought 

us to winter time when a gas strike for even one day might present serious problems. 

 

Who would have a club then? The union, of course. Who will have a club if this legislation is passed? 

The people of this province through its elected Government. Had the Government not done this it would 

have been open to serious criticism for anything that might have happened during the winter months in 

the months that lie ahead. 

 

What will happen now and from this time on if this legislation is passed is to guarantee protection to the 

people in case of reckless action of a few against the welfare of all? Personally I feel the workers in this 

instance will get much the same pay under any system used. However, the legislation will say to the 

people of Saskatchewan that they need not fear the result in this case because if the worst comes to the 

worst, the Government will not allow the public at large to suffer the consequences. 

 

One wonders if there has been a sincere wish to settle. Last year the settlement was made without a 

strike in November, not August or September. I don‘t know what the rush was about a strike. Last year 

the union was quite happy to settle negotiations in the month of November. All of a sudden it becomes a 

big rush and it must be settled in the month of August or it is going to go on strike. There is every reason 

to suspect that a reasonable settlement could have been reached by November again with proper 

negotiation systems used. Let me remind Members that in this instance it was not management again 

that broke of negotiations to use the big stick of a strike but the union, so that it could use the strike 

weapon at a time when it might not serious repercussions to upset the public. I think this was the reason. 

It felt at the present time the public might not get incensed by its actions because the weather is rather 

warm; problems would not become as serious as they would in the winter months. So it picked this time 

to do it hoping to scare management because of the prospect of the upcoming winter months. Now no 

one need 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

34 

be scared and management and labor can sit down at the table and make a serious attempt at 

negotiations. 

 

Why do I claim there is no threat to anyone of the parties? I say that because of the procedure which 

constitutes a board very similar to the present Voluntary Board that we have in the Trade Union Act in 

this province. The only difference is that the decision of this Board must be binding on both parties. 

However both parties have first recourse to a Voluntary Board still if they desire to use the particular 

Act that we have on the statute books at the moment under the Trade Union Act of this province. If 

conciliation means anything the use of this Board, with the passage of this Act, should make the more 

extensive use of the present measures possible in order to settle disputes between management and 

labor. This legislation chooses only those aspects of business which might most closely involve the 

health, life and property of the people of this province. The machinery is much the same as that already 

approved by labor and management through the present Trade Union Act. 

 

Any legislation to be meaningful must have penalty clauses. We have seen the ridiculous example in the 

last two weeks of unions and individuals defying the laws of the land, the government unable to enforce 

the laws. This session would be a waste of time if we were to pass legislation which people could feel 

they could flout and no action would be taken against them. Anyone that is law-abiding has nothing to 

fear from this legislation. Anyone who wishes to flout the law should have fear as to the consequences 

of his actions. 

 

I believe it is worthwhile to look at the position of the workers in the SPC to determine how just the 

demands are. Because of recent labor demands, the request of the SPC workers might be adjudged fair. 

But I think that we must take into account, when we look at all the settlements that have been made in 

the last 12 months in various industries in Canada that they is no relationship whatsoever between the 

amount that one industry has received and the amount that another industry has received. We must look 

at the actual salaries received by the individuals in a particular working group, we must look at the 

circumstances and think of the possibility of that industry being able to pay the salaries and still operate, 

because, surely if a business had to close because of salaries that were too high, those workers would be 

out of work completely and it would be no help to the workers concerned. 

 

When one compares wages of SPC personnel with others in Saskatchewan and other provinces, our rates 

are as high as, if not higher than, the best. The rates offered at the moment will place clerical staff in 

SPC much above similar people in public service and ahead by and large of those in other corporations 

and businesses in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would just like for a moment in order to bear out my argument in this regard to read to you the 

statistics of salaries paid in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation in comparison with the Saskatchewan 

Public Service, Saskatchewan Government Telephones, and the Government Insurance. I will take here 

a junior clerk steno as one position. The starting wage under the last offer made by the Power 

Corporation, under a new arrangement would be $246 a month. The Saskatchewan Public Service is an 

equivalent position is $218 a month; Saskatchewan Government Telephones is 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

35 

an equivalent position, $210 a month; Government Insurance, exactly the same at $246 a month. So 

there is only one of those four organizations that has a salary as high as a junior clerk steno would have 

under the last offer made by the Power Corporation. 

 

Then we have the key punch operator as another example. The offer of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation would place the starting salary at $281 a month; in the Saskatchewan Public Service a 

similar position is $249 a month; Saskatchewan Government Telephones, $210 a month; and the 

Government Insurance, $254 a month. In other words, the offer places the employees of the Power 

Corporation in the highest paid bracket as far as that particular position is concerned. 

 

Then we come down to the final one that I will use as far as the clerical positions are concerned, pay 

group five of clerks. A starting wage under the last offer by the corporation would be $348 a month; 

Saskatchewan Public Service is $309 a month; Saskatchewan Government Telephones, $306 a month; 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance, $313 a month. And the low and high categories relate pretty well 

as you go through these various brackets of jobs in the Power Corporation and the other organizations. 

 

How many Members in this House feel that it would be fair for us to be paying in one of the operations 

that the Government has something to do with a salary which is much above that of any of the others 

doing equivalent work, in other positions in the Government service. That is what the union has been 

asking of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. That indicates the fairness or the justice of the demands 

that they have made on management in this case. 

 

And now to go to the matter of wage comparisons with regard to laboring classifications: caretaker, the 

offer by the SPC of $332 starting wage per month; Saskatchewan Public Service is $285 a month; 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones, $315 a month; Government Insurance, $296 a month. The 

storeman, the latest offer of the Power Corporation starting wage again is $332; Saskatchewan Public 

Service, $260; Saskatchewan Government Telephones, $299; and Government Insurance, $313, again 

indicating that in the laboring classifications the employees of the Power Corporation are the highest 

paid employees that we have any place in our Public Service in the province of Saskatchewan. I ask you 

as Members whether you feel that this is just, that a man doing exactly the same type of work today 

should be demanding more than our public service has already agreed to next year in spite of the fact he 

is much higher at the present moment. 

 

And then when we get into these specialist classifications for gas employees; for a gas meter repairman, 

the rates offered by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation are much higher than in the Alberta utilities, 

$406 a month, starting wage; Alberta Utilities, $361 a month; Greater Winnipeg gas is a bit higher at 

$428 a month. For a gas fitter serviceman, as the starting wage the Power corporation offers $532; 

starring wage in the Greater Winnipeg Gag System is $487 a month; in Alberta Utilities, $446 a month. 

And you can go through the rest of the items on this sheet and you will find in almost every instance that 

employees of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation today are as well paid as, if not better paid than, 

employees doing the same work in the province of Manitoba and Alberta and much better paid than for 

similar jobs here in the province of Saskatchewan. So I say that 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

36 

when you consider matters of importance to labor you cannot take a position that because one industry 

manages to get 30 per cent then everybody should have 30 per cent. This is foolish. It is ridiculous and I 

think it‘s an argument that all of us must get away from in labor disputes if we are to control the 

inflation that has been spoken of on both sides of the House during this present debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the first place it is the responsibility of men themselves to regulate mutual labor 

relations. Only in the event that interested parties are unwilling or unable to fulfil their functions does it 

devolve upon the state to intervene and to deal with labor equitably, safeguarding the standards and aims 

that the common good, properly understood, demands. 

 

This position we have attained. The Government is acting. We ask the support of the Members of this 

Legislature. We ask your support in hope that our actions today might in the end prove good for both 

labor and management and give freedom of mind to the general public in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I think all of us are concerned that we are here 

today. We are concerned because the task upon which we are engaged is a task which I am sure is 

distasteful to many of us and perhaps to all of us in this House. We all recognize, I think, that 

Legislature is an inappropriate place to settle a dispute between management and employees. 

 

Our purpose, I think, was reasonably put by the Premier in his opening address in introducing this Bill 

when he said that our job was to find an appropriate method of settling the strike at the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. That I suggest is what we are here for and I think that all of the other accoutrements 

which have been added to this Bill are matters which would have been best left out of the Bill. 

 

I am not here to deny that problems of this nature can arise again, but I think it is worthwhile to note that 

it is 20 or 25 years since we have had a serious strike in a public utility or in an area of our activity 

where life, health or property might be endangered, seriously endangered. Therefore, it is unlikely I 

think that we are going to be met with a rash of these strikes which the Minister of Public Works (Mr. 

Gardiner) postulated as the basis for this blanket or shotgun legislature. 

 

I certainly take the view that this is a highly isolated experience, a highly isolated incident and that if we 

deal with this one we probably will never have to deal with one again in the legislative lifetime of any of 

us here. I may be wrong but I think that on the record in the past I would be right. This is why I think 

that I will find myself supporting the amendment which asks the Government to settle the power 

dispute, to establish the machinery which will for certain settle the present dispute, and not go farther 

into other areas of activity. In this regard I think the words of the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) 

were particularly well taken. He felt that if we were going to expand our area of compulsory arbitration 

the matter was not an emergent one and it could be the subject of further study by a committee such as 

the one which reviewed the Trade Union Act or by some 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

37 

other body which we might wish to be set up, which the Government might wish to set up to inquire into 

this problem. 

 

I think that there are two essentials. First, and I don‘t want to be misunderstood on this, the employees of 

the gas division of the Power Corporation have to be got back to work. And secondly, we have to find a 

way to get a fair settlement, fair to the employees, fair to the corporation. 

 

A reference was made to the fact that Members on this side don‘t think this session was necessary. What 

we meant to say  perhaps it‘s a little difficult to get across to the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. 

MacDougall) any idea as complicated as this. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That doesn‘t keep him from interrupting, if I may so, Mr. Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald). 

 

It is this, we agree that given the circumstances which have arisen since last Friday, this session is 

necessary, or at least I agree and I believe my colleagues will agree with me. There is no alternative if 

there is a strike in an essential public utility to finding a way around it. Now, It may well bet hat a crash 

program of negotiations could have solved this. That is always a possibility. But I think the Government 

was not wrong in assuming that this would not come to pass and therefore convening the session. 

 

Our criticism is that from March when these negotiations started to September when they broke down, 

the actions on the part of the Government were such that reasonable action would have made this 

session unnecessary. In that sense of the word the session is unnecessary. In the sense of the word that 

we have an emergent problem that must be dealt with, then of course, the session is necessary. 

 

Now, I want, before turning to the bulk of my remarks, to just comment on a few of the remarks of the 

Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner), the Member for Melville. He is engaged in the relatively 

age-old operation of picking classifications and categories and making comparisons. Anyone who has 

been doing a bit of union negotiating knows  I see from the smile that flickers over the face of the 

Member for Touchwood (Mr. Trapp) that he has done a bit of this  that you can easily pick out 

categories bearing the same name in union contracts and establish that almost any employer is paying 

more than almost any other employer, if you are carefully selective in your categories and pick the 

names carefully, and if, of course, you don‘t mention some other matters which might be very germane. 

You will note and I will have noted that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) didn‘t mention 

some matters which were very germane. He did not mention, for example, that when comparing the 

Power Corporation with the SGEA, Saskatchewan Government Employees Association, that the one 

group worked 36 1/4 hours a week and the other group worked 40 hours a week. This might well have a 

considerable effect on the wage comparisons. This one got overlooked in his review of the comparisons. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I believe, . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, that period of time 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

38 

would justify, if you were paying on a straight time basis, SPC wages on the average of over ten percent 

higher than SGEA wages. 

 

I am not here going to enter into a discussion of this category or that category. I think form a review of 

those by the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) it is reasonably obvious that the key punch 

operator in one utility who is making almost $100 less than the key punch operator in the other is not 

performing the same function. There must be some variant in function because in point of fact these 

wages for the work that has been done have kept more or less pace over the last 15 or 20 years because 

the comparisons are naturally very apt comparisons, comparisons which will be made readily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, our purpose here today is to find a way of settling the Power Corporation 

dispute and Members on both sides agree that this dispute can only be settled at this point by 

compulsory arbitration. But I want to point out to this House that when we agree to this we are 

legislating away the right of a group of people to withdraw their services, not to work for someone you 

don‘t want to work for. The Common Law of England, hundreds of years ago, established the 

proposition that no one had to work for an employer he did not want to work for except under penal 

sentence. Now then, sometime later, perhaps a hundred years ago, the principle developed that labor 

could combine to withdraw their services. This development of the law of trade unions was such that at 

least 50 years ago it was well established that in ordinary circumstances any group of employees had the 

right to join together to with draw their services. As Paul Martin calls it, the right to strike is a basic civil 

right. But as other Members have pointed out, basic civil rights of employees are not their only rights 

around. Citizens have rights too and citizens have a right to more or less continuous service in essential 

public services. They have no right to ask management to spend huge sums of money so there won‘t be 

a momentary interruption. They have no right to ask labor to give up all sorts of rights so there won‘t be 

a momentary interruption. But basically they have the right to continued services of an essential public 

nature. 

 

This means that it may be necessary for us to take away private rights to accommodate this public right 

and we have well recognized this in times of war. We have recognized it with respect to police. We have 

recognized it with respect to firemen and I am prepared to say that under extreme circumstance we must 

recognize it with respect to power workers or gas workers. All I am saying is that before we invoke this 

principle we should not do that unless it is necessary. We should only do it to the extent necessary and 

we should do it in the fairest way possible to the person whose rights were taken away. 

 

I think that most Members would agree with that proposition. We start out with a proposition that the 

right to strike is a basic public right, a basic civil right developed over a couple of hundred years. We 

find that we have to take it away for good and sufficient reasons. But we believe that we should not take 

it away to any greater extent than the situation demands. With that background we have to ask ourselves: 

is this Bill necessary? And I have already indicated that when all else has failed, when we have an 

interruption in an essential public service, then a strike must be terminated and fair and equitable 

arbitration procedures are then justified. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

39 

I want to direct my remarks to two questions. Has the Government done everything reasonable possible, 

and those who have read the Bill will recognize that phrase, to prevent the strike? Secondly, are the 

provisions of the Bill fair and reasonable? 

 

Let‘s turn to the question of whether the Government has done everything reasonably possible to 

prevent the strike. Has the Government seen to it that its agency, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 

has made reasonable and fair wage offers and made them without protracted haggling. This involves, 

perhaps, a greater analysis of the facts that this House is able to carry on at this time but a few bare 

bones will raise some very serious questions. The contract was to expire on May 31st. Negotiations 

commenced on March 18th. The corporation had made no wage offer by the end of March, by the end of 

April, by the end of May, by the end of June, by the end of July. There were certainly meetings in April, 

in July and June . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — None in June. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — None in June, April, May, July . . . 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — End of April and . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, at any rate, there were, prior to the first offer by the corporation, perhaps 20 

meetings, perhaps 20 meetings prior to the first offer. Now that is a very substantial number of meetings 

to drag one‘s feet. One can concede that there may well have been discussions on general terms, but I 

don‘t think it would have taken any great skill on the part of the corporation‘s negotiators to realize that 

the union and more particularly its negotiators to realize that the union and more particularly its 

members were becoming very restive at what they regarded as undue reluctance on the part of the 

corporation to put forward any wage offer. 

 

We have got to ask ourselves: is that the conduct of a reasonable employer to sit tight from March until 

mid-August? Mind you, no wage offer was made until the employees recessed the proceedings, 

consulted their members and, as will have been known to the corporation, got some pretty direct 

instructions to get down to getting an offer. 

 

There followed some offers by the corporation in the dying days of August. The question we have to ask 

ourselves is: is this responsible conduct on the part of the corporation? The maximum offer that was 

arrived at, and that I think within 24 or 48 hours of the strike, was four percent with some fringes. 

 

The union had put forward a proposal for eight per cent. Now in some circumstances the union proposal 

for eight per cent would be unreasonable. In some circumstances a corporation attitude of no offer for 

five months would be reasonable. We have to ask ourselves whether either of those positions was such 

in 1966. In 1965 or 1965 or any other year, what are some of the basic ingredients of union 

negotiations? Well, there are two recurrent things. Ho much has the cost of living increased and what 

recent wage settlements are other unions getting? These are the perennial stuff of union negotiations. 

 

Now, I think it will be generally conceded by most people that employees are entitle to increases which 

cover the cost of 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

40 

living, which offer the employees some share of the increase in productivity, both of their industry and 

of the nation as a whole, and possibly some adjustments, up or down, to cover obvious inequities. These, 

I think, are generally conceded to be the framework in which union negotiations might proceed. 

 

Frequently there are other factors. These are almost invariably present. 

 

What was the climate with respect to the cost of living when these negotiations were carried on? Well, 

all of us know that there has been a spiralling cost of living during the last year. Certainly if we don‘t 

know, all we need to do is ask our wives. There is hardly a housewife in Regina who isn‘t appalled an 

just a little bit afraid of the rate at which the cost of living is increasing. All of us reflect this fear when 

we talk about inflation, unreasonable or ridiculous wage increased, or whatever else. Wage increases are 

just one price you know, the price of labor, the price of food, the price of clothing. Lots of things are 

going up rather rapidly and when a person has to pay a lot of his essentials he would like to raise the 

price of hits product. 

 

Let‘s look at the increases in the cost of food and the cost of clothing. I could give a good number but I 

think these two will illustrate the background and the framework in which these negotiations were being 

carried on. 

 

Now, I am going to quote from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics consumer price index which we are 

all so familiar with. We all know that the index is based upon a figure for 1949 equalling 100. In April, 

1965, the food index stood at 133.4. In 16 years, from 1949 to 1965, it had gone up 33.4 points. Thirty 

three points in 16 years, just about two points a year. By April, 1966, one year later, it was up to 143.7. 

In one year . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Is my hon. friend opposed to the fact that food prices have gone up a little last year? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, indeed I am not. I think that food prices ought to go up. I think that the wages of 

persons who have to buy food ought to go up commensurately. No, indeed, I am not here to oppose 

these increases in food prices any more than I am going to oppose the increases in clothing prices in a 

moment or two. I would like to think that we could get a grip on our economy. I would like to think that 

the Government in Ottawa would show a little more leadership in planning an economy so that we 

would not be faced with runaway inflation, but I have no real prospect that this will come about. Under 

these circumstances all I can do is say that I can‘t object to this segment of the economy trying to get 

their share and I resent, or at least do not agree with, the views of others across the way to want to 

prevent another segment of the economy from getting a somewhat commensurate share. 

 

I want to say again, if I might use the Premier‘s phrase, that the price of food went up ten points in one 

year. I have already illustrated that the average increase from 1949 was two points, so that food prices 

increased from 1965 to 1966 at a rate five times as fast as in the period from 1949 onward. Increase in 

food prices alone was seven or eight per cent. In the face of this, was a stand by the corporation of no 

offer for five months a reasonable stand? 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

41 

Let‘s turn to clothing. April, 1965, the clothing index stood at 121.2. For those 16 years from 1949 to 

1965, the clothing index had increased 21 points. That‘s about 1 1/2 points a year, a little under that. In 

April, 1966 it was up to 125.3. In 12 months it had increased 4.1 points. That is an increase of a rate 

about three times as fast as in the period from 1949 to 1965. These figures show what we all know, what 

the corporation knew, what the employees knew. The cost of living is rising faster now than it has for 25 

years. 

 

No, it won‘t have been missed, I think, that no only are prices going up but corporate profits are going 

up. The Premier, in his opening remarks, was demanding that wage increased be curtailed so that the 

financial position of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation would not be endangered. I want to know 

whether he has demanded that the prices charged by Canadian Westinghouse or Canadian General 

Electric be similarly curtailed so that the financial stability of the corporation will not be imperilled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I wonder if he has, and if so, when. You know the corporation has other expenses 

other than its wage bill. It has other suppliers of essential services and I wonder to what extent they are 

being asked to contribute to the health, the financial health of the corporation. 

 

A reference has been made to Trans Canada Pipeline. I wonder if they have been asked to lower their 

prices a bit to improve the health of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. My bet is that they have 

enjoyed an increase in their rate or price or wage, as you wish, very much greater than four per cent or 

indeed, eight per cent. 

 

Now, according to the Financial Times for August 1, 1966, profits for the first quarter of 1966 were up 

seven per cent over 1965. It‘s worth noting, I think, that the margin of profits in power, gag and water 

was nine per cent and the margin for the oil companies was ten per cent. I don‘t quote these figures to 

prove anything very specific except to say that prices are rising, profits are rising, and that it would be 

fair to expect that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was enjoying the same measure of prosperity as 

people in the power and gas business with which it competes or at least carries on its activities in the 

same economic climate. 

 

Mind you, there were many, many more impressive profit increases than that. A little selection from the 

Financial Post of August 6 shows Asbestos Corporation up 77 per cent; CIL, 18 per cent; Lafarge 

Cement, 76 per cent; Husky Oil, 24 per cent; R.L. Crane Limited, 14 per cent, and so on. My point, Mr. 

Speaker, is this, we are in a period of sharply rising prices and sharply rising profits and under these 

circumstances I think any reasonable employer would expect that his employees would be pressing for 

substantial increases. In point of fact, Mr. Speaker, a union proposal of eight per cent must be 

considered responsible and moderate. One would be hard pressed to find a union which made an initial 

proposal of less than eight per cent in the last year. 

 

The IBEW are asking for 16 per cent. They may be perfectly right. I am certainly not criticizing them. 

Any other unions 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

42 

that I can see are asking 20, 25, not necessarily expecting to get it, but they are certainly not coming in 

for a request for eight per cent. 

 

What have other settlements been? We all know what the settlements have been in Eastern Canada. 

Seaway workers, 20 per cent and 10 per cent; longshoremen, 30 per cent;  these figures are not easy to 

quote sometimes because they are usually two and three year agreements  newspapermen at Oshawa, 

for the benefit of the people in the press gallery, 15 per cent to a 30 per cent; construction workers, 40 or 

50 per cent; Air Canada, 15 per cent; B. C. longshoremen, 15 per cent; Quebec hospital workers, 11 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River): — Farmers minus . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Maybe. I know that it‘s easy to say that these increases are far too high and it‘s 

particularly easy for us, because we are in Saskatchewan and those people are in B.C. or Ontario. The 

job of the grandstand quarterback is always particularly easy, you know, even when they are attending 

football games when they might have been preparing legislation . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It‘s far too easy to say that these increases are just too large, far too easy to second 

guess some of the best men in Canada, far too easy to say that Senator MacKenzie doesn‘t know what he 

is talking about when he recommends 20 per cent for the Seaway workers; that Judge Rene Lippe has 

got holes in his head when he recommends 25 or 30 per cent for the longshoremen; or that Judge Craig 

Munroe when he comes in with a Conciliation Board report of 18 per cent for the railways doesn‘t know 

what he is talking about; that Labor Minister Nicholson isn‘t doing his job when he agrees with him; that 

Mr. MacEachen doesn‘t know what he is doing; that everybody is wrong; that Parliament is wrong; that 

everybody is out of step but Johnny, but good old Johnny here in Saskatchewan is right in step. 

 

But this is just a little easy and a little too facile. I am sure that you were just as taken aback by some of 

these increases as I was about but I doubt whether we can write them off as being unreasonable quite so 

easily. We certainly can‘t when we look at our own local settlement. Let‘s look at a few of these: Police 

In Moose Jaw, five per cent to seven per cent; Regina General Hospital, eight per cent to twenty per 

cent; Pioneer Electric, 10 per cent plus a reduction in hours; Transit workers in Regina, 13 percent over 

two years; plumbers and sheet metal workers, 37 per cent over three years; carpenters, seven or eight per 

cent; dairy workers, at least seven per cent; Safeway and Dominion stores, 20 or 25 per cent over three 

years; Board of Education, six per cent; Saskatchewan Wheat pool, 8 1/2 per cent. These are settlements. 

 

I don‘t know what these unions asked for but you can rest assured that in every case they asked for 

something more. In the light of this sort of a climate of sharply rising prices, rising profits and fairly 

substantial settlements all across the board, was the eight per cent request a reasonable proposal? I think 

the answer is Yes. I am not saying they should get eight per cent but certainly it is no evidence of being 

unreasonable that a 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

43 

union asks eight per cent when settlements like these are in the wind. Was the corporation‘s position of 

offering nothing for five months reasonable and then offering two per cent and three per cent? You 

make your own judgement on that. I think the corporation has yet to make its case. In particular, was the 

Government‘s pose of doing nothing to urge a reasonable position on the part of the corporation, not 

even to introduce its mediation services as it would with a private employer, fair or reasonable? Did the 

Government do all that could have been done? In short, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the facts establish 

that the possibility of real and realistic negotiations have not been exhausted, indeed they have hardly 

yet been touched. In this I gather there is some measure of agreement. But as I say it takes two to tango. 

What we need is a resumption of work and a resumption of negotiation. 

 

I invite Members to study this motion with some care because this is precisely what it does and it 

provides that when negotiations fail there shall be compulsory arbitration. Our proposal would fully 

protect the public, it would provide that all the possibilities of direct negotiation, mediation and 

conciliation be exhausted. It would provide that there be a try at voluntary arbitration and it would 

provide that if all else failed there be compulsory arbitration. We are taking away a basic human right as 

Paul Martin calls it. If this must be done so be it, but it ought to be done after all of the alternatives are 

explored. 

 

The Government, Mr. Speaker, appears to know only two voices, that of dead silence or deafening 

shouts. It is time they found a lighter touch, it‘s time they brought to this dispute and to a good number 

of other disputes in which they are engaged the voice of calm and the voice of reason. Mr. Speaker, the 

motion which we proposed will get the mend back to work, will allow a resumption of negotiations, 

would give the Government an opportunity to use all of its available resources and in a calm and 

dispassionate way arrive at a reasonable settlement with this group of employees. Mr. Speaker, that is 

the proper solution. The Bill which was offered to us, extreme in its terms, radical in its scope, is clearly 

the wrong way to solve this problem. 

 

I now turn, Mr. Speaker, to the second general question. Are the provisions of the Bill fair and 

reasonable? I have already said that in my opinion it was quite unnecessary to include tens of thousands 

of Saskatchewan workers who have never been on strike in their lives, who are working in plants or 

hospitals or for civic governments where there has never been a strike in the history of the institution, 

where there have never been any problems, acute otherwise, endangering public health or safety. Indeed, 

why is it necessary to say everybody who works for a civic waterworks in this province must have his 

right to strike withdrawn? Why is it necessary to apply this legislation to some tens of thousands of 

workers who have in no way provoked this loss of their rights? 

 

All of us will recall that a few years ago there was another event that caused some public apprehension, 

the withdrawal of medical services for a given period. In the light of this medicare dispute there was no 

legislation to attempt to force people back to work, nor was there any attack on the legal status of the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons, no effort to do the equivalent of decertifying. The reason for this is 

perfectly clear, that relations between any group of people are a continuing thing. It 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

44 

is all very well to use the sledge hammer but after that the relations get a little strained, and in every 

possible situation where you can avoid it the type of provisions which are in this Bill certainly ought to 

be avoided. There is simply no call for section after section which are in this Bill. As my leader has 

described it, it is a compost heap of the most onerous clauses of legislation that may be found in the 

legislation and the regulations of Canada, Ontario, Alberta and Saskatchewan, with a few clauses so 

onerous that no other province has ever found it necessary to adopt them. 

 

Now I want to give you one or two examples. I wonder whether some Members opposite are aware of 

some of the provisions in this Bill. Suppose a union clearly represents a majority of the employees, say 

at the Regina Geriatric Centre and suppose that in the course of the dispute this Act is invoked, and 

suppose that one employee of that union is tardy in complying with the Act. I indeed have read the Act. 

It provided that where one employee of a trade union fails to do all that he reasonable can to comply 

with the Act and if the Premier and his colleagues think this is so, they don‘t want to have to establish it 

in the mind of anybody but their won, if they think mind you, just think that any employee  one and 

only one is enough however lowly, indeed it can be a stenographer under this Bill  has not done and 

these are the words ‗everything reasonably possible‘ whatever that may mean, to end the strike then the 

union can by a simple Order in Council be forever decertified. That is what Section 10 says. 

 

Now, this provision pays no attention whatever to the wishes of the employees as to what union they 

want to belong to: it allows the most arbitrary decisions by the Government; it can act on evidence 

which it doesn‘t have to disclose, or it can act on no evidence at all. There can be no appeal to any court, 

even to a Labor Relations Board. In short, any union in any field covered by this Act is at the complete 

mercy of the Government. The Government can say No to every and any wage request and if the union 

takes strike action the Government can promptly decertify it. Note this, if it decertifies it, any arbitration 

board that may come down in favor of those employees in nullified. 

 

Suppose in selecting a judge to be chairman of one of these arbitration boards, one got a judge that was 

as ill-informed as Judge Craig Munroe of the British Columbia Court, who brought in the proposal for 

18 per cent for the railway workers, or one as ill-informed as Judge Lippe who brought in the proposal 

for the longshoremen. Suppose one got one those and knew that the aware was going to be much higher 

than you wanted, the simple thing then is to decertify the union; you don‘t need any evidence. You can 

by that little devise nullify the arbitration board aware. Now you may say that this is drawing a long 

bow; I would like you to read that Section 10 and whether you do not think that the principle in that 

section is thoroughly pernicious. I say that Canada has no before seen labor legislation so arbitrary and 

so unfair to tens of thousands of decent honest citizens in hospital or wherever they may be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could point to some other reprehensible principles contained in the Bill. Section 9 

provides that every employee of the union, every stenographer, every file clerk can be fined up to $1,000 

a day if her superiors do not send out some notices in proper form. Section 14 introduces into 

Saskatchewan the interim injunction which has been the subject of so much labor unrest elsewhere. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

45 

Mr. Speaker, last week I was attending the annual meeting of the Canadian Bar Association in 

Winnipeg. That group is not noticeable anti-management in its orientation and, yet even there, there was 

a recognition that the device of the ex parte interim injunction should be avoided wherever possible 

because it has led in the past and can gain lead to strife and bitterness. All of us I think know of the strife 

that has been going on in Ontario over this everything and it leads to the disrespect of the law which the 

member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) so properly deplored. There is a very, very strong feeling among 

many trade unionists that ex parte interim injunctions are given too freely and they are given so freely 

that indeed they ought not to obey them. I don‘t necessarily commend this view; I just say that it is very 

widespread and that since we have got along successfully without ex parte injunctions in Saskatchewan 

for some very considerable number of years, I wonder why at this point it is necessary to introduce this 

device which has been so very divisive elsewhere in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‘t want to take too much time of the House. I have given my general views. I feel that 

the Government has failed to demonstrate that it acted reasonably under the circumstances and it has 

very materially failed to illustrate and to demonstrate that this Bill with its very onerous and unfair terms 

is necessary. I feel that it is established that we will have done our job as legislators if we can end this 

strike and get the negotiations, possibly ending in arbitration, on the road again at the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. I think there is no call for us to attempt to spread our net into every municipality tin 

this province, to very hospital or nursing home and to intrude ourselves into the bargaining situation 

there. I feel that when we do this we demonstrate a lack of appreciation of the real needs of 

labor-management relations in this province. And I think that this Bill just demonstrates that on the part 

of the Government. I think the Bill is a confession of failure, it is a confession of the Government‘s 

belief that coercion is the way of the world. It is a declaration to all the employees of this province who 

bargain for their salaries, whether they are power workers or hospital workers or teachers or nurses or 

whatever, that the Government has no particular sympathy or concern for their positions. It reveals that 

the Government opposite is wedded to pressure, to coercion, to force. It‘s a Bill which does far too much 

and does it badly. It‘s a bad Bill, it should be defeated by this House. I invite the House to support the 

amendment, thereby solving the problem, and defeat the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — By leave of the House I would ask that we revert 

to Orders of the Day for moment or two so that a motion might be presented for sittings tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Hon. Members ask leave to revert to Orders of the Day. Leave granted. 

 

MOTION RE ADJOURNMENT 
 

Mr. Gardiner: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of the Assembly to move, seconded 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

46 

by the Hon. Mr. Heald that the adjournment of the House today, Wednesday, September 7th, 1966, be 

set at 10 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Motion agreed. 

 

QUESTION RE EMPLOYEES GOING BACK TO WORK 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, while we are on Orders of the Day, I would like to 

ask the Government a question. Has the Government any assurance at all that if this Bill is passed that 

the employees will go back to work? We‘ve seen the problem in Canada and there is no doubt looking 

back now, that if the original Bill introduced in the House of Commons had been passed as it was, the 

employees would not have gone back to work. A lot of them hesitated after the improvement in the Bill. 

Now has the Government any assurance that this Bill will be effective? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We are quite certain that the great majority of the employees of the power union are 

law-abiding. I am quite certain that if this Legislature passes a law that most of them will wish to abide 

by it. In case there should be the odd one who does not feel that way inclined there are certain provisions 

in the Bill to take care of the circumstances as they arise. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Now, a supplementary question. Has the Premier discussed this with 

any of the labor leaders in the province to get their opinion or point of view on it? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — As individuals we have discussed it with some labor leaders. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The debate resumed on second reading of Bill No. 2 — An Act Respecting the Continuation of Services 

Essential to the Public. 

 

Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — In rising to take part in this debate I do so with some 

hesitation having to follow such a group of eloquent speakers. However, I do feel that as a farmer and a 

member of this Legislature representing a rural area it is about time that somebody spoke on behalf of 

our farm population. 

 

Some may say, what does the effect of strikes on agriculture have to do with the Bill before us? We have 

heard a great deal this afternoon about the individual rights and freedom to the people. They say the 

individual rights and freedoms of people are being curtailed in this Bill. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

that the individual rights and freedoms of people should be a two-way street. The strikes that we have 

had in the past couple of years and in recent months are infringing on the individual rights and privileges 

of farmers. I think farmers should have the rights and the privilege and the freedom of delivering their 

produce to the market. This I suggest hasn‘t been given us in the last number of years. 

 

I would just like to take a moment and read of a few of the 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

47 

strikes that have affected agriculture in the last two years. First, Canada Packers, Toronto, 2,397 people 

on strike from July 18th and it‘s not finished yet in 1966; the Shipping Federation in Canada, various St. 

Lawrence ports in Quebec, 4,250, May 9th to June 14th; CNR, Montreal, 2,391, May 24th to May 26th; 

the Teamsters in Ontario, 7,000, January 19th to April 30th, 1966; the National Harbor Board, Montreal 

longshoremen, 3,500, April 19th to 22nd in 1966; the Massey-Ferguson Company of Canada, 1,600, 

August 11th to August 13th, 1965; the Albert Wheat Pool, Vancouver, 118 men, June 2nd to August 

16th, 1965; the International Harvester Company, 2,100, May 14th to 17th, 1965; the Shipping 

Federation, St. Lawrence River ports, 3,500, November 9th and 10th, 1964. Now, we also know that in 

the operation of farming it becomes necessary at times to have farm trucks. During this time we had the 

Chrysler Corporation of Canada, 6,000 men, January 28th to March 8th, 1965; Massey Ferguson, 

Brantford, Toronto and Woodstock, 4,000. 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Better back up . . . Dodge. 

 

Mr. Hooker: — And Ford Motors of Ontario, 10,000; General Motors, 24,000. These are the people 

that have been on strike in the last two years and I would like to suggest that this directly and indirectly 

affects agriculture in this province. 

 

We all know that farming today is a risky business. We always have drought, we have the dangers of 

frost, we have the dangers of rust, we have the dangers of one thing or another to contend with and today 

that risk has been added to with the danger of not being able to get your crop to market. I think that the 

farmers in this country are getting sick and tired of the threat of strikes. I know the people in the rural 

area that I represent will be very happy to see some type of Bill passed whereby strikes are prohibited. I 

know that any time that the strikes prohibit the movement of grain it always seems to be called at the 

most opportune time. When we have a good crop and we have a change to get markets there is always 

strike at one coast or the other, the railroads or the Seaway. 

 

Now I hope the people in this province would realize what would happen if we had enough strikes so 

that we wouldn‘t be able to meet our commitments to get our grain to market in the foreign countries. 

These countries would cease to come to us for their grain, they would go where else they could get it. I 

happened to note also, and I stand to be corrected in this, that I think that most of the labor unions that 

have called their men out and restricted the movement of grain in t his country have been unions who 

have their parent organizations in the United States. I just stopped to think that, while these ships are 

sitting idly by in the harbors when we can‘t load them, after awhile they move on and fill with American 

grain. I just wonder if this happens to be a preconceived plan whereby they know that they can get some 

of the grain out of their own country. I notice there aren‘t any sympathy strikes in the United States 

along this time to keep those ships from being loaded. I also wonder when we hear so many people in 

this country complaining the American capital coming into this province to help industrialize 

Saskatchewan — that I haven‘t heard anybody complaining about some of the union fees that have been 

collected from the union members in this province being funnelled over into the United States to help 

these parent organizations. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

48 

I think today that Canada, a country the size it is, with the resources that we have, should be looking 

forward to running our own unions. I, for one, think that unions are very necessary. I think that . . . 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Tell us about corporations too. 

 

Mr. Hooker: — Well, we‘ll do that also, I think that it would be very drastic if anything should happen 

that we couldn‘t have our labor organized in this country. But I don‘t see why we are not capable of 

operating our own businesses. If we can operate our own business elsewhere there is no reason in the 

world why we can‘t operate our own unions. 

 

I also have heard much today of the right to strike. I think people should have the right to strike in some 

cases but I don‘t think that they should have the right to strike provided that by striking they are 

infringing on the very livelihood of others. When we think of striking in a utility, if they have that right, 

gives them the equivalent of an atomic bomb in one hand to probably a club to somebody striking in a 

small industry. I would hesitate to think what would happen in our province, especially in the rural areas 

if the electrical union had failed to step over the picket line put up by the gas union. If our electricity 

went out — I think most of us know that possibly this couldn‘t happen — what would happen to our 

rural areas along with our cities? We have many people in rural areas who have power, who have 

deepfreezers, who have all their own vegetables and meat. Ho long would this last? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It would just be like when the had the Liberal Government last time, no 

electricity at all. 

 

Mr. Hooker: — We had meat. I hesitate to think as I said before what could happen if this was allowed 

to pass. I know that the people in rural Saskatchewan will be happy if they know that their utilities will 

not be cut off. I know that the people in rural Saskatchewan would . . . 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Who put up the power line? The managers? 

 

Mr. Hooker: — They are still going up Toby. But speaking of strikes, a few years ago I read an article 

by somebody who said he had a method of ending all strikes. At the time it sounded fantastic to me; 

when I read his reasoning today it is even more fantastic. He said the way to stop al strikes is for 

everybody to strike. This means that everybody would refuse to go to their jobs for two or three days. 

We know what kind of chaos this would be; it would be impossible. It is even so far-fetched that we 

can‘t think of it. But if this were to happen I think in possibly two or three days or less than that, in tow 

or three hours, or ten hours or twelve hours, we would find out how dependent we are upon one another. 

I think in this country an all over, especially in pour province in the Dominion of Canada, it is about 

time we started thinking as Canadians rather than individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to take up any more time in this 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

49 

House but I did feel that I should say something on behalf of the rural people and the farmers of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, I also am a farmer. This 

morning when I washed my hair I still found some chaff from the combine. And I know that in order to 

get a haircut all I need to do is to take one swath around the field and I‘ve got it all. 

 

But in listening to the debate I say that most of the points were covered quite well. Some remarks that 

were made on this side of the House I agree with. Some that were made on the other side I also agree 

with, even some of the remarks made by the Member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson). But I just wonder 

what really led up to this situation that we have a strike in the Power Corporation. From all I have heard 

I feel that the Premier wanted this thing in order to try to find a way to cover up for the bad deal he got 

in Saskatoon at the Liberal Convention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — He wanted to pull the attention away from the real problem and by getting a strike 

going in the Power Corporation it would be pretty good. 

 

But now when we look at what the boys in the Power Corporation ask for, it was an eight per cent 

request. I have a whole list of requests that were made in recent years and what they were settled for but 

a log of them were touched upon by the previous speakers so I will just pass over this. I want to point 

out that some of the increases that were made in the last while we have not heard very much about. As a 

farmer I know about the price of machinery, especially combines. This year, a very common increase is 

$1,000 per machine. Now, do we hear anything across the way about the machinery company? Should 

we not do something about price control? Should we not have had a special session to deal with this 

outrageous increase in the price of machinery? Oh no. It‘s a different bunch of people that are doing it. 

It‘s these boys‘ little friends that fill up the campaign fund that are doing it. So we don‘t say anything 

about it. 

 

Now, if this situation had been handled properly, I am sure that we wouldn‘t have a strike today. We can 

look back at what the Government across did just a few years ago. In order to raise the indemnity of 

their backbenchers they found a way of giving them an extra 25 per cent. They did it in a sneaky way 

but they did it anyway. They want to point out at these other boys so that they shouldn‘t get eight per 

cent, but 25 per cent was OK for them. 

 

Let‘s look at Ottawa. They got some increase there too. Try and tell the farmer that the MPs should get 

an 80 per cent increase and he has got to pay an extra $1,000 for his combine. You are going to tell the 

power boys that eight per cent, even six per cent is too much. And what did these boys at Ottawa do 

besides arguing about the flag debate, Mr. Spender and Mr. Rivard? Finally they had a heck of a fight 

over Mrs. Munsinger. But they got an 80 per cent increase for this stuff. Eighty per cent. 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

50 

 

The power boys have got to work at a dangerous job and can‘t even ask for eight per cent. We are going 

to kick them out and say, ―Now, you go to work. You have no right to ask for this much‖. I want to say 

that they certainly have used good sense. They have assured the people, their customers, that they would 

not be inconvenienced by shortage of gas. They stayed on the job. They did not walk off. So you have 

got to give them credit for having done their part in a very civilized manner. They did not come into this 

House and try to kick some of the doors down when they were not getting what they wanted as you 

know. Some of you might not know who this boy was, but he became the Premier of this province. But 

as for now the power boys, you haven‘t heard anybody knocking anything down yet. The gas is coming 

through the pipelines as before. 

 

Now, there is another thing that disturbs me, the freedom of these boys. A few years ago they were told, 

―Now, you stay out of politics or you will lose your job‖. Very pleasant atmosphere to work under. And 

if you want to run as mayor of the town you‘ve got to ask permission of Daddy because you can‘t be a 

mayor unless we OK it. And on and on this goes. Is this a good atmosphere? Are you doing your part in 

providing freedom to these boys and saying, ―You go out and do your job. That‘s what we are concerned 

about‖. Oh no. Doing your job is not enough. You have got to be careful what you say about our 

political party and when they come along and ask for eight per cent we have go to check. I think they 

must have given a blood check to the union boys and said, ―Well, this is one outfit we‘ve got to get rid 

of, so we‘ll pass legislation to put them out of business‖. 

 

Now, what are you doing is working to put a group of people into chains. But chaining people will not 

work. It may work temporarily but the time is going to come when they are going to break their chains. 

What has been done in the last while is just a promotion of hatred, trying to put farmer against labor. 

Now, my wife and I have got five kids . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — There‘s a lot of labor there, Art. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — . . . three boys and two girls. I know very well that they are not all going to be 

farmers. Do you suppose I have got to teach them that go into the labor force that these farm boys are 

going to have to hate them, and vice versa. You can‘t work together. This is what has been promoted by 

the Liberal party in this province, get hatred going. You think you can win, but I am going to tell you 

this is not going to happen because I think they are just a little better informed than you people expect 

them to be. 

 

I don‘t want to take any more time. I want to congratulate the power workers for the sensible, the high 

degrees of responsibility with which they have conducted themselves. If the Premier of this province had 

assumed his responsibilities the way he pretends to have done we wouldn‘t be here today trying to sort 

this thing out. I want to say that if we want to control one group let us work for price control to stop the 

increased price of farm machinery. We are talking about this great big crop we are going to get. Well 

you know, it‘s going to be swallowed up before we can lay our hands on it because most of it will have 

to be paid out on loans of money that is already borrowed. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

51 

Now, I don‘t want to take too much time but as a farmer I say let us see that everybody gets fair 

treatment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on an Act Respecting the 

Continuation of Services Essential to the Public, I have a few remarks to make in this respect. But First I 

would like to say a few words in regard to the motion that was put in by the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd). 

 

The five clauses of his motion are dealt with adequately in the Bill that is being proposed to the House. 

They are (1) to provide for the return of workers to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation which is 

provided in the Bill. (2) to order the resumption of negotiations on all remaining outstanding issues. 

Actually negotiations are still continuing though the operations are not as such. (3) to direct the parties 

to employ impartial mediation and conciliation procedures. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — The Bill doesn‘t provide that. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I said, ―Direct the parties to employ impartial mediation and conciliation services‖. 

Under the present terms of the Trade Union Act any parties in negotiations may apply to the Minister of 

Labour for conciliation and mediation services. Nowhere to this point has any of the parities officially 

asked the Minister of Labour, or unofficially for that matter, for any conciliation services. These 

provisions are there. They have not been used by either party. (4) to direct the parties, in the event these 

measures fail, to bring an agreement in 60 days. Everyone in this House knows what would happen in 60 

days with respect to the weather. The Government feels at this time that it is too late in the season to 

take chances of definite breakdowns at this particular time. (5) No, in the case of all parties agree that 

the matter be submitted to arbitration and these procedures are set down in the Act. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that it would be quite in order at this time to deal with the question of rights to 

strike. The right to strike derives its validity from the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. In 

other works, it derives from the fact that man is essentially a rational animal endowed with the free will 

by which he can achieve dignity and self-fulfilment on a basis that gives meaning and purpose, based on 

justifying values, to life and living. 

 

Any law or legislation designed to control strikes must recognize and respect the human, social, 

psychological and economic realities that are relevant to any strike situation. 

 

One basic reality is that the first essential of a good law is that it must be enforceable. 

 

A second reality is that recognition of unions and the right to strike came only through the ordeal of 

breaking the laws forbidding unions and the right to strike. These errors, I believe, should not be 

repeated. 

 

The right of workers to strike and the right of employers to lock workers out are generally considered, 

subject to certain 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

52 

restrictions, as necessary for the unimpeded operation of the collective bargaining process. If employees 

and employers disagree on a matter of wages or working conditions, the employees may refuse to work, 

or the employers may refuse to offer employment, on the grounds that the terms offered are not 

acceptable. The right to strike may be considered as an extension of the right of an individual worker to 

withdraw his labor if he regards conditions of work unacceptable to him. When a number of employees 

act together and withdraw their labor, such as going on strike they are actually exercising their 

individual rights simultaneously. 

 

But, add a big but, since we have chosen the democratic process of government as the most appropriate 

form for our particular society, and since our democratic constitution guarantees us certain freedoms of 

religion, association, education, speech, and so on, the right to strike appears to be consistent with our 

true national ideals. In most instances this is so. 

 

When however, circumstances are such that the freedoms of a majority of citizens are endangered by the 

exercise, on the part of a small minority, of their freedoms, it is the duty and responsibility of the 

Government to take action to protect the welfare of the majority. I am not saying that at this moment 

there is a danger but the possibilities are there if things continue. This implies a restriction of the right to 

strike by means of compulsory arbitration. Thus, in times of apparent emergencies, strikes and lock-outs 

may be made illegal, because all sections of the community, including labor unions and employers‘ 

organizations, consider work stoppages, which are acceptable at some time, to be intolerable at some 

other time. 

 

In many jurisdictions, it has been found necessary to implement legislative provision for compulsory 

arbitration in the case of essential services. There is no need to dwell on the precedents which exist in 

Canada today, on the question of compulsory arbitration. Since the first element of compulsion in this 

country, in principle and in practice was introduced in the Railway Labor Disputes Act of 1903, passed 

by Parliament following a long drawn-out strike of trackmen on the CPR, this action has, since then, 

been taken many times. 

 

In a number of cases, compulsory arbitration is operative for certain public utility undertakings, 

particularly those for the supply of water, gas and electricity. In Saskatchewan, it has not been necessary 

to date to introduce such provisions but the necessity is here now. However, action has become 

imperative. These services are essential for the health and well-being of our citizens. The interruption or 

impairment of these services would pose a grave danger to the community, depending on how long it 

lasts, not to speak of the inconvenience which would result. 

 

The real solution to the problem of strikes is to solve the disputes leading to strikes before they reach 

that crucial stage. To a marked extend, this characterizes the disposition of industrial disputes in 

Saskatchewan. Despite the many problems associated with the rapid growth of the non-agricultural 

sector of our economy and the accompanying increase in the industrial labor force, the number of 

disputes which result in strikes in Saskatchewan is a small fraction of the total number of disputes. The 

amount of working time lost through strikes in Saskatchewan in 1965 was only 48 minutes per 

non-agricultural wage earner. This 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

53 

compares with 192 minutes for Canada as a whole. In percentage terms, Saskatchewan‘s time loss 

represented 0.04 per cent of the total working time available. The corresponding percentage for Canada 

as a whole was 0.17 per cent, or more than four times the Saskatchewan figure. It can thus be said, Mr. 

Speaker, that Saskatchewan‘s industrial relations climate is a relatively peaceful one and for the sake of 

all our people we must not allow it to be otherwise. 

 

The settlement of disputes before they reach the strike stage requires mutual understanding, respect and 

responsibility to the common good of each individual person who can be affected by the implications of 

the dispute, that is the collective public interest. 

 

Mutual understanding, Mr. Speaker, is possible only on the basis of mutual values and this is dependent 

on the understanding and appreciation of what is meant by the dignity of the human person. 

 

Experience has proven that laws governing or regulating the process of negotiation can be fair, effective 

and fruitful. The same experience has proven that the effectiveness of the laws has depended on the 

attitudes of those involved in disputes. It can be demonstrated, for example, that respect for authority 

and the mutual respect of those involved in disputes have declined to the point that the participants have 

no respect left for the dignity of the individual. It can also be demonstrated that the social integrity of 

any organization suffers in that it becomes estranged and insulated against the recognition of the dignity, 

worth and interdependence of the human person. 

 

The negotiating component of the collective bargaining process implies that the differences between the 

parties involved can be reconciled by comprise and concession. I understand in some cases there have 

been no concessions in the present strike, with a view to concluding an agreement. It goes without 

saying that if one side or the other does nothing but make demands or stipulations when they meet, 

negotiations soon breakdown. However, in the overwhelming majority of cases, willingness to give and 

take, in the spirit of the mutual respect which I have mentioned, made the negotiating procedure 

successful. 

 

Consideration of the problem of strikes requires a realistic appreciation of all the facts mentioned above. 

It is necessary that the meaning of the right to strike be fully understood. 

 

A strike is an instrument or weapon of economic dispute or conflict involving the ultimate use of 

peaceful economic strength to correct conditions of injustice or social abuse. I fail to see, in this 

particular case with which we are dealing any injustices or abuse of the corporation toward its 

employees. Rules regulating a strike must be carefully defined ton ensure that they can be observed to 

forestall their extending into violence and destruction, and this is always a danger of strikes. 

 

Social moralists, Mr. Speaker, are agreed on four conditions that can justify a strike. The four 

conditions, Mr. Speaker, justifying them are namely: 

 

(1) The cause for which a strike is imposed must be just. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

54 

(2) There must be sufficient hope of success. It is morally wrong to involve workers in a strike where 

there is little chance of success, resulting in their being worse off when the strike is over than they were 

before. In this connection, it may be pointed out that it will take the average machinist for example, 

involved in the recent airlines strike in the United States 16 months to make up the pay he lost during the 

strike. With regard to the employees of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation currently on strike even if 

the additional four per cent salary increase which they are not asking had been granted, it would take an 

employee six months to make up his pay if the strike were to last one week, and a year if the strike were 

to continue for two weeks. If it should turn out that an extra two per cent were provided, that is over and 

above the four per cent now offered, it would take a year to recover the lost pay in the case of a one 

week strike and two years for a two week strike. You can see for yourself the tremendous loss of 

revenue to the individual worker and no gain, no personal gain for having been on strike. I think it‘s 

essential that legislation be brought in so that the workers can get back to work. Very often the loss of 

pay has never been recovered. I wonder how many employees considered this very important economic 

factor when the strike vote was taken. This does not mean that losing a strike necessarily nullifies 

benefits or that it had to be without purpose. There are rumors around the city as the moment that the 

percentage of strike votes was around 50 to 55 per cent as compared to the 86 per cent that appeared in 

the press the other day. It appears that the majority of the employees are not necessarily in favor but that 

they would sooner work than not. 

 

(3) The benefit to be gained must be greater than the measure of harm that can be done. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Would the Minister permit a question? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — That rumor about the strike vote, is that something like the car you saw? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — We‘ll just leave it at that. However, there is no way for any party to know very 

specifically the percentage of the membership of a union that wishes to go on strike. 

 

However, as I mentioned before, Mr. Speaker, the benefit to be gained must be greater than the measure 

of harm that can be done. This imposes on those who decide to go on strike the responsibility for the 

rights of those who are not directly involved. That means, Mr. Speaker, the common good, or what is 

termed as the public interest. 

 

(4) Every effort, Mr. Speaker, must have been made to arrive at a peaceful solution by way of 

negotiation, conciliation, mediation, or other methods. And I do believe that this effort has been 

maintained insofar as the corporation, which is a crown corporation, is concerned. They haven‘t walked 

out of a meeting. It is a fact that the union negotiators have walked out on it. This is why they have a 

strike. Otherwise, the negotiations, as I said, have 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

55 

already been continuing and no requests have been made to the Department of Labour for conciliation 

services. 

 

Human nature, Mr. Speaker, being what it is, there can be times and occasions when the exercise of the 

public authority is desirable and even unavoidable. This is one of those times. 

 

By its nature, democratic government is delegated to protect and promote the common good of all 

individual persons making up the community. This means that the public interest is the first criterion for 

evaluating the justification of a strike on a basis of justice and charity. The public interest is more 

directly involved when it is a question of public services established for the good of a community or 

state for supplying common needs to life and living. Some services, Mr. Speaker, can be so essential as 

to defy any justification of strike action such as fire, police, health, utilities. This requires of the public 

authority a specific concern and consideration for the rights and well-being of those who cannot lawfully 

resort to strike measures. And that is the consumers. 

 

Now, as for control and prevention, the first means to control and prevention of abusive or destructive 

strike action — it is destructive because the working man is not earning his pay at that time — must be 

the basic education needed to establish a respect and appreciation of human rights and the common 

good. 

 

The second step or means should be a body of just laws and/or regulations. This should include 

provisions for fair and impartial arbitration. This is being provided for in this Bill. 

 

It has been said that compulsory arbitration of labor disputes is as consistent with democracy as is 

compulsory education or taxation, especially when the welfare of the province is at stake. It was 

mentioned a moment ago that Australia and New Zealand have had compulsory arbitration since the 

early 1900‘s. It was introduced there with the general support of employers and the workers who desired 

a new and sounder method of settling disputes without recourse to costly strikes and lock-outs. Both 

workers and employers actively support he system in New Zealand and Australia, which obviously they 

would not continue to do if they were not happy with it or if they felt it to be unfair. It has been proven 

in many cases where demands have been made by the unions and management has denied them and 

where there has been arbitration that the worker has always had more out of the pot. Experience in other 

countries as well indicates that arbitration tribunals have been able to gain and maintain a reputation of 

the highest standards of impartiality. 

 

Arbitration has been called a solemn process and is not a game to be won or lost by manipulating the 

rules. At the same time it is not so official and impersonally legal a technique that it does not take into 

account the rights and aspiration of the individual, both the employees and the public. While it cannot 

completely do away with disagreement, because there is still bound to be disagreements after arbitration 

has taken place, at the same time it can keep it within bounds and can play a very important role in the 

maintenance of just and harmonious industrial relations. 

 

With these words, Mr. Speaker, showing the pros in some ways and the cons and the reasons why 

arbitration is being brought in in this case, it is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

56 

support the Bill and not support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, permit me at the outset to extend my congratulations to the hon. 

Member for Milestone on his recent appointment as Minister of Industry and Commerce. I wish him 

success in that new post. He is a member of the Saskatchewan Teachers‘ Federation, a teachers‘ union, 

and I invite him as such to join Members on this side of the House in supporting the amendment and 

defeating the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear!! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — This would be in keeping with the policy of the Saskatchewan Teachers‘ Federation 

which, as he knows, is strenuously opposed to compulsory arbitration as are most trade unionists an as 

are we in this party. I would like to warn him that the axe might fall next on the teaching profession. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the first day the Government opposite took office its policy has been that of 

attempting to destroy the public confidence in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation through attacking 

its management and that the SPC was an unprofitable enterprise. Secondly, they have attempted to 

destroy the union representing the employees. There are a great many examples that can be cited, some 

of them have already been mentioned today. Speakers on this side of the House have already pointed out 

that the bargaining proposals of the union are indeed reasonable. 

 

Several years ago I had the opportunity of attending two meetings of the National Productivity Council, 

an agency of the Federal Government. At these meetings were present the top business people of our 

country, labor leaders and government officials. During the course of discussions at these meetings with 

regard to wages and improvements in working conditions I found that there was a large measure of 

agreement that industry has an obligation to improve wages to meet rising costs of living and share with 

the employees the benefits of increased national production and company profits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I can call it 5:30 o‘clock and resume at 7:30 o‘clock. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 o‘clock to 7:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, when the House rose at 5:30 I made reference to meetings that I had 

attended several years ago of the National Productivity Council. 

 

There can be no argument that the cost of living to SPC employees, as to all consumers, has increased 

sharply in the last year. The increase in the gross national production in 1965 over that in 1964 in 

Canada rose by 8.7 per cent and is 11.6 per cent greater in the first quarter of this year compared to that 

of last. The SPC profit picture as reported to this Legislature earlier this year is good, $400,000 in 1965. 

Wage increases in recent months in a great many cases in this province and throughout Canada are 

greater than those proposed by the Saskatchewan power and gas workers. 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

57 

The Premier, as he has already been reminded, is reported in the press to have said last week: 

 

I think the second union is a much more sensible one, 

 

in reference to IBEW, the union representing the electrical workers. This union has asked the SPC for a 

wage increase of 16 per cent, exactly double what the OCAW has requested. One might assume from 

the Premier‘s remarks that had this OCAW union asked for twice the amount they proposed they would 

have been a more sensible organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to refresh the memories of the Members opposite. I want to quote a statement 

made by the Minister in charge of SPC. The Minister at the spring session was replying to a question by 

the Member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) as to the reasons why 417 employees had left the SPC last 

year. The Minister said that one of the reasons was wages, that private industries and corporations in 

Saskatchewan are offering higher wages and that B.C. had an active recruitment program offering 

employees more money. He is reported in the press as saying: 

 

All that can be done when drains in certain areas are noted is to try to improve working conditions 

and wages so that any dissatisfaction can be rectified. 

 

What did the Minister in charge do to rectify this problem? For 5 1/2 months he sat on his hands. In fact 

what the Minister did last spring was to ask the SPC or ask the union to request of the SPC substantial 

wage increases to meet this problem. The union did ask for an increase of eight per cent. What were they 

offered in return after five months of negotiations as at August 16th? A pittance, Mr. Speaker, a pittance, 

two percent was offered for office employees and three per cent for technical and non-office employees. 

This offer was then increased to three per cent across the board and under pressure of a possible strike, 

raised to four per cent, plus some adjustments to certain classifications which amount to between 1/4 

and 1/2 of one per cent, this with the Federal Government in the background approving wage increases 

anywhere from 18 to 30 per cent. What the Government said to the office and gas workers of SPC was 

that we invite you to strike so that we can have an excuse to pass this notorious compulsory legislation. 

The workers were deliberately provoked into strike action through insults and provocation. There was 

no effort on the part of the Government — and this is admitted — to mediate, conciliate or even arbitrate 

by impartial people. 

 

The Premier and his Ministers in the last two years through their propaganda have helped to foment 

industrial strife throughout this province. They have been saying over and over again that there is a large 

labor shortage in Saskatchewan and that wages are rising rapidly. Just two weeks ago the Premier, 

appearing on a television broadcast, said that we had a labor shortage of 12,000. Well, a check with the 

National Employment Service offices in the province shows that some 9,000 persons were registered as 

seeking employment, were unemployed, not to mention the thousands who for one reason or another do 

not register. You may recall that one year ago the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) speaking at a labor 

convention said that the nonagricultural labor force in Saskatchewan had increased by 20,000. Well, 

when the Saskatchewan Economic Review was handed down about one-half hour before the last session 

prorogued, we learned that the nonagricultural labor force in 1965 had increased only by 3,000. Some 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

58 

workers have concluded that if things are so good, let us get in on part of this bonanza. The result, a new 

militancy has developed among workers. They see no benefits passed on to them at the initiative of the 

Government, so they fight for what the Government has said is the right and proper thing to do. Workers 

know that in periods of economic prosperity they then made gains, not in periods of economic 

depression. The Government‘s foolish propaganda is beginning to catch up with them. Now, I am 

uncertain whether or not some of this propaganda and misinformation was an intentional prelude to this 

obnoxious legislation that is before us today. There are reasons to be suspicious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have read the Bill before us several times — I am at a loss for words to describe it. What 

the Government has done is to take the worst features of similar legislation in other provinces and 

incorporate them into this Bill and add many of its own new reactionary and vicious thoughts. The 

anti-labor legislation enacted by Joey Smallwood in regard tot the loggers‘ strike a few years ago and 

the bad labor laws passed by the Duplessis Regime in Quebec put them among the angels beside what is 

contained in this Bill. 

 

Joey Smallwood gave unto himself the power to outlaw a single union in a single dispute. The law here 

is all embracive. It will apply to any number of unions the Government wishes to bring under 

proclamation. Duplessis gave unto himself the power to decertify a union under certain conditions, but 

not because of a strike, under circumstances envisaged in this Bill. 

 

One has to ask himself, in the light of the excellent free-strike record in the Saskatchewan hospitals, gas, 

power and other institutions and industries that may be brought under this law by the Government, why 

the punitive measures? Why the dictatorial powers? Why this denial of rights and freedom? I cannot 

help but conclude that this is vindictiveness. The Premier and the Minister in charge of SPC, over the 

months have shown nothing but contempt for the power and gas workers‘ union and the hospital 

workers‘ unions in this province. They say this is the way we will fix them. Let me remind the 

Government of their promise before the 1964 election — they promised the wage earners and the people 

of Saskatchewan —and let me quote their particular election plank: 

 

To maintain and improve trade union rights and security. 

 

Let me remind the Premier of this answer. I note that he is not in his seat but maybe some of the other 

Members can pass on to him this particular bit of information the he should be reminded of. In Answer 

to a promise, or in answer to a letter that was written to the Premier by the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees Association in 1960, they asked where the Liberal party stood in regard to collective 

bargaining rights in respect of public employees? The Premier, then the Leader of the Opposition, 

replied this way, and I quote: 

 

I have your letter which states that your Association naturally feels some concern about the attitude of 

the opposition parties. You have therefore decided to seek a statement in writing from the leaders of 

the four political parties, the CCF, the Liberal party, the Progressive Conservative party, and the 

Social Credit party, setting out their positions on the maintenance of the right 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

59 

by law of the Provincial Government employees in Saskatchewan to bargain collectively. 

 

The recent convention of the Saskatchewan Liberal party made this statement of policy: 

 

‗To promote justice and harmony in the economy we propose to maintain the right of employees to 

organize and bargain collectively. This general statement applies equally to employees of the 

Provincial Government and others.‘ 

 

No suggestion here of compulsory arbitration. Every suggestion and every implication that employees of 

the public and all employees of the province will have the free collective bargaining rights that they had 

in the past. 

 

You may recall that during the spring session of the Legislature when the Bill to amend the Trade Union 

Act was considered, Members on this side of the House expressed concern that the Act may be 

interpreted in a way to make unions legal entitles. The Premier tried to assure us that his was not the 

case and said to the effect that he did not believe that this should be the case. But now in this Bill the 

heavy hand of the law comes down, not only making unions sue-able, but also its officers and members. 

It imposes heavy penalties. It provides for dissolving unions by government decree. It enslaves the 

workers; they shall no longer be free. It is opposed to every principle of our Bill of Rights — the 

Canadian Bill of Rights — the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights and the Conventions of the 

International Labor Organization of which Canada is a member. 

 

I have been a member of a labor organization for 20 years. I know something of the dangers of this type 

of legislation. I have never thought that in this province, in this period of our Canadian history, when we 

are about to celebrate our 100th birthday, such ruthless and dictatorial legislation could be introduced in 

what is a free nation. Only those who have no respect for freedom and rights of people would conceive 

this kind of arbitrary legislation. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that there are members here who are interested in having this session adjourned as 

quickly as possible. They have crops to harvest, and I am interested that they take advantage of the good 

weather we are presently enjoying to r reap the bountiful harvest. I will, therefore, not discuss the many 

iniquitous, the many bad provisions in this Bill. I shall point them out and their dangers when we meet 

in committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to direct part of my remarks in this debate to the problem of staff dislocation and 

job elimination caused by technological, automation and work-method changes. All wage earners 

including the employees of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation interpret the introduction of automated 

equipment and changes in work methods as a threat to their job security. This is a serious problem in this 

company, particularly since the change of government and changes in senior management. Let me point 

out the seriousness of the problem. If you examine the 1964 report of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation which was laid before this Legislature you will note on page 12 the report states: 

 

At the end of the year the staff totalled 2,789, a reduction of 114 compared with the total at the end of 

1963. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

60 

The 1965 report tabled in this House also on page 12 states: 

 

At the end of the year the staff totalled 2,770. This is a reduction of 19 compared with the total at the 

end of 1964, notwithstanding the addition in May of 204 employees from the City of Regina Light 

and Power System. 

 

Had the same complement of staff at the end of 1965 been retained as in 1963 and adding the 204 

employees of the Regina Light and Power System then we would have had in the staff of the SPC 3,107 

employees; instead we have 2,770 or 337 employees less. The staff reduction in this two year period was 

11 per cent. 

 

I admit, Mr. Speaker, that the 11 per cent reduction was not all due to automation. Some of it is due to 

the SPC contracting out some of its operations and construction to private contractors, on which the 

contractors make a profit and for which the consumers must pay, but this is the way the Liberal 

Government satisfies its friends. However, part of this job dislocation is due to automation. Late in the 

1964 a computer system was installed to do data processing, billing and so on. How many jobs 

disappeared due to the computer system being installed, I do not know. No doubt the corporation 

spokesmen will say that no employees lost their jobs as a result of this, and this may be true to a point. 

But the problem goes much deeper, for which unions are expressing great concern. We must keep in 

mind that automation is not only displacing people directly but also indirectly due to what has become 

known a ‗silent firing‘, with regard to workers who would have been hired but for jobs that were 

eliminated by automation. 

 

The union proposed that a new article be written into the agreement to cope with the problem of 

automation, with the changes in work methods and retraining. The union‘s bargaining proposal was as 

follows and let me quote: 

 

With regard to dislocations and the need for retraining of employees of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation due to changes in work methods, technology and automation, the following shall apply: 

 

1. There shall be a notification to the union on the above mentioned matters as soon as they become 

known but, in any case, at least 18 months before any change takes place. 

 

2. The corporation undertakes full responsibility for any training necessary for employees to fill new 

positions created by changes mentioned above. 

 

3. The corporation undertakes full responsibility for retraining those employees whose positions are 

affected and who are unable, for any reason, to secure new positions created by changes mentioned 

above. 

 

4. The corporation undertakes to provide a minimum severance pay, based on three weeks‘ pay for 

each year of service, for all employees who do not elect for retraining and whose positions become 

redundant due to changes mentioned above. 

 

With that they made two notes: 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

61 

1. This article does not prevent employees from exercising their bumping rights as set out in the 

agreement between the local union and Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Any limitation on bumping 

rights shall only be made by mutual agreement between Saskatchewan Power and Gas Local 9-649, 

OCAW and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

2. This article may be revised . . . 

 

I want you to take note of this, 

 

. . . at any time by mutual agreement between the union and the corporation as a result of proposals 

for revisions initiated by either part. 

Management may have had reasons to question the time period in effecting changes or the amount of 

severance pay proposed. But it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the principle of giving adequate notice 

of technological change and establishing a program retraining of dislocated employees is one that no 

reasonable person could argue against, but the corporation was adamant. It refused to consider any 

proposition put forth by the union. As at August 3rd, the union finally withdrew its proposal and in its 

place suggested that a joint company and union committee be established to study and discuss the 

problems posed by automation or new work method changes. But again the company refused to 

consider this proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I bring to the attention of this Assembly some important information. In March, 1964, 

a Federal-Provincial conference was convened by the former Federal Minister of Labour to consider the 

problem of industrial technology and make recommendations to governments and employers. The 

March 11, 1964 issue of the Regina Leader Post in part states: 

 

Federal and Provincial Ministers of Labour have set the stage for a new partnership in tackling the 

problem of the technological solution in Canada. This appears to be the chief result of a two day 

conference of Provincial Labour Ministers meeting with Allan J. MacEachen. 

 

In summing up the results of the conference Mr. MacEachen said there were five areas of agreement. 

One reads this way: 

 

A promise of provincial support for the new manpower consultive service in its pioneering program of 

encouraging labor-management studies of potential technological problem spots. 

 

Now, I know, Mr. Speaker, that the present Minister of Labour was not at that meeting and I do not 

know what his position would have been. The significant fact is that all Provinces and the Federal 

Government agreed to encourage labor-management study of the problems posed by automation and 

technological changes. I suppose that one can assume that had the Premier attended that conference he 

might have threatened to secede, as he did at the August Federal-Provincial Conference. 

 

Another fact to remember, Mr. Speaker, is the recommendation of the Saskatchewan Minister of Labour 

(Mr. Coderre) on this important matter when the BA Oil refineries were on strike last 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

62 

winter. His recommendation was, and I bring it to the attention of the hon. Members opposite: 

 

In view of the interest and concern by the parties in the impact on manpower and conditions of 

employment resulting from technological changes and automation, it is recommended that the parties 

utilize to the best advantage of the company and the employees all scientific improvements and 

establish a committee to be known as a Committee on Automation consisting of equal representation 

by the employer and union. 

 

Pending the implementation of recommendation made by the above Committee on Automation, the 

following provisions shall apply: 

 

(a) The company shall notify the union six months in advance of intent to institute changes in working 

methods or facilities which will involve the discharge or lay-off of any person who was employed by 

the company on the 31st day of August, 1965. 

 

(b) The company in cooperation with government agrees to participate in every way possible in 

training and retraining any employee. 

 

(c) Any employee who is discharged or laid off because of technological change or automation shall 

be entitled to severance pay equivalent to one week‘s pay for each year of service in the employ of the 

company to a maximum of 26 weeks. 

 

There is a reason to believe that the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) goes along with developing 

training and retraining programs as a result of redundancy caused by automation. In announcing the 

increases in living allowances for trainees at technical and vocational schools on August 24 he is reports 

in the press as saying: 

 

We recognize the urgency of adequate training programs. We intend to do everything possible to assist 

and encourage upgrading and skill training for those who desire it to enable them to take advantage of 

the new employment opportunities in the rapidly changing economy. 

 

I do not know whether the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) spoke for himself or for the Government. 

It would appear he spoke for himself, since it looks as if the Government does not want to apply this 

same rule to itself, its agencies and corporations. It would appear that the Premier and the general 

manager of SPC need more than encouragement to deal with the problems of automation. I might 

suggest to the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) that he consider the purchase of a sharp object and 

apply it to that part of their anatomy on which they sit. They need some rude awakening from the 

irresponsible positions that they have taken. I agree with the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) that our 

economy and conditions at the work-place are changing very rapidly. Many people in Canada agree on 

this point, labor agrees and so do many employers and governments, economists an engineers, and so do 

many of our farm people since in recent years they have experienced many changes resulting in a 

reduction of persons employed in the farm industry. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

63 

In the last few weeks we have heard a good deal of discussion and debate with reference to the problems 

of automation in our railway industry in Canada. We have heard about the report from the Federal 

Industrial Inquiry Commission relating to the Canadian National Railway Run Throughs. This 

commission is more commonly known as the Freedman Commission. Members know that Mr. Justice 

Freedman was appointed by the Federal Government as a commissioner to investigate and report on the 

problems of Run Throughs and technological changes in the railway industry. What does Justice 

Freedman recommend as some solutions in dealing with this problem of automation? Well, here are 

some of his recommendations: 

 

1. The Commission is of the view that an obligation rests upon the company to take reasonable steps 

towards minimizing adverse effects . . . upon its employees. That obligation has its roots in the 

principle that when a technological change is introduced, the cost of reasonable proposals to protect 

employees from its adverse consequences is a proper charge against its benefits and savings. 

 

2. The Commission recommends that any employee who is required to change his place of residence 

as a result . . . should be compensated by the company for financial losses suffered in the sale of this 

home for less than its fair value. 

 

3. An employee who has served the company for at least one year and loses his employment with the 

company . . . should be entitled to receive severance pay. 

 

4. Dieselization and other technological changes have been contributing to the decline in railway 

employment. Those are the consequences in human terms and to eliminate or reduce their effect is the 

task to which cooperative efforts of management, labor and government must be directed. 

 

5. The present situation which permits management to make unilateral changes in working conditions 

during contract period is the manifest inequity which clamors for attention and correction. The 

Commission believes that the company give . . . 30 days‘ notice . . . as a prelude to the negotiations 

thereon. 

 

6. The Commission recommends that legislation is required, either by amending the Railway Act or 

the Industrial Relations and Dispute Investigation Act ‗that technological innovation development or 

change proposed by the employer which would materially and adversely affect the working conditions 

of the employees should either be deferred for negotiations at the next open period or be dealt with in 

the same way, as if it were a provision falling within the scope of Subsection 2 of Section 22 of the 

Act. That particular Section provides that the parties may be their collective agreement reserve a 

particular issue for later consideration and still retain the right to strike or walk-out with respect to the 

settlement on that issue‘. 

 

Let me restate, Mr. Speaker, the position of the union as at August 3 on this important question. They 

asked that a joint labor-management committee be established with or without the services 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

64 

of the Federal Manpower Consultative Services Division of the Federal Government of Labour. Back in 

1964 the Federal and Provincial Ministers of Labour agreed that there should be consultation and study 

between labor and management on the problem of automation. The Saskatchewan Minister of Labour 

made such a recommendation in respect of the Oil Industry Dispute. The Minister of Education for the 

province of Saskatchewan agrees that training, retraining workers displaced by automation is an 

important and serious problem. Labor and management throughout the length and breadth of this nation 

in many instances are sitting together and are working out the problems of automation. The Federal 

Government in establishing the Freedman Commission recognized that there was a problem in this area. 

The Freedman Commission has agreed that there should be joint collaboration and negotiations and 

agreements to deal with the serious problems of automation. But what do the Premier of Saskatchewan 

and the General Manager of the SPC say? They say No, we will not meet with the union to consider 

these problems on a joint basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit, that governments have a responsibility, they have a duty to give leadership and 

pave the road for labor and management study and negotiation of these problems facing our economy 

and our working force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to this Bill proposing compulsory arbitration. There is no question but there 

are many, many people who have given this matter study who are equally opposed. I noticed in the 

September 1st issue of the Regina Leader Post the position taken by the Canadian Bar Association. My 

colleague from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) pointed out the position of the Bar in respect to the ex parte 

injunction. Here is the position that they took in respect to arbitration or compulsory arbitration. Let me 

quote: 

 

A resolution proposing compulsory binding arbitration of strikes or lock-outs which threaten public, 

health, safety or essential services was defeated by the Labor Relations Section of the Canadian Bar 

Association on Wednesday. 

 

This appears in the September 1st issue of the Regina Leader Post. 

 

Students and researchers of these types of laws have found that such laws do not resolve industrial strife, 

they encourage it. But more important, Mr. Speaker, this proposal seriously denies freedom and rights of 

people. 

 

One year ago my youngsters bought me a record for my birthday. It is a transcript of a speech or a series 

of speeches and program of the Washington March held on August 23, 1963. The main speaker at this 

huge meeting which was attended by some half a million people was Dr. Martin Luther King, a Civil 

Rights leader. In his address to this throng of people he talked about the need for justice, he talked about 

the need for recognizing and ensuring rights of people. He concluded his remarks by saying: 

 

Let freedom ring, and when that happens we will all be able to sing together, free at last, free at last. 

Thank God we are free at last. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this legislation is passed the workers, the citizens of this province will say, ―Free no 

more, free no more. Dear God, we are free no more‖. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

65 

I will support the amendment. I will oppose the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to say but a few words in this debate in reference 

to this Bill because I do not feel that passing it in its present form would solve the problems of this strike 

or other strikes that might arise. I take exception to forcing workers to accept working conditions and 

wages which have been enforced or imposed upon them by arbitration until at least both parties 

concerned have exhausted entirely, and I might emphasize entirely, their rights and their privileges to 

bargain and to bargain freely with out hindrance or imposition. 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, that we as Members of the Legislature should be taking a much deeper and perhaps 

more serious look into the rising cost of living or what the worker has to pay for a say a new car, or what 

the farmer has to pay to the implement dealer for a combine or tractor. These are the things that the 

farmers are concerned with. If we were to take some action in this line and to its curtailment in prices 

then I feel we would automatically eliminate to a great extent strikes and the causes of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — And might I suggest to the Government, Mr. Speaker, that if this strike is settled, I hope 

it will be very soon, that I still do not feel that we have eliminated the cause of strikes unless some 

measure is taken to face up to the facts that this good fortune in our so-called affluent society must be 

shared by all people of our community. So until this is done I cannot see why we should take steps or 

even consider taking steps to eliminate the rights of some of our citizens to protect themselves, if we are 

not prepared to make it possible for them to enjoy the affluency enjoyed by others. In passing this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, we are not only taking away from our workers the right toe express their wishes in regard 

to the working conditions and their wages but we are taking away from them the right to say what 

condition and what terms of their wages that they would like to go back to work to. 

 

In further examination of the Bill, I find that it covers a very large scope of workers. Coming from the 

constituency of Weyburn where we have several hospitals I find that it will affect the workers and the 

staff in these hospitals. These hospitals, whether it is the unions, whether it is privately operated, or a 

mental hospital, they have not to my knowledge ever had any trouble in negotiating or bargaining as to 

the salaries or working conditions or any other benefit that they might so desire. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is definitely unfair to include hospital workers at this time in a Bill when they have given 

no reason why they should be included in it. I fell, Mr. Speaker, that there is only one way and one way 

only to grapple with the problems of strikes and that is by bringing wages, prices and profits into some 

proper relationship with human justice. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I feel that the amendment which was presented so ably by our Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) is a good amendment which suggests that we specifically deal with the 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

66 

single dispute referred to. It provides for the return to work of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

employees involved. It calls for the continuation of negotiations and employment of impartial and 

conciliation procedures. And if, after a period of time, this fails it should be referred to an arbitrator, one 

named by the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan. This, Mr. Speaker, to my way of thinking, is a fair and a 

just way to deal with this situation and I take much pleasure in supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a only a few comments on 

this Bill, largely because I think it is a manifestation of many other problems that will require a good 

deal of discussion not only in this province but in this country in the future. 

 

This year we have witnessed in this country one of the worst years of many of labor-management unrest. 

One of the results of this, Mr. Speaker, is the settlements in favor of increased wages which have not 

followed the generally accepted guide lines of increases of wages to cover the cost of living and an 

increase in productivity. I am continually amazed, Mr. Speaker, at how the Members opposite look with 

such great disfavor on increases of vie or six per cent an greater, while many people in this country, I am 

sure, particularly in rural areas, people employed in service stations, cafes, farmers, people privately 

employed across this country, would look upon wage increases of that nature on an annual basis as being 

exceptionally favorable. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the concept of collective bargaining between management and labor is not 

one which is undertaken a very great deal of the time in our society in good faith. It has now resolved 

itself into demands by unions of how much can I get. The concept of cooperation in our society has run 

on to foul ground. In many cases the corporations or the companies accept these large wage increases 

and simply pass them on to the consumer in increased prices. This is the way they maintain their margin 

of profit. There is quite ample evidence today in the economy that is depressing. The result is increased 

inflation resulting in a deteriorating standard of living for all of us. 

 

The Seaway workers, the railway workers have been able to extract from the economy simply by use of 

sheer power unfair increases that will be passed on to the rest of us in increase in prices. Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that we are all in favor of what is reasonable increases to the working man. I am also amazed, 

Mr. Speaker, how often the Members opposite speak about controlling corporation profits. It is quite 

true that each year that the profit picture of many companies increases, but they always fail to mention 

the investment that is put in by that company. It would be a strange thing if a company like Steel of 

Canada which last year invested over $200,000,000 in new capital facilities didn‘t have a higher profit 

this year. I would suggest that if they didn‘t then labor and all of us in this country are in a very poor 

situation indeed. High prices to labor or extravagant demands must be controlled and become somewhat 

reasonable. Once these are reasonable then the increased prices passed on to the consumer through the 

various companies, I am sure, can be given a much tougher look. 

 

But I am greatly concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the people 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

67 

who cannot share in those wage increases that we have seen. There are many people in our society who 

have fixed incomes. Many of them I have already mentioned, the small independent operators, 

businessmen, barbershop operators and many nonunionized people also who are not able to bargain for 

the large increases that we have witnessed. I think that the current dispute between the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation and the OCAW is only a sign of the times in this country which indeed illustrates to 

us that we have lost the spirit of cooperation and that too many of us have decided to go it alone and get 

everything that we can. The attitude has already resulted in unrealistic gains for some people and 

increased costs that will jeopardize the position of our country in export markets. I am convinced at this 

time that this is a situation requiring strong leadership from the governments across this country in the 

interests of people who are not able to protect themselves. 

 

I was very pleased this afternoon to listen to the member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) who adequately 

outlined the need of protection for people who were not able to protect themselves in this power 

struggle. 

 

I think the second important point is that today we are continually seeing complete disregard for the law. 

And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is great concern in this regard. For better or worse we Members 

of this Assembly and indeed of the legislatures and the parliaments of this country are elected to pass in 

our wisdom or poor judgement, the laws of this country. Yet we are continually seeing people who 

disregard these laws, and a very adequate example is the recent railroad strike. There is provision that if 

we don‘t like a law in the next election we can change the members who have made it and I think that 

this is a fairly realistic approach. But if as individuals we all wish to take the law in our own hands and o 

more or less what we like, if we think what we are being offered is unfair, then the governmental system 

as we know it is beginning to break down. A continued trend in this direction is almost certain to lead to 

increased violence and anarchy. Government itself must reassume its roll of strong leadership and it 

must insist that the laws as passed by legislature or parliament are obeyed and upheld. It they are not 

then we in effect have no government at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, because I am anxious to expedite the proceedings here a s quickly as 

possible, I support this legislation although I do not believe that compulsory arbitration is the solution to 

all of our problems. I believe that at this point in time it is absolutely necessary that we bring about at 

least certain wage settlements that are somewhat realistic. I do not believe that other industries can be 

compared. I believe there is only one basis for a new agreement between management and the 

employees and that is an agreement which is based upon the productivity and cost of living index. Other 

areas of course are certainly open to negotiation but I believe that this is the only arrangement which can 

be arrived at which is realistic as far as Canadian economy is concerned. I feel that in this case the 

Government is doing its very best and is doing the proper thing in attempting to set some guide lines for 

what are realistic increases where the working people are concerned. 

 

Also I believe that some of the provisions in this Act, while they may appear to be somewhat strict, are 

necessary for the provision of decertification and to make the union a legal entity and I feel these are 

necessary largely because I think at this 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

68 

time that governments can no longer tolerate disregard for the law as it is passed. I think it wrong to 

allow groups in our society to disregard the law and more or less dictate what they think is good, or 

whatever their power is able to take from society as a whole. I think that the Government is doing the 

proper thing in passing legislation which is tough enough that we can legally and morally expect it to be 

upheld. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly support the Bill as it is presented and do not support 

the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, there are a few observations I 

would like to make. I know that we are called here today on a serious and important matter. Certainly 

many of us have reservations about legislation of this nature that would take from the working man any 

of the rights and privileges and freedoms which he enjoys today. Yet in the interest of the economy and 

of the people of Saskatchewan, the time has arrived when we must muster the courage and the intestinal 

fortitude to take the action that the serious of events today demands. 

 

Having been around this Legislature for quite considerable time I can recall some ten years ago the 

Power Corporation and the Government of that day were having some considerable difficulty in 

negotiating a new contract. It wasn‘t the Opposition of the day that were using obstructionist tactics to 

prevent the Government from negotiating a fair and equitable contract while at the same time being 

conscious of the fights and privileges of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I know today that many accusations have been made against the Government. I think it was termed that 

this was a political vendetta against this particular union. I think it was said the Government had been 

contriving for some time to bring about these precise conditions in order that it could set the stage for 

this precise, vicious legislation which we are having today. It condemned the Government for not taking 

a direct hand and taking the negotiations out of the hands of management into the hands of the 

Government. The Government was condemned for dragging its feet for five months when a settlement 

could have been made. Someone said, I think the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), ―They sat 

tight from March to mid-August‖. 

 

These are some of the accusations that are being made today. I thought it would be of interest to this 

session, particularly to the younger members, to realize that there was a time in history when a former 

Government‘s hands did not look so lily white, when they too were having some unkind things said 

about them. I want to read some of those unkind things that were said in that day when that Government 

faced this same particular union over the bargaining table. I looked up the annual report of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation for 1955. It said that the Power Corporation began negotiations with 

the union on April 29, 1954 and carried on these negotiations for nine months in 1954 and a settlement 

was finally reached in May, 1955, one year and one and a half months. 

 

Now, I ask who were dragging their feet at the table at that time? I want to read to you from press 

reports what I have read in going 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

69 

back over the papers, some of the comments made in that dispute. These comments were made by 

officials of the union and it is interesting to note that in November, 1954 . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — You should hear what they say about you. 

 

Mr. Cameron: – . . . Local 649: 

 

Oil Workers International Union passed an emergency resolution at the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour meeting in Prince Albert and they said, ―After having dragged their feet for seven months this 

is an emergency which we can no longer tolerate‘. 

 

And the resolution charged the Government of the day, the Provincial Government with nullifying the 

rights of free collection bargaining . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame. 

 

Mr. Cameron: – . . . by restricting its management groups that they had no power to bargain on wages. 

Today the Opposition says we should have stepped in and taken the bargaining out of the hands of 

management. In that day they were condemned for not having left the bargaining in the hands of 

management. Here are some further charges by the union of the day. It says: 

 

Personnel men in employers‘ organizations are attempting to scuttle security rights, affecting 

promotion and layoffs, and rehiring . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — No strike. 

 

Mr. Cameron: – That was the atmosphere that prevailed. After that the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour, which I understand by tonight‘s paper, are to pay us a visit tomorrow, likewise got into the act 

in 1955 and met in convention. They had some words that weren‘t very gentle too. I want to read a few 

of those as reported in their convention: 

 

The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour charged the Government‘s wage freeze had brought a 

deadlock in negotiations between Government employees and management of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation, Saskatchewan Government Telephones, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 

and other crown corporations and all government agencies. 

 

There was a wage freeze where the Government had stated, 

 

We do not intend to give any considerations to wage increases this year. 

 

The Federation condemned the Government‘s action again as 

 

. . . nullifying the rights of the free collective bargaining. 

 

And this is interesting. They termed it: 

 

anti-labor, reactionary and completely dictatorial. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

70 

This was the friend of labor in those days. And the Federation went so far as to demand that the 

Government rescind its decree and restore to all its employees free, unrestricted and realistic collective 

bargaining. Where had their rights and privileges gone during those nine months? Labor people felt it 

anyway. They had been washed down the drain. And then the Saskatchewan Federation followed up 

with a brief to the Government and I read that brief with some interest. In this brief the Federation of 

Labour linked the CCF, which touts its labor legislation the most advanced in Canada, with anti-labor 

employers. Now they ask, why did the Government not interfere? Saskatchewan Federation of Labour in 

that day said: 

 

Labor unions feel that the so-called right to collective bargaining with the Government which the 

Government has held as unique in this country because the Trade Union Act applies to the provincial 

civil servants and crown corporations staff, is actually a sham. 

 

Because managements of crown corporations have been told by the administration that they cannot 

bargain on wages. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They can put a freeze on them. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Note at this time, no long the Power Corporation but the Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance employees had ceased negotiations in November. Discussions were discontinued. Employees 

of Saskatchewan Government Telephones had suspended negotiations with management. They were no 

longer at the bargaining table and the employees of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company had 

adjourned negotiations to await the outcome of the dispute between the Power Corporation and the 

Government. So here we had a condition existing not only in the Power Corporation, but in the civil 

service, in the crown corporations, in telephone in buses, and power, where there had been an order, a 

wage freeze order had been issued, and they refused to change that particular stand. This was the spirit 

of labor unrest in the province in 1955. 

 

Then I notice, in early 1955, in fact in February, the local of the OWIU stated that ―strike preparation is 

continuing in full force and strike action is almost of certain consequence if early settlement is not 

obtained‖. 

 

And that went on from February until May before a settlement was obtained. I don‘t think it is mere 

rumor that consideration was being given to calling a session of the House such as was called yesterday, 

that legislation had been prepared which would at that time compel the unions to go back to work and to 

have compulsory arbitration. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Jekyll and Hyde. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — When the union capitulated it wasn‘t brought in and I understand an order was issued 

for it to be destroyed. 

 

We have heard a lot about this Government being anti-labor. I want to review the atmosphere of labor in 

Saskatchewan today in the civil service and in the crown corporations. I happen to be the Minister in 

charge of the two of them. I want to state here on behalf of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

the first 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

71 

time in the company‘s history a new contract was signed before the old contract expired and 

negotiations with the Saskatchewan Transportation Company lasted a mere two and a half days and set a 

record for the shortest negotiations in the history of the company. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I would say that was a responsible and a prudent union and the new contract, signed 

in two and a half days on December 15, 1965, provided with salary increases of 3.6 per cent for 1966 

and 3.1 per cent for 1967. Coming to the Saskatchewan Government Telephones that employs about as 

many people as does the Power Corporation, we met with the union that represents the employees of the 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones. We sat down with the union to negotiate a new contract on 

September 13th and concluded negotiations on October 28th, 1965. Negotiations lasted 18 days with a 

total of 26 meetings which established here again a record as the shortest period of negotiations in the 

history of the Saskatchewan Government Telephones. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The contract was signed in December, 1965. The new contract provided for wage 

increases of 3.6 per cent for 1966 and 3.24 per cent for 1967. 

 

While these negotiations were going on in the crown corporations for which I am the Minister 

responsible, negotiations were going on with the employees of the Sodium Sulphate Plant, with 

employees of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance. They too reached a mutually satisfactory 

agreement, Sodium Sulphate a settlement of 3.2 per cent; Insurance, 4 per cent. These are men and 

women in the employ of various phases of Government activity. They are each represented by their own 

union. No doubt these unions too had considered the increase in the cost of living that was mentioned 

here today. They had looked to the overall economy of the province. They had considered what in their 

judgement was fair and equitable for the ensuing year and the coming year. 

 

Now, we find the position where some people in the Opposition say, well, they are only asking for eight 

per cent. It‘s a modest increase. Probably it should have been granted, they will say. Thus this legislation 

is a mere excuse to shackle and put in chains this particular union. I ask you to consider this. The union 

which represented the employees of the Saskatchewan Government Telephones has almost three times 

the number of employees of this union, those unions which represented and negotiated on behalf of the 

other crown corporations settled for what they considered was a fair and equitable adjustment in salaries. 

Now, I ask you this, why should one very small segment of labor say, ―I am entitled to more than the 

others negotiated for? Our judgement is correct, theirs was wrong. We don‘t care what they settled for. 

We are out to get our own demands.‖ I wonder how the people of Saskatchewan, yes, and the people in 

the other crown corporations and the other unions, who have acted with such responsibility, view the 

actions of this particular union when they are asking for twice the amount of the settlement that these 

unions agreed to work under. 

 

In the Saskatchewan Government Telephones, after the contract 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

72 

was signed, both the company officials and the union representatives commented on the cordial and 

friendly relations that existed during the term of the negotiations. These parties to the bargaining in these 

public utilities recognized that they had an obligation that goes beyond those imposed by law, 

obligations rooted in the character of the service to the community. They were aware that the existence 

of these obligations were such as to impel those representing the employer and those representing the 

employees to develop a relationship marked by mutual confidence and respect. Relationships of this 

kind do result in agreements and understanding that will be beneficial to the employees, to the institution 

which they serve and to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I wish to pay a compliment to the unions and the employees in Government service in general, 

particularly my own two in the Telephone Corporation and in the Bus company, for assuming a 

responsible attitude, for being conscious not only of their own rights and privileges but of their 

obligations to the institution that employees them and to the people of the province and as members of 

society and as citizens of the province, to work for what is fair and just to us and that does not ample on 

the rights and privileges and worthiness of others. I ask you, if you look at this in this light and ask 

yourselves, wherein is there injustice? Where does it lie when a union, after a mere five months, 

compared to fourteen months before, gets up, closes its briefcases and leaves the bargaining table and 

goes on to the street to announce, ―We‘re going on strike‖? Who ceased negotiations and why? And this 

type of legislation which we have? And surely to goodness, if we were to keep faith with those other 

unions and those other employees who have kept faith with us, we cannot shudder or capitulate in the 

face of this which in turn would be a kick in the teeth to them. That we do not propose to do. 

 

I support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, the time interval that has been involved since the 

employees of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation withdrew their services has been scant and with the 

calling of a special session within a few days of that time and the lateness of receipt of the printed Bill, 

the opportunity to properly prepare for this debate has been somewhat limited. However, there are a few 

brief comments which I wish to make at this time with respect to the Bill which is before us. 

 

Compulsory arbitration, Mr. Speaker, I believe, is regarded by most people as a very distasteful business 

and it is generally accepted that it should be used as a final measure only when all other methods of 

settling disputes have failed and a situation results where peril, extreme hardship or danger to the 

economy of the country materializes. I suggest to you tonight, Mr. Speaker, that there is a little evidence 

to indicate that such a situation exists in Saskatchewan today. I believe it is evident to most people who 

have been close to the matter that the differences separating management and the employees are not so 

sufficiently great that a solution could not have been reached if a more flexible attitude had been 

assumed by management. 

 

As late as 3 p.m. on September 1st, management stated that 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

73 

it was not prepared to move in any direction on any of the outstanding proposals put forth by the 

employees in spite of the fact that it had been made clear by the union that it would be available to 

continue bargaining. But, Mr. Speaker, instead of attempting to arrive at a mutually agreeable solution 

the Premier saw fit to call a press conference for 4 o‘clock, he had called the conference — incidentally 

even before the 3 p.m. meeting — for the purpose I expect for announcing that a special session of the 

Legislature would be called. At that time the impression was left that the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation customers would be left without gas service in spite of the fact that it had been made clear 

that this would not be the case. The experience since the work stoppage occurred would seem to indicate 

that the Premier and his colleagues were attempting to use scare tactics in order to gain support for this 

kind of legislative action., The truth of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that supervisory personnel are in 

charge of gas distribution and the union membership stands by ready to meet emergency measures 

which may arise involving the health and the safety of the public — including gas leaks — and the 

needs of institutions caring for the sick and the aged. With these considerations in mind, Mr. Speaker, 

then it is not surprising, if I say once again, that it is felt in some quarters that the Government 

welcomed this opportunity of the work stoppage as an excuse to take the course of action which is under 

considerations at this moment. It has been said in this House, and I repeat again, that no attempt was 

made by the Government to undertake the legitimate steps of collective bargaining. No attempt was 

made to set up mediation proceedings, no attempt was made at conciliation nor was there an attempt 

made at voluntary arbitration with an arbitrator being appointed who was mutually agreeable to the 

disputants in this particular case. 

 

I believe this suspicion would seem to be borne out by the fact that Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

employees are not singled out at this time for attention. The Bill ranges far and wide, Mr. Speaker. At 

the outset it was suggested that employees of Saskatchewan Government Telephones might also be 

included. It was later announced that these employees were not to be included at this time, leaving the 

inference that they too would be rolled into the package if they should dare provoke this particular 

Government. 

 

So I believe, Mr. Speaker, that without provocation other workers including hospital workers have been 

tried and sentenced in advance. This leads us to believe that the hard line may be expected with these 

employees with the Department of Health holding a tight rein on the demands of the hospital boards 

with the ultimate result that wages for these hospital workers will likely be met with a good deal of 

resistance. I say that this is particularly unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because a large number of the people 

referred to in this particular legislation are people who are at the lower end of the wage scale, unless 

doctors are to be regarded as hospital workers and I rather suspect, Mr. Speaker, that they are not for 

purposes of this legislation. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that according to the annual survey of the Income Tax Department 

which takes note of earnings by occupation that doctors are at the top of the heap as far as income across 

Canada is concerned, that farm labor invariably year after year is at the bottom of the heap and that 

hospital workers and people in that job category are next to the bottom. I think it is unfortunate and it is 

also to be expected 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

74 

that future requests for an upward adjustment for the wages of these employees will meet with a 

minimum of success with the knowledge that their group, their bargaining group has been made 

impotent by this particular piece of legislation. These are workers, Mr. Speaker, who have a fine record 

for tolerance and for responsibility and they are not deserving of the kind of arbitrary action which the 

Government has taken. Hospital employees in Saskatchewan have never been on strike, Mr. Speaker, in 

fact no strike vote to my knowledge has ever been taken among these employees. It is extremely 

doubtful that strike action would ever be used by these employees but I make this point and attempt to 

add emphasis to what I have already said in saying that it is now clear that for these employees with the 

option to withdraw their service snow gone their power to bargain ahs been nullified and the union 

representing hospital workers has been relegated to a position little better than that of a debating society. 

 

I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, as other speakers have noted, that the Government may see the error of 

their ways only when it is too late to stop the flow of trained personnel which have been named in this 

legislation to other parts of Canada. Concern has already been expressed at the exodus of large numbers 

of people to other provinces and I suggest to you today that the Government may be sure that this trend 

will continue and it will be accelerated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dispute between the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers and the Power Corporation 

cannot be regarded as a single special case in this country at the present time. It stems from conditions 

that are not only well known by Canadian citizens but they are conditions which are causing grave 

concern among those who are presently in the ranks of labor. Job security and automation, the rising 

cost of living, are not matters which will be disposed of by unfounded claims that high wages are 

causing inflation and that labor in Canada is pricing itself out of the world market. One can only suspect 

that these claims are being made by some people who know better and are using this as a smoke screen. 

 

To go to a rather authoritative source, Mr. Speaker, I go to the United States Bureau of Labour statistics 

in a survey of average yearly increases in wages, salaries and labor benefits in manufacturing from 1957 

to 1964, the latest data which are available. Canada lags behind in wage gains compared with eight other 

countries. These other countries, Mr. Speaker, are the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden, the 

Netherlands, France, Italy, West Germany and Japan. I think this makes it relatively clear, Mr. Speaker, 

that Canadian labor is not pricing itself out of the world market. 

 

From the United States Department of Commerce data the comparison of percentage increases in labor 

costs per unit of output in manufacturing for the same industrial countries gives us also a rather 

interesting text. It shows Canada 3 per cent, France 42 per cent, Mr. Speaker, the United States 5 per 

cent, Germany 23 per cent, Japan 11 per cent, the Netherlands 26, Sweden 16, the United Kingdom 16 

per cent, Italy 17 per cent. I think it may be seen once again, Mr. Speaker, that Canada‘s unit labor cost 

in manufacturing was the lowest of all those countries which were studied. In 1960 for some further 

evidence, Mr. Speaker, the average hourly income in Canadian manufacturing was $1.78 per hour; last 

year it was $2.11; the increase is 19 per cent. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

75 

But let‘s not talk exclusively of manufacturing. If we examine the total, the entire labor income across 

Canada, the increase during this period of time was 43 per cent, but I think to gain the proper 

prospective while examining this issue, Mr. Speaker, an examination of corporate profits by comparison 

should also be in order. In 1960 corporate profits before income tax totalled $3,338,000,000. Last year, 

1965, these had risen to $4,199,000,000, for an increase, Mr. Speaker, of some 56 per cent. 

 

Well, I think most people would agree, Mr. Speaker, that a double standard would seem to exist in our 

society when labor gains must be justified by increase profits or by increased productivity. They must be 

justified while increased profits go largely unnoticed. Unions are required to justify their demands in 

terms of increased productivity in the public interests. The actions of trade unions are examined closely 

and are exposed to public scrutiny while the decisions which are made by the industrial community are 

made quietly, Mr. Speaker, without fanfare. Workers are expected as a public duty to exercise the 

necessary restraint to prevent inflation, but what about profit rates, Mr. Speaker? What about capital cost 

allowance for income tax purposes? Why not salary rates for business executives and management with 

the full family listed on the payroll as employees? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was interested earlier in the day to hear a few remarks which the Premier had to pass with 

respect to inflation. I believe I had some notes on it here somewhere but I believe it might be a fitting 

time perhaps to have a look at some of the causes of inflation which the Premier might have missed in 

his examination of the problem. Members I believe will recall that at the end of World War II there had 

been created a brand new flock of war-made millionaires who were not satisfied to continue playing the 

game under existing rules and in a short time they were successful in having the excess profits tax and 

price controls lifted. But with an accumulation, Mr. Speaker, of wartime savings and backlog of 

consumer needs to be filled an with the debts cleared, the steel companies did not go on strike, Mr. 

Speaker; they simply raised the price of steel by 12 1/2 per cent overnight, Mr. Speaker, not because of 

wage increases but simply because they regarded this as good business practice. Other industries that 

were affected directly by the price of steel followed this example and this caused an immediate increase 

in the prices of stoves, refrigerators, automobiles, farm trucks and farm machinery and so on. This 

caused the wage spiral with wages chasing the cost of living ever since. I think it must be agreed also 

that an important factor in this situation has also been administered prices by large firms in determining 

the price level of their product without regard for the demand side of the market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier had a few words to say also earlier in the day with respect to the Swedish 

example in regard to the labor relations picture in that country. I trust that some Members may have also 

taken note of an editorial which appeared in the August 29th issue of the Regina Leader Post which was 

entitled ―Sweden Points the Way‖. This particular editorial draws attention to Sweden‘s rather enviable 

record with respect to time lost as a result of labor disputes. The editorial points out that from 1954 to 

1963 the number of days lost annually per hundred persons employed never exceeded 5.1, and twice the 

figure dropped to .1. It is interesting to note also that the low figure in Canada was in 1960 when that 

figure dropped to 15.6, that is days lost with respect to each one 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

76 

hundred workers in the labor force and the record in Canada was 15.6 in 1960 with days lost ranging up 

as high as 57.8. I think it is especially appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that this particular editorial states that 

this enviable record in Sweden, which I expect the Premier was drawing attention to and which was 

mentioned in this editorial, points out quite conclusively that the enviable condition which was see in 

Sweden was not, and I repeat, was not achieved through compulsory arbitration. I believe also that it is 

well known that the economics of these two countries, Mr. Speaker, rest upon entirely different 

foundations. I suggest to you at this time that, if some of those who in the past have shown a preference 

for the anarchy of production and the planlessness with which production is undertaken in the capitalist 

jungle and who wish to reap the benefits of a socialist economy, they will also manifest their willingness 

to make the necessary adjustments. 

 

It would appear, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has given recognition to the rising cost of living at least 

as it applies to his own operation. He saw fit I believe to raise his own per diem allowance for $25 a day 

to $50 a day as he travels hither and yon. He seems to suffer no remorse when he accepts his present 

remuneration as Premier in addition to the $2,700 a year approximately that he receives rain or shine by 

virtue of his services a former Member of Parliament for Moose Jaw Lake Centre. The Premier also 

seems to favor comfortable living if the $17,000 renovation to his office and Executive council 

chambers can be regarded a guide. The purchase of an executive type aircraft for the Cabinet and 

himself to fly about in would seem to add further to the belief that some luxuries are to be expected in 

this affluent society of ours. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that it might be most appropriate at this time to examine the wage scale of the 

employees who are involved in this current work stoppage, beginning at the bottom of the wage scale 

with group one up to approximately group six to bring this thing into proper perspective. The Minister of 

Public works (Mr. Gardiner) when he spoke a short while ago was extremely selective in his choice of 

job categories. I want to begin with a group one, Mr. Speaker, quickly up to group six. Group one shows 

a junior blue print operator at a handsome salary of $206 a month, a junior clerk $214, a junior clerk 

Typist $224. We come to group two, Mr. Speaker, where an accountant clerk earns $237 a month, a 

clerk typist $245, a commercials artist‘s helper $253, a file and records clerk $270, a junior audit clerk 

$286. In group three, Mr. Speaker, this range finally comes into the $300 a month category. Group four, 

Mr. Speaker, is in the mid-$300 a month category and group five ranges between $335 to $385. Finally 

when we reach group six the top of that particular group shows $420. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one might expect that the Premier with his own taste for lavish living might recognize the 

need for an upward adjustment for these employees. However, Mr. Speaker, from his ivory tower, this 

20th century Marie Antoinette, regards this $206 to $420 a month range as ample to raise, to feed, to 

clothe, and to educate a family. It must be apparent to most people that over half of that monthly figure 

which I have quoted, Mr. Speaker, will be absorbed by a payment on a very modest NHA home and the 

grocery bill. Over half of that figure will be dissolved by that particular payment of those two features. I 

expect that had the Premier lived in the days of the French Revolution that he instead of Marie 

Antoinette might very well have been the author of that now famous expression, ―Let them eat cake‖. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

77 

I intend, Mr. Speaker, to vote against this Bill on second reading for three reasons in particular. First 

because I am convinced that the differences between management and the employees of the SPC are not 

so great but that they could have been easily resolved through the normal process of collective 

bargaining. Secondly it must be recognized that the compulsory settlement of this particular work 

stoppage does nothing to solve a very serious inflationary problem which is affecting the entire 

Canadian economy, a problem, Mr. Speaker, which had its roots in action which was taken by 

government over 20 years ago, a problem which will be solved only by government action on the 

national level. The Premier, I suggest, would do well to use whatever influence he may have with his 

colleagues in Ottawa to convince them to show the necessary courage and good judgement to apply 

necessary and evident remedial measures before an already critical problem becomes more acute. 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a fundamental principle. I oppose compulsory arbitration 

except where all other methods of settlement have been exhausted and an emergency situation exists. I 

feel quite sincerely, Mr. Speaker, that such is not the case in this dispute and I will be obliged to vote 

against the motion and I will be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to make a few comments on statements 

made by the Premier, the hon. Member for Morse, when he introduced the Bill this morning. He said 

and I quote his directly: 

 

Only since this Government took office has the Power Corporation had reasonable profits. 

 

He implies, Mr. Speaker, that this is due to more efficient operation of Saskatchewan Power because 

Saskatchewan now has a Liberal Government. The Premier may not know it but intelligent people know 

that this implication is idiotically inaccurate. Improvement in Saskatchewan Power profits anticipated in 

1966 compared with the some $8,500,000 realized in 1965 will be directly due, in the main, to the 

increased proportion of generated power which is hydro power and to the inclusion of the utility 

previously owned by the city of Regina within the general operations of Saskatchewan Power. The 

Premier in introducing the bill this morning said and I quote him again directly: 

 

It is the duty of the Government to manage the affairs of the province in a practical and responsible 

manner. Any uncalled-for invasion of the resources of Saskatchewan Power will have to be borne by 

Saskatchewan Power and therefore indirectly by the people of this province. 

 

He made a remark about a debt in excess of $530,000,000 and a net return of something in the 

neighborhood of two per cent on the investment in Saskatchewan Power. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

Provincial Treasury of this province is still borrowing money for Saskatchewan Power. In fact, less than 

one week ago the Provincial Treasury borrowed $15,000,000 maturing on October 1st, 1986. At a price 

of $97.75, to yield 6.45 per cent. This is indeed interesting, Mr. Speaker. It is general knowledge in the 

investment community across this country that the Province of Saskatchewan was ready to come to 

market with a bond floatation of between $10,000,000 and $15,000,000 in late June or early July. On the 

same day that the Saskatchewan issue was to come to market 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

78 

an issue of Toronto Metro municipal corporation, came to market at a cost to that municipal corporation 

of 6.09 per cent. The Saskatchewan bond issue was withdrawn. It is also generally common knowledge 

in the investment industry in this country that the withdrawal occurred because of the decision, I suggest 

in a rather intemperate mode, of the Provincial Treasurer of this province. He was not going to pay a rate 

I the market place equal to the rat Toronto Metro had to pay and this was the reason for the withdrawal. 

Mr. Speaker, two months later the Saskatchewan issue came to market at a cost to this province not of 

6.09 but of 6.45. The difference of .36 per cent means an additional cost on the $15,000,000 issue of 

$54,000 per annum and for the next 20 years a total of $1,080,000. That is an invasion of the potential 

earnings of Saskatchewan Power and will have to be paid for by the people of this province. 

 

I recall that a once prominent Liberal, now departed, derisively commented in a rather flippant reply to 

an inquiry in the House of Commons, ―What‘s a million?‖ Well, it‘s $80,000 less than the additional 

cost which Saskatchewan Power must now bear because of the intemperance and incompetence of the 

present Provincial Treasurer. Is this not an uncalled-for invasion of the resources of Saskatchewan 

Power? Will this cost not have to be borne by Saskatchewan Power and, therefore, indirectly by the 

people of this province? Is this businesslike? Is this efficient? I‘ll admit the market is difficult to gauge 

but surely the Treasury officials and the Provincial Treasurer of this province are aware of the fact that 

we were in a tightening money situation and could quite logically have come to market in the initial 

stages rather than wait for the two month delay. Mr. Speaker, if it were not for this type of incompetence 

I suggest that Saskatchewan Power might well have been in a position to make a more generous offer to 

its employees and carried out proper negotiations which might well have led to a satisfactory settlement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment and oppose the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of speaking in this debate until I 

listened to the member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) who did not stay on the Bill at all so my speech will 

probably be in tune with his. 

 

On rising to speak in this debate I submit it is significant that this is the second special session that has 

had to be called in recent weeks to deal with a labor dispute which could not be solved by annoy other 

means. It would appear that labor relations are at a low ebb across Canada and the main reason for this 

situation appears to lie with the actions of certain labor leaders. The question we must ask is whether 

Canada is to be governed by its elected representatives or by labor unions who for the most part are 

controlled from outside of our own country. I cannot help but continue to be amazed at the strong 

opposition by the NDP to American capital to develop our economy while at the same time they have an 

overwhelming desire to use American labor leaders to destroy our economy prior to the next election. 

 

Across the country there is a growing concern that labor unions feel they are above the law of the land 

and in Saskatchewan they are aided and abetted by a political party that a few 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

79 

years ago ignored the please of the small businessman and the farmer and hitched their wagon to the 

labor star, only to find that they have lost their identity as a farmer organization; and instead of the dog 

wagging its tail, the tail is now wagging the dog. 

 

The labor union movement must be recognized as one of the most important segments of our society and 

well they should be, but as such they must be expected to act responsibly. I want to compliment the 

Member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) for his remarks this afternoon concerning the responsibility of 

unions, because they are only too true. It is true also that the majority of our unions do have responsible 

leaders and do act in a responsible manner. For this the country can be thankful. Unfortunately there are 

a few unions that fall into the clutches of the irresponsible labor leader and other subversive elements 

who are concerned only with their own power and glory rather than for the benefit of their members or 

for the benefit of society to which they belong. 

 

This appears to be the case in the present situation. Surely to goodness responsible leaders with the best 

interests of their members at heart would not have called a strike at a time which would cost their 

members three days‘ holiday pay. Surely the leaders, if they had been responsible, would not instruct 

their members to picket illegally in such a way that the police force had to be called on several occasions 

throughout the province to bring about legal picketing. Yet these were the action of the leaders of the 

OCAW. One is not really to surprised, however, when one realizes that the international representative 

of this union is the same one that used such bad judgement in several other situations in the last year. 

The OCAW has unfortunately been coerced and duped into playing politics for the benefit of our NDP 

friends opposite. Their knowledge of politics leaves a great deal to be desired. This combined vendetta 

against the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan is the real reason that the strike was called before 

conciliation, mediation or voluntary arbitration could be adopted, and don‘t ever let the people of 

Saskatchewan think any different. 

 

The situation that exists in Saskatchewan today did not begin with the strike of the Power Corporation, 

but it had its birth in a back room when our CCF-NDF friends opposite convinced the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour to pass a resolution a their 1964 convention not to rest until the new Liberal 

Government was defeated. This action directed no doubt by the two SFL executive members sitting 

opposite was the greatest disservice that any so-called responsible organization could have done to the 

union or labor movement in this province. Fortunately most of the unions in the province have placed 

responsibility to their members and the public ahead of politics, and it was only the power-hungry, 

selfish leaders of the OCAW who proved to be the offspring of the SFL resolution. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) has suggested that this Bill is an attempt to stir up animosity 

between various groups of the province but I would remind his and Members opposite that this 

animosity was created a few years ago when the CCF went through an ill-conceived and ill-advised 

wedding with the labor union movement. I said then and I say again now, if labor wants to be respected 

by government regardless of the political party in power, they had better forget political partisanship and 

concern themselves with their responsibility to their members and to the public. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

80 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) also said that there is no need in Canada for compulsory 

legislation. This may be debatable but it is also true that there is no province in Canada where the 

Federation of Labour and its supporting unions have massed such a concerted attempt to overthrow a 

government as here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Member for Regina East (Mr. Smishek) referred to the Liberal promise in the last election campaign 

that we would maintain and improve relations with labor. I want to remind him that this we have done 

under difficult circumstances brought about by that Member and his friends. Did the SFL by which he is 

employed wait to see whether the Liberal Government‘s attitude towards labor was favorable? They did 

not. Before the ink was dry on the oaths of office of our Cabinet Ministers the SFL passed a resolution 

to defeat the Liberal Government at all cots. They dared not wait but had to resort to immediate 

distortion of facts and creation of fear to try and turn the unions against us before we could create a 

favorable atmosphere for labor in this province. The Member for Regina East (Mr. Smishek) and his 

senior colleague from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davis), another executive member of the SFL, have done more 

to destroy relations between this Government and labor than any other two people in Saskatchewan 

today. They have sacrificed the welfare of many of the people who elected them to chase the sacred cow 

of labor as they believe it to be. In the same way other Members opposite have sacrificed the farmers 

who are responsible for their success for 20 long years. 

 

It will be interesting to see Members sit and squirm when the vote on this Bill is taken because no matter 

how they vote they are destroying themselves. It will be interesting to see if the farmer Members will 

succumb to the wishes of labor or vice versa. No matter which way it goes the final wedge has been 

driven between farmer and labor and it is nobody‘s fault but their own. They alone are responsible for 

being on the horns of a dilemma. Any political party who are willing to put all their eggs in one basket, 

who are willing to overlook principles for political expediency, and who are willing to sell out the 

people of the province they represent for the benefit of international labor unions deserve no sympathy 

and their obliteration at the polls at the next election will justly deserved. 

 

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, I will oppose the amendment and support the motion, which due to the 

actions of Members opposite is the only possible solution under the circumstances prevailing in the 

province at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I‘ve been very disappointed in this kind of debate on this 

particular matter in this House today. I had assumed that the Members had come to the Legislature for 

the purpose of settling not only this immediate labor dispute, but of taking steps that would at least 

direct attention towards finding a solution to the rash of labor strikes that we have had throughout 

Canada, not only this year, in the past and that will occur in the future. We must find a solution. My 

chief objection, Mr. Speaker, to this Bill is that it does not provide a solution and it goes far beyond the 

immediate strike facing the Power 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

81 

Corporation at the moment. It is extended to other workers who haven‘t struck, who probably don‘t 

intend to strike at all. 

 

I have in my hand here a wire from Lloydminster and the Premier knows something about that area. It‘s 

an area in which he prefers to carry on his discrimination in the matter of Homeowner Grant and other 

things. His reputation is really high in that particular area of the province. The wire reads: 

 

As provincial workers we have sent our protest to Premier Thatcher. We strongly oppose his taking 

away our bargaining rights. We, as a local, feel and know you will do all possible to fortify this. 

 

Well, I certainly will. There is no good justification for having extended this legislation to include 

hospital workers, to include workers in other public utilities, with the threat that there is a possibility we 

will be extended to the good telephone workers an other good workers, with no regard, Mr. Speaker, to 

whether the cost of living continues to go up or not. It is with deep regret that I heard very few, if any, 

except on this side of the House, refer to the needs of people as individuals, their needs and their 

families‘ needs, Mr. Speaker. It was nothing but a chorus of condemnation of trade unionism as such, 

holding out dire consequences of what will happen to the poor, poor public and to the poor, poor farmers 

as a result of their final resort to strike action. 

 

I don‘t like strikes. No one likes strikes. But we do need to find a solution. It has all been 

over-simplified, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier starts to cry about the farmers. For what reason, Mr. 

Speaker? He hopes they will forget because it is bad administration, bad handling of this case, when he 

was taking his trips to Europe, flying over to the United States to see his millionaire friends, when he 

probably should have been at home attending to business and attending to the affairs of the citizens of 

this province. May I remind him and others that it was the laboring people that built the power line, it 

wasn‘t management. It was the labor people that moved the grain to the seaboards, not management. It‘s 

peculiar that when things go well the railways get all the credit for moving the grain but these workers 

moved the grain. They are the ones that did it. And if they were driven by virtue of economic 

circumstances to take the action they did in their own defence and in defence of their families they had 

every legitimate right to do so, Mr. Speaker. Everyone recognizes that. Church organizations including 

the hierarchy in my own church recognize the responsibility of Legislature, the responsibility of 

businessmen to human beings, to society as a whole. 

 

It emerged in the course of the debates in the House of Commons that these railway workers were 

getting an average salary of some $4,200 a year. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is that sum of money adequate 

to keep a family? Everyone knows this is not the case at all, Mr. Speaker. So let‘s think a little bit more 

about people. Think a little bit more about finding a lasting solution between the conflicts that tear our 

people apart, that make declarations of war between labor and management. And I am saying to you, 

Mr. Speaker, that it will take cooperation, it will take sensible government, reasonable government, not 

shouting and not making fantastic charges and attributing blame to just one segment, to labor alone. 

Maybe we are all to blame, Mr. Speaker, and as a Member here of the Legislature probably I have 

neglected my responsibility in not keeping pounding at finding a solution to 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

82 

the problem. This is what concerns me more than anything else. This Bill does not provide a solution. It 

will aggravate the problem. The Premier‘s speech will aggravate the problem too if he has done it for 

political purposes. Bringing the farmers into it too was merely to find justification and support for this 

own neglect of this important segment of our society. 

 

May I remind him too that while he is talking abut farming that it is farmers‘ daughters and sons who are 

unable to stay on the farm because there isn‘t enough income there, who come to the city, who work for 

the Power Corporation, who work on the highways, who work for private enterprise. Are we not now to 

accept the statement then that when these farmers‘ sons and daughters find it necessary to resort to strike 

action that somehow this is offensive to their parents who still remain on the farm? I think the fathers 

and mothers at home if they could be standing right alongside with them. And what‘s more if these 

farmers had someone to strike against they would be on the picket line too. May I remind the Premier 

and Members opposite, farm strikes have occurred in the province of Quebec. They have occurred in the 

province of Ontario and they are talking about strikes here too. That is a reflection on our inability to 

find a solution to the farm problem too. 

 

Well, if I may take a look, Mr. Speaker, at my typed notes. I certainly overlooked entirely the remarks 

made by the hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) because I considered the source. They are 

completely irresponsible and similarly, I can only say this to the hon. member for Maple Creek (Mr. 

Cameron) that as usual he works around and builds a mole hill into a mountain. Oh what difficulties we 

had with trade unions. And in the next breath he says we are too pro-labor and in this argument we were 

supposed to be anti-labor. Sure there are things said in the course of negotiations it is true, but never, 

never would we have brought down legislation of this kind that would encompass workers other than 

those who are on strike and probably jeopardizing the public. May I suggest, Mr. Speaker, we all have a 

responsibility for the public interests and we should not be so irresponsible as to aggravate a situation 

that will make any effect on the public worse. 

 

Everyone, Mr. Speaker, is now asking why this sudden rash of strike explosions throughout Canada. If 

we are to achieve a lasting solution to this problem we must of necessity in a reasoned and sensible way 

first of all determine the basic cause of this unhappy situation. The rash of current strike explosions in 

Canada can no longer be solely attributed to labor‘s unreasoned demands and disregard for the public 

good or its irresponsible, selfish attitude regardless of consequences. This is just a little too flimsy and a 

simple excuse that is not palatable to farmers any more either. It‘s getting to be old hat. 

 

This Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) mentioned that trade unionists have lost money as a result of 

strike action which indicates to me that this is a deterrent. This too is of great discomfort to them. And 

so I suggest that if this is correct, they are compelled to take this kind of action as a last resort since 

there is no other settlement on the horizon. 

 

The facts are, Mr. Speaker, farmers and laborers, as well as consumers generally, face a desperate 

struggle to maintain reasonable living standards in the face of escalating profits and sharp increases in 

living costs, which the hon. Member for Cannington 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

83 

(Mr. Weatherald) glibly throws to one side. That isn‘t important at all. Every family head and housewife 

will bear witness to this fact of life. Recently a housewife showed me a bit of pork spareribs for which 

she had paid 90 cents. I asked her how she was going to use this food to feed a family of six. She 

replied, ―Put it into soup, I guess, to give it a flavor‖. Now, I swear, Mr. Speaker, that there wasn‘t 

enough meat on these spareribs to properly feed a family of chickadees for a day, Mr. Speaker. Still 90 

cents for it. 

 

Now, I suppose the Premier will get up and say, ―Toby, don‘t you favor higher food prices?‖ Well, let 

me tell the Premier it might have been 90 cents for this little bit of pork spareribs, but what did the 

farmer get for it? He certainly did not get enough to keep in the pig business or you wouldn‘t be so 

worried about farmers going out of pig production in Saskatchewan, and out of sheep production too in 

Saskatchewan. And may I tell the Premier that his gesture of getting 12 sheep on this farm isn‘t going to 

improve the economics of sheep raising in Saskatchewan. Maybe he should go back and shear those 

sheep and help his kid look after those 12 sheep. Great encouragement to the sheep industry in 

Saskatchewan! From cattle rancher to sheep. By gum, in my days of ranching this was considered to be 

quite a comedown, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the price of bread is reaching the price pastry used to be. It is significant to note that 

the price went up when the price of wheat to the farmer went down and his costs were reaching new 

record highs. Still I heard no protest from you people across the way but I have witnessed you people 

across the way, led by your Premier, turning down a motion on this side of the House asking for a 

guaranteed price of $2 for wheat. I can recall the Premier of this province now when he was in the 

House of Commons saying that the farmers shouldn‘t get an increase in floor prices which were already 

low for farm commodities. This is his love for the farmers. The destruction of the Agricultural 

Machinery Testing organization is another good demonstration of his great feeling for farm people. But 

when it becomes convenient to try to divide farmer and labor for political reasons and to support his bad 

administration, then he tries the old trick of saying these wicked workmen have hurt you grievously. I 

daresay, Mr. Speaker, that if the farmers were to organize a Producer Marketing Board tomorrow and 

ask to be able to bargain with the processors and the rest of it for decent prices, he would oppose it too. 

He can‘t support that and at the same time support his 19th century concepts of private enterprise and 

labor relations. This man, Mr. Speaker, is trying to sweep us back to the 19th century in all respects. 

 

In statistics, Mr. Speaker, it is revealed in the period 1961 to 1965, business profits rose by 65 per cent 

while wages went up only 16 per cent in this same period of time. These are pure, hard statistics. It is 

clear that demands for increased wages and salaries did not precede huge profit-taking and result in 

inflation but after this had already occurred well in advance. It is estimated that in this scramble for 

survival wages are now running from two to four years behind schedule. That‘s quite a bit behind, much 

further behind than the railways tin getting caught up with the freight pile-up. 

 

People with set incomes particularly those retired on old age pensions have been most completely 

forgotten. I heard no one mention them. I can recall the former Minister of Agriculture, 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

84 

now Senator McDonald, saying that society didn‘t owe even the old people a living, an increase in their 

pension, when we were talking about $125 a month for the old age pensioners. We need to start to think 

in this light, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The farmer, as usual, is of course also out of the race and has always been far behind in terms of his 

prices in real income in relationship to inflationary costs. As a result we helplessly view with alarm the 

liquidation of some 50,000 farmers in Saskatchewan during the postwar period, and their sons and 

daughters going to the urban centres to eke out a living. If they dared to join a trade union in order to 

make life liveable and keep up with costs, they are condemned for doing so by saying they are doing 

their parents a disservice. I can‘t understand greater nonsense than this and the sill illogic that I have 

heard emanating from the hon. Members opposite in this particular debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite booming prosperity and profits in the business sector farm prices in the year of Our 

Lord 1966 continue a downward trend. I have some figures here. I will just quote a few of them. These 

are comparative figures for June and July this year, and June this year, and June a year ago. In every 

case there is a drop in the price index to farmers. I don‘t hear the Premier talking about that at all. I don‘t 

hear him talking about a federal-provincial conference to do something about falling farm prices, 

escalating farm costs, or to do something constructive to find an answer to the problem of differences 

between labor and management. No, he shouts his head off until he is blue in the face hoping that he is 

going to stir up a favorable political wind. This is cheap politics, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, and the 

general public in Canada are getting sick and tired of it. 

 

I was going to say something to the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson) but he is not in his seat. 

I was disappointed with him too. He got on the band wagon of blaming labor for everything. He did not 

like this Bill at all, at all, but he is going to vote for it. Now, what kind of play is this? Turning their sails 

to the political winds, I say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To go back now to these comparative figures. For Saskatchewan, May indexes are in brackets and the 

June index is by provinces. For June compared to May the index of farm prices went down in this 

province and down from 8.6 per cent from what it was a year ago in June, Mr. Speaker. There is an 

interesting item that appears in this, namely that Saskatchewan is at the bottom of the rung in farm 

prices. When you look at Quebec there is 331.3 for June and 326.4 for May. Manitoba pretty much 

similar. Saskatchewan, 221.5 for June and 220.7 for May. We are the lowest. Our price index in farm 

products for June is 221.5; for New Brunswick, 265; Quebec, 331; Ontario, 318. We are the lowest and 

the Premier, I suggest, should do something about it. 

 

Fortunately, nature is much more kind than the governments are to the farmers. We are blessed with a 

good crop this year. This will help a little bit, Mr. Speaker, but it will not offset the tremendous 

economic difficulties facing the farm industry in this province. 

 

Little wonder we also have farm strike demonstrations, as I said, in Quebec and Ontario, with threats of 

similar strikes here. And little wonder, Mr. Speaker, too that we have so much unrest 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

85 

and turbulent labor difficulties throughout Canada, Mr. Speaker,. As I stated before, no one likes strikes. 

We don‘t like strikes neither on this side of the House. We do want to find a solution. We have proposed 

an amendment that we feel will solve this immediate problem without involving workers who are not 

now involved in the strike at all and who are very concerned about the destruction of their union rights. 

 

The principle point at issue is not this immediate strike, as I have said, but a solution to strikes in the 

future. Some suggestions have been made. How do we know what a proper wage scale should be? May I 

suggest, and I agree with some hon. Members opposite, that the cost of living index must be utilized. It 

seems to me that we could have a national labor code for Canada in which job classifications with 

appropriate wages opposite them could be established for Canada, based on the cost of living index. And 

if the cost of living index goes up, then right across the board, in my view, there ought to be wage and 

salary increases to keep up with these increased costs and forget entirely about this talk and nonsense 

about productivity. Our productivity has never been as high in the history of Canada. Certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, by virtue of necessity we must distribute income back into the hands of our consumers if we 

are to have an effective and a pliable and stable economy. 

 

These are scientific facts, Mr. Speaker. So may I suggest to hon. Members, particularly on the 

Government side of the House that when another conference is called this entire matter of 

labor-management difficulties be brought to the forefront, that consumer problems be discussed because 

they are caught in the vice, particularly the pensioners and those retired on fixed incomes. We need an 

all-out war on poverty; and the only way that I can see as an answer to the problem is to do some 

sensible economic and social planning in cooperation with industry and in cooperation with labor on the 

basis of reason and understanding and not condemnation of one side or the other in the question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will vote against the motion and vote for the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, having come over 300 miles to this session, 

which I don‘t think should have been necessary had the Government carried out its duty and prerogative, 

I must say a few words and particularly after one or two members, the member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) 

wanted to know how the farmers are going to vote and what stand they are going to take on this Bill. 

Well, I can assure him that when it comes down to principle and liberty this Bill is incompatible with the 

freedom people are accustomed to, and I certainly will vote against the Bill; but I will vote for the 

amendment, although I would rather not have to do that. 

 

The reason I said that, Mr. Speaker, is this. I don‘t think as others have said, that compulsory arbitration 

is going to resolve anything. As a matter of fact, I happened to get a hold of the manufactures‘‘ annual 

report and I noticed that the Premier happened to be there. There is a picture of him with the 

vice-president — he is always in good company of that nature — and at that time the president made a 

statement; two or three statements were made. I think he agrees although he is the president of the 

Manufacturers‘ Association that, as he said, 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

86 

Every fairminded person will recognize that when they negotiations fail, then the man providing 

the services has the right to withdraw his services. 

 

Which just means simply this, that at all costs negotiations must be carried on. It was mentioned by the 

Member for Maple Creek, the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) that there was a situation 

in 1954, which I recall quite well, in the city of Prince Albert and it took a long time until the matter 

was settled. But the previous Government, the previous CCF Government, saw to it that negotiations 

went on and on until the problem was settled without bringing in this kind of vicious legislation which 

we have before us. 

 

Now the president, as I said, of the Manufacturers‘ Association said this: 

 

While employees certainly have the right to withhold their labor if they must, employers have an 

equal right to keep their business going to get along without striking employees, if they can. 

 

In other words, he simply said that government should not interfere. This is a matter between labor and 

management. Yet here the Government is taking upon itself the prerogative to interfere by legislating an 

Act which has been pointed out to be evil and vicious. 

 

I would like to say — I think it was the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) who mentioned something 

about the strike being a tool or sword or a weapon with which labor can fight — Mr. Speaker, a strike is 

a tool. It is something that the working man must depend upon in this age to protect himself and his 

family so that he can make a decent living in an unstable economy. It can also be a sword when a 

working man who provides services cannot get justice and he must use the strike weapon as his sword. I 

do not think that government should interfere with that particular right, if we believe in freedom in a 

democracy. 

 

I will say this, if compulsory arbitration is good, if it works, and is desirable — as it has been mentioned 

it does work in some other countries like Australia and New Zealand, I know nothing about it — 

certainly the least that this Government could have done is to have appointed a committee or 

commission, if you like, to have studies what goes on in other countries, what results have been obtained 

form compulsory arbitration, and bring the recommendations into this Legislature ad give the 

Legislators of this province a chance to analyze and make up their minds whether this is good for the 

public welfare or not. And I say this in all sincerity because we, the Legislators, are only servants of the 

people, and as such we must see that we do nothing it is going to jeopardize the democratic functioning 

of this country or of this province. 

 

It must also be remembered, as has been pointed out by the Member from Regina, that the strike weapon 

is a human right. It has been obtained over a long period of time. If you read the history of labor in 

trying to obtain economic justice you will find that they evolved this weapon, and sword if you like, to 

obtain their ends. And in most countries even today it is recognized as a right. Just because people work 

for the Government doesn‘t put them in a different position than if they work for private industry. The 

right should be the same. Certainly in this 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

87 

particular case there is very little need to go to the extend that this Government has gone in calling this 

special session. 

 

As it has been pointed out by two or three members, it is very obvious that the only reason — there may 

have been another reason — the main reason has been because this Government is carrying on a 

vendetta with a particular union and the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) made that very clear as well 

as did others. 

 

I am very glad that the speaker who preceded me mentioned the real cause of the unrest among the labor 

forces in Canada. I as a farmer would be the last one to blame labor for the unstable and unjust situation 

that exists in our country today. I recall quite well, Mr. Speaker, that we could have faced the same kind 

of situation during the war years whether the Government at that time had the courage or not, when 

necessity required that the Government set up certain controls It‘s during that part of the history of 

Canada that we find that farmers made some of the greatest progress economically — and this cannot be 

denied — in the 1940‘s. Many of my friends who are submarginal and marginal land farmers in the 

north were able to set themselves up with more land and machinery because of price controls. Yet even 

this may not be palatable to everyone. But it‘s the same thing, Mr. Speaker, that if a man has a family 

and he has a loaf of bread which is sliced up, you cannot give that loaf to one child. You must divide it 

among all of them as fairly as it is possible to divide. Some may deserve more than others but you 

cannot deny people what they are entitled to. 

 

I would like to point out that one of the real causes of inflation, which means too much money in the 

country, is that workers and people like myself on smaller farms haven‘t too much of that money or very 

little of it. There is too much money in the country. There is inflation; but where is it? It‘s in the hands 

of 20 or so per cent of the people of Canada who have been taxing the people, the consumers, and the 

producers and labor in this country under the guise of legitimate profits. But on the other scale you have 

got 20 per cent living in poverty, and that is what governments are becoming concerned about today. 

That is what this Government should have been concerned about, the 20 per cent that are living in 

complete poverty. This Government has chosen to pick on a small group of people in the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation and the Premier has said this is one way that we are going to curb inflation in our 

country. What nonsense, Mr. Speaker. If the real intent of this Government and of any government is to 

curb inflation, they must hit at the roots of the system as has been pointed out by the previous speaker, 

with whom I agree entirely. This session should have been called for that purpose and not for the 

purpose of interfering with negotiations which could have been carried on quite successfully, I am sure, 

between the Power Corporation and its employees. 

 

One of the hon. Members opposite tried to blame the strikers in different parts of Canada, the 

grainhandlers and others, for the reason why farmers wouldn‘t be able to deliver their grain. I remember 

quite well telling the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) about a year ago, when he boasted about 

the grain that was being sold and so forth, that that wasn‘t the answer to the farmer‘s problem. The 

answer was a decent price. And whether you penalize the power employees or anybody else or set up 

stringent regulations, you are not going to resolve the farm situation until you hit at the root of the thing 

and see to it the farmer gets a decent price for this product. 

 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

88 

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of Members who don‘t know, particularly the Premier who probably doesn‘t 

know these things, I saw hundreds of dozens of eggs sold in my community for eight cents a dozen last 

spring. It costs the farmers 35 cents a dozen last spring according to the university to produce a dozen 

eggs. Yet they were selling them for eight cents because they had to and they had to be satisfied wit that 

pittance. Can you imagine how many dozen eggs you would have to get to get a pound of bacon at $1.19 

today? 

 

And Mr. Speaker, when you blame labor for costs why don‘t you look at the picture. Take the case of 

bread. I could tell you quite a bit about what has been happening in the bread industry. Who decided to 

raise the price of bread two, three, four and five cents, all across the country? As it has been pointed out 

it wasn‘t the price of wheat; it wasn‘t because they took on more labor. Machines are producing the 

bread today more than machines ever did before, and yet it was decided by not one corporation but a 

combine of corporations right across the country that they would raise the price of bread to 25 and 26 

cents, bread that was formerly sold for 21 cents, Mr. Speaker. Here is an increase in profits of 20 and 

more per cent. This Government did nothing about it. But when labor demands a small pittance in order 

that they can meet the costs of living then you must shackle labor; you must attack them in every 

possible way and try to play politics with the hearts and souls of people of this province. This is what I 

object to. As Legislators we were elected to sit here in the House to find some of the answers, to 

sincerely sit down and produce answers if al all possible instead of playing politics. But on every 

occasion he plays politics and I think it‘s a shameful attitude. It‘s disgraceful and I, certainly for one, 

don‘t want to have a part of that kind of philosophy. 

 

In the meantime, I am going to appeal to the Government not to take the stand that they cannot back 

down because they brought in this legislation. I am sure that everyone opposite must realize if they are 

fair and I think they are fair men, that this legislation is evil, it is bad. Let us compromise on something 

that is good, such as we find in the amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). It 

goes halfway. Let us deal with the situation that we think is before us. As I said, I would rather not have 

to deal with it, but I am prepared to deal with it. But let‘s not tie in hospital workers and all of these 

other people. I don‘t want to see the hospital workers in the position that they were in about a year ago, 

when they went to the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) complaining that the boards would not 

give consideration to their representation for better wages; and they are, Mr. Speaker, some of the lowest 

paid people in this province. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Under your Government they were. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And they are now. What did the Minister of Public Health 



 

September 7, 1966 

 

 

89 

(Mr. Steuart) do? He referred them back to the boards, hospital boards, and there they stand between the 

devil and the deep sea. And you are going to shackle them some more because if they dare to strike you 

are going to tie their hands completely. I think this is wrong. I think that negotiations should be made 

possible. I think these hospital workers should be in a position where the boards know that they must 

give them a proper and decent wage so that they can carry on with at least a fair standard of living in this 

province. 

 

As I said, there is much that can be said, most of it has been said. I am very unhappy to be here but I am 

here. I don‘t mind my combine standing there for a week if necessary. It will be a good contribution to a 

worthy cause to fight for a principle that I believe in and that principle is the freedom and liberty for 

which our fathers fought for a long time, Mr. Speaker. I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

Hon. D. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — I beg leave of the Assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. on the motion of the Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of 

Public Works). 

 


