



















































Hansard: March 23, 1966


1437 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Wednesday, March 23, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. W. A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I would like to draw 

your attention and the attention of all members to a group of students from Clavet School, they are in the 

east gallery with their teacher, Mr. Adrian. I presume it is quite all right for me to do this in the absence 

of the member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) since another member, from Saskatoon introduced a school 

the other day from the Hanley constituency. I sincerely hope that this group will have a pleasant time in 

Regina today, that they will enjoy the legislative proceedings and that they will have a safe journey 

home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. M. Breker (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct your attention and the attention of the 

other members to the west gallery. Seated there are the students from the Spalding High School. They 

are accompanied by their teachers, Miss Nora Nelson and Mr. Palmer Routin and their bus driver, Mr. 

Elsworth Johnston. I hope your day has been a pleasant one so far, and that it will be an informative one 

and I wish you a safe journey home. I would like also to suggest to all the students here that they go to 

the Exhibition Stadium this afternoon, if they have the time, where they presently are having the bull 

sale and the light horse show. This afternoon the horses are being put through some of their trials and 

events. I am sure you will enjoy a few hours out there at the Exhibition. Above all, my dear students, 

there is no admission charge. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to the attention of the house a fine 

group of students from the Dolremy High School, also the Bellevue High and St. Louis Schools. Among 

their teachers are Sister Marie Yvette, Sister Marie Michele and Robert Kuroki. They have been visiting 

the city this morning and they had a little trouble with the city transit system but their troubles are over 

and I want to compliment the mayor for being so helpful. I hope their trip will be educational and 

pleasant on the journey home. I want to add Bon Voyage. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, may I, as the member for Hanley, welcome the Clavet 

group in the east gallery, I see Mr. Adrian there and I see Mr. Derdall and all that group of 35 bright 

young students from the Clavet School. I want to welcome them here on your behalf and join in the 

words that were uttered a few minutes ago by 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1438 

the member for Saskatoon (Mr. Robbins). I hope they will have a very pleasant visit here and that they 

will tell their friends so that their friends will come back another year. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Hon. D. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I too, want to draw your attention and 

the attention of the members of the legislature to an outstanding group of young students here this 

afternoon who represent the grade 8 class in the town of Indian Head. The significant part about some of 

these young boys in the Speaker‟s gallery, the first three rows, is that they belong to a minor hockey 

league in that town which comprises some 180 boys. One of their teachers, Mr. Walker, is in charge of 

the minor hockey league. He is with them this afternoon, and Mrs. Dour, in charge of the girls is also 

with them this afternoon. I understand the girls all get out, of course, to cheer for the boys. I am sure 

they will enjoy their stay here this afternoon as they have on so many occasions in the past. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — I would like to draw the attention of hon. members to the 

presence in the Speaker‟s gallery this afternoon of a fine group of students from the Sterling School in 

my constituency. They are touring the building today and they are finishing off by observing the 

afternoon sittings of the legislature. I am sure you will want me to extend to them the very best wishes 

of all of us for an interesting and instructive afternoon, I hope the calm which they will observe in the 

Assembly this afternoon will stand them in good stead when they fight the battle of life. I am sure that 

we would want them to have an enjoyable stay this afternoon and to wish them also bon voyage. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!


Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to, if the hon. Attorney General will permit 

me, to also greet the group from Sterling School because this is the area where I had the privilege of 

starting my teaching career. I know most of these folks up here, and many of their friends and 

neighbours in the city of Regina. I want to extend a very warm welcome to the Sterling School district as 

well. As mayor of the city at this time I would like to welcome the Dolremy, the Bellevue and the St. 

Louis Schools, and all the other students that have come to their fine capital city. We wish them a 

pleasant stay and we hope they will enjoy the proceedings and learn much for their own future years to 

come. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

QUESTION RE HANLEY CONSTITUENCY 
 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a question to the 

Premier, who I see is back. Last week he made a statement that sometime during the week he was going 

to introduce some legislation which would have the effect of, shall we say, dismembering the 

constituency of Hanley? I wonder since 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1439 

last week has now passed whether or not we should regard that as just one of those statements. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member can take it anyway he likes. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Public Health): — One thing sure he is going to get it. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Thatcher for second 

reading of Bill No. 60, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I think that last day I had a few words to say with 

reference to the proposal to reduce the income tax of those who are fortunate enough to have to pay 

income tax and at the same time impose imposts upon those, many of whom do not pay income tax 

because they are not fortunate enough to have a large enough income to be subject to tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hand-out which the Premier and which the government is giving in this so-called tax 

reduction to the man who makes less than $75 a week is just a cent or two a day, not enough even, Mr. 

Speaker, to cover the increase on the cigarette tax. But the reduction of the income tax by one per cent of 

the net tax, as is now proposed, to some of the Premier‟s friends, those who earn $25,000 or $30,000 a 

year, the so-called middle of the road Liberals, will amount to a reduction of almost $200 per year. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it perfectly clear that I am always in favour of any government reducing 

taxes if it can do so by more efficient or more economical administration. This is something which the 

previous government always sought to do, eliminate unnecessary expenses, to eliminate . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Are you going to vote for it? 

 

Mr. Walker: — Well, we eliminated the Public Revenue Tax which was a three mill tax on all real 

property in Saskatchewan and now you birds are putting that tax back on. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the farmers of Hanley constituency enjoyed the benefit of the repeal of the Public Revenue Tax 

by the CCF government. Now 90 per cent of those people in Hanley constituency are going to have to 

bear a two mill tax which this government is putting on to fatten and swell their undeserving coffers at 

the expense of the people of Hanley constituency, people who ought not to have to bear an increase . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What bill is the hon. member talking about? 

 

Mr. Walker: — When this government reduces taxes for their Liberal, their big free enterprise Liberal 

friends, by removal of one per cent on the income tax, and does it at the expense of the farmers of 

Hanley constituency, 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1440 

I protest against that tax, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government over there must take the responsibility for this 

switch, this shift of tax, from people who can well afford to pay to people who can ill afford to pay. As I 

said before it is always pleasant to see tax reductions, I am just sorry that this government has not seen 

fit to reduce the taxes where they would do more good. I could think of many places where this 

$1,100,000 could do more good. The government could take off the tax on soap and detergents, the 

government could take off half of the medical care and hospital tax, the government could refrain from 

putting on the real property tax of two mills which they are now putting on to the lands of this province, 

the assessed property of this province. There are many, many other alternatives which this government 

could select. Instead of that, of course, their friends who finance their election campaigns with their 

generous donations at election time, will get back enough in one year to finance the next campaign of 

the Liberal party. I would hope that the Liberal party will not get the benefit of that, but this is where it 

is going, to their friends. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it very clear that I object to the priorities which the government has 

applied in this instance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, want to speak with reference to the bill to 

amend the Income Tax Act. The amendment proposed is one which will decrease the tax by something 

under one per cent. Members will recall that the surcharge on the income tax was introduced to finance 

the medical care program. The Premier in introducing the bill was careful to point out that no other 

province has the universal medical care program. We now find that because of the buoyant conditions in 

the province and because of four successive excellent crops, we can make a tax reduction. The question 

which faces the legislature is the area in which the tax reduction should be made. 

 

The taxes which were imposed with respect to the medical care program included two — (1) the family 

tax for medical care and (2) the income tax. I regret that the government has chosen the income tax as 

the tax to reduce. The income tax is a fair tax. I don‟t say it is a popular tax, no tax is popular. But 

though we must pay taxes I think every government has the obligation to impose taxes where they will 

be fairest. The proposal to abate the income tax by one point, something less than one per cent, will do 

nothing for most elderly couples, elderly people have a $1,500 tax exemption if they are single and over 

65, a $2,500 exemption if they are married. The facts are that the average older person will get 

absolutely no benefit from this tax abatement. Very, very few people of 65 or over will benefit from this 

and they are one class of persons who ought to be benefited by a tax cut. Certainly they will be hit by 

taxes on soap and taxes on gasoline and taxes of this nature which bear heavily on the consumer. They 

are not being hit by the sharp increases in cost of living which are being seen all across the province, 

increases in the cost of food, in meat, bread, milk and so on. If anyone deserves some abatement of tax it 

is the people who are suffering from these 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1441 

increases, but they are to get nothing by this bill. 

 

Lower income groups will get nothing. Fully 50 per cent of Saskatchewan families don‟t pay any tax at 

all. They will get no relief. Even people with average incomes who pay a small tax will get a benefit of 

only a dollar or two a year. But for persons with larger incomes the benefits will be very substantial. 

 

The short question which faces the legislature is this: should tax rebates go to the well to do or go to 

those who need it most. That is the simple question. Should the tax rebate go to the well to do or to those 

who need it most? The Premier says that other provinces don‟t have such a large income tax and he 

wants to get it down to their level. Well how about applying the funds on the hospital tax. There are only 

two other provinces which have any family tax for hospitals at all. If he wants to abate taxes he might 

start with the hospital tax since it is a fact that only in Manitoba and in Ontario is there any direct tax for 

hospitals at all. If he wants to equate our province to other provinces that area is a good place to start; it 

certainly would be far fairer than to abate the income tax. 

 

In my view this tax relief should be given, but it should given to those who need it most. I think that all 

will welcome the fact that we can afford a tax abatement of $1,100,000. And I think on reflection that 

members opposite will agree with the idea that the tax relief ought to be given to those who need it most. 

With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I, therefore, beg leave of the Assembly to move, seconded by the senior 

member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), the following amendment: 

 

That all the words after „that‟ in the motion be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

That the bill be not now read a second time, but that it be referred to a Select Special Committee of 

this legislature with instructions to consider legislation which would provide an equivalent dollar 

amount of tax relief, but which would divide the relief in a more equitable manner, and in particular 

would benefit senior citizens and persons on lower incomes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support the amendment moved by 

my colleague, there are a few things I would like to mention. The Premier in his Budget Address 

announced that he was giving relief of $1,100,000 to a select group of our citizens. I am fortunate that I 

happen to belong to this group. In spite of that I cannot consider it in the public interest to support this 

type of legislation. I did a few calculations after studying the 1965 taxation statistics. These are for the 

1963 taxation year. There are 27,983 of us in Saskatchewan who have taxable incomes of less than 

$2,000. This group will receive a maximum rebate of $2.50 a year, or about 21 cents a month. Then 

there is a larger group, 37,941 Saskatchewan citizens who have taxable incomes between $2,000 and 

$3,000. This group will have a minimum refund of 35 cents a month. Then if you take the next group 

there are 39,892 who have taxable incomes of between $3,000 and $4,000, who will have a rebate of 

$6.12 a year, or 51 cents per months. 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1442 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this group of 105,816 Saskatchewan taxpayers really cannot make a good 

case for getting refunds of these amounts. The next group of 89,188 income taxpayers are going to fare a 

good deal better. I am referring to those who have a taxable income of $25,000 or more. The income tax 

authorities are careful not to go too far in breaking down the individual incomes of the group receiving 

over $25,000. In Saskatchewan, there are only 652 of our citizens who have the good fortune to be in the 

taxable income of $25,000 or more. They did very well. They had total incomes of over $22,000,000, 

they paid in income taxes $7,187,000. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this group really doesn‟t need to have 

the crocodile tears of the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

We will take the poor chap who has a $25,000 taxable income. He will get relief of $90,84, $7.57 per 

month. I don‟t think that a good case can be made for coming to the rescue of this particular group. Hon. 

members who fill out income tax papers each year are always curious about the citizen who might have 

a $400,000 taxable income. The amount he pays is quite sizeable, $265,070. I should explain that I don‟t 

imagine there are many, if any, in Saskatchewan who ever get to these income tax brackets, but certainly 

there are in Canada. If one were in this income tax bracket, one would have relief of $2,852, or $237.68 

per month. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how sorry do you feel for the citizen who has to pay $285,211 in 

federal and provincial income taxes. It should be agreed that it isn‟t how much income tax the citizen 

pays that is important, it is how much do you have left after you pay your income tax, to pay your 

property tax, the increased price on gasoline and buy food and clothes for your family. Well, the chap 

who has to pay $285,211 would have left after paying taxes $314 per day, seven days a week, every 

week in the year. 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that in a country like Canada, we shouldn‟t be concerned about the appeals made 

by the people in the high income brackets who complain about income taxes. I presume I was paying 

income tax before some of my colleagues were born. I have had the good fortune to pay income tax for 

many years and I have always felt that I have had good value for my taxes, whether they were 

municipal, provincial or federal taxes. I think that it is a mistake for this legislature to be giving relief of 

$1,100,000 to the group of Saskatchewan citizens who need concern when out of a total population of 

933,000 in 1963, there only were 195,004 people in the province who had the good fortune to receive 

enough to pay income taxes. 

 

We haven‟t been able to identify exactly how many families in Saskatchewan did pay income taxes but I 

submit that this total of 195,000 suggests that this is well below half of the families, probably 

one-quarter of the families. I think that instead of giving the relief to the fairly small group with high 

incomes we should be having a look at those who are going to have to cut down their food and their 

clothing costs to pay for the additional taxes which are going to be imposed upon us. I think that the 

citizens of Saskatchewan, after hearing the Premier‟s plans in the field of education, health, roads, 

industrial development, and the many other fields, would be anxious to leave the income taxes as they 

are, and to raise the necessary revenues by other means. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1443 

The amendment was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 22 

 

Lloyd Whelan Link 

Cooper (Mrs.) Nicholson Baker 

Wood Kramer Snyder 

Nollet Dewhurst Broten 

Walker Berezowsky Larson 

Blakeney Michayluk Robbins 

Davies Smishek Pepper 

Brockelbank(Saskatoon City)   

 

NAYS — 31 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Leith 

Howes Grant Radloff 

McFarlane Coderre Romuld 

Boldt Bjarnason Weatherald 

Cameron Trapp MacLennan 

Steuart Cuelenaere Hooker 

Heald McIsaac Coupland 

Gardiner (Melville) MacDonald Gardner (Moosomin) 

Guy Gallagher Mitchell 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Pederson 

Loken   

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the members to the fact that the mover of the motion is 

about to close the debate. If anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I shall only speak briefly. I think we must be 

realistic. What is the purpose of this bill? Some years ago this government put a surcharge on income 

tax of six per cent. As a result, people in this province have had to pay six per cent more income tax than 

all the rest of the people of Canada except in Manitoba. This bill in effect reduces that six per cent 

surcharge to five per cent. My hon. friends can say if they wish that the legislation isn‟t going to help the 

average working man. I do suggest that when you cut taxes you help everyone. This is a measure which 

is vitally needed. I want to repeat that this government is not going to be satisfied merely to cut the tax 

from six to five. In subsequent years we are going to get the rate down to a level where it is in other 

provinces. One of the penalties of having a Socialist government for 20 years has been that our tax 

levels have been far above other parts of the nation. Liberals are sick and tired of this situation. 

 

I can tell you that this government intends to do something about the Medicare tax at the appropriate 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Don‟t ever let my hon. friends think they will be so fortunate as to go into another 

election without seeing other taxes reduced. 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1444 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The socialists have one great faculty, Mr. Speaker, they usually talk one way and act 

another. This afternoon we have watched them talk against a reduction in the personal income tax. It‟s 

going to be of great interest to watch how they vote. If they vote the way they talk, they must vote 

against the proposal. I challenge any one of them to get up here and vote against this tax cut which the 

liberals have introduced. I challenge the member for Lloydminster (Mr. Nollet) particularly. Their vote 

is going to be very interesting. 

 

When the Homeowner grant was up, they talked against it all afternoon but finally they voted for it. So I 

think it will be interesting to see what they do on this occasion. This is one more progressive measure, 

Mr. Speaker, where the Liberals are reducing taxes that the Socialists imposed. It gives me a great deal 

of pleasure to vote for it. 

 

The motion was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 31 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Leith 

Howes Grant Radloff 

McFarlane Coderre Romuld 

Boldt Bjarnason Weatherald 

Cameron Trapp MacLennan 

Steuart Cuelenaere Hooker 

Heald McIsaac Coupland 

Gardiner (Melville) MacDonald Gardner (Moosomin) 

Guy Gallagher Mitchell 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Pederson 

Loken   

 

NAYS — 23 

 

Lloyd Whelan Baker 

Cooper (Mrs.) Nicholson Snyder 

Wood Kramer Broten 

Nollet Dewhurst Larson 

Walker Berezowsky Robbins 

Blakeney Michayluk Pepper 

Davies Smishek Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Thibault Link  

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of 

Health) for second reading of bill No. 74, An Act to raise revenue for hospitals and to provide for the 

levying of a tax in areas presently not contributing toward the support of a hospital. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about this for reasons which I 

have already given in another debate. But the reason for my vote against the reduction in the income tax 

is very apparent right now because this is where the money is going to come from. It‟s going to come 

from my constituents. 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1445 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that there has always been an argument that hospitals should be financed 

in some other way than through property tax. There has always been a lot of complaint that hospitals 

financed through property tax within a hospital district have to, by the nature of things, make their 

services available to all comers. But I think that much of the force of that argument disappeared when 

we got the hospitalisation plan in the 1940‟s because under that plan the major cost of operating 

including such things as depreciation was borne out of the personal tax which all citizens have to pay. I 

would ask the house to look at a map of the province showing those areas which are not included in 

hospital districts. They would find, Mr. Speaker, that by and large with some exception, the parts of the 

province that are not included in any Union Hospital District are areas which have a large amount of 

marginal or sub-marginal land. In many cases — and I don‟t say this is true without exception — but in 

many cases, Mr. Speaker, the reason that there is no hospital district in some areas of the province is 

because the land was assessed at a fairly low rate and the burden of establishing the capital cost of a 

hospital was too high. Those people by deliberate design decided that they couldn‟t afford a hospital 

because of the low assessed land in many of these areas. Now, I realize that there are some areas where 

the assessment is very high and different arguments apply to those areas. But there is a lot of land which 

is assessed quite low in these exempt areas and everyone will acknowledge that the costs of providing 

the capital costs of hospitalisation should be borne as widely as possible, that the burden should be as 

evenly distributed as possible. But the way to do that, Mr. Speaker, is not by the application of a 

property tax but by the application of general taxation, general provincial taxation. The government 

ought to be looking at the alternative methods of providing these revenues. it has been a cry as long as I 

have been active in politics that the burden of land taxation is too high in Saskatchewan. In relation to 

other sources of revenue that are available to the government of Saskatchewan the burden of land 

taxation impinges too heavily particularly on people of lower incomes. 

 

Land taxation is not as progressive a mode of taxation as is available to the provincial government. Land 

taxation is a more regressive, one of the more regressive forms and yet this government instead of taking 

advantage of the opportunity to shift a pat of the burden from land taxation and from property taxation to 

a general provincial tax on wealth and on commerce and on industry and on trade, is moving exactly in 

the opposite direction. This government is taking taxes off general provincial commerce and putting 

taxes on real property. I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is a retrograde step. Instead of putting a mill rate on 

those areas which are excluded from hospital districts, this government ought to be taking the mill rate 

off those areas which are in hospital districts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Walker: — And they could do it with the $1,100,000 that they just tossed to their big rich fat 

friends. They could have done it. So, Mr. Speaker, when we say on this side of the House that we object 

to this increase in taxation we cannot be accused of that kind of irresponsibility that the former 

opposition was accused of, of being opposed to taxation in general. We have been consistent. We have 

maintained the proper level of integrity for an opposition. We have said that if we are going to demand 

that certain taxes be 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1446 

removed, that we must place before the House and the people what alternatives are available. And by 

our vote here, a few minutes ago, we showed the people of this legislature and of this province that we 

are prepared to face the burden of finding the revenue, of providing the revenue, of pointing out the 

fields of revenue that are available. So, instead of putting a two-mill property tax on the rural people of 

Saskatchewan where this tax will mostly apply, in fact I think this tax will almost exclusively apply to 

the rural areas of Saskatchewan. Well, my friends may call the hamlets and villages urban, but all of the 

cities are in their own hospital district and the majority of the towns are in a union hospital district. A 

small scattering of towns and villages may be, but if my friends call that urban, all right, but these are 

the places where it is proposed to tax, the rural parts of Saskatchewan and the villages and smaller 

towns. This tax of, my friends say, $600,000 — I don‟t know just how much it is — this tax could have 

been avoided altogether if the Premier had restrained himself in his zealousness for his rich friends a few 

minutes ago and not moved that bill that was just passed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is the objection I take to it. It‟s a retrograde step to shift taxes off commerce and 

business and industry and trade and put them on real property, particularly rural property. 

 

The only other objection that I want to take to the bill and I take this purely in reference to my own 

constituency. As I have said before, about 80 or 90 per cent of the people of my constituency are not in a 

Union Hospital district, many of them having considered the matter and having decided that they could 

not afford it at a time when it was opportune to build hospitals . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where do they go to the hospital? 

 

Mr. Walker: — . . . and they can‟t really afford, in Hanley, for example, they decided they really 

couldn‟t afford to pay the hospital mill rate of two or three mills to provide a hospital in Hanley. Now 

they are going to have to afford it and not have a hospital. Now they are going to have to pay for it and 

not have it. That was a decision which they made which this government in its arrogance is over-ruling. 

It‟s just simply turning upside down. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They asked for it. 

 

Mr. Walker: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the people who asked for it are the people who are 

now paying the tax. If this government had been any good it would have suggested that the whole tax 

could be lifted, the whole property tax on real property could be lifted. That‟s what they could have 

done. Throwing off taxes for their rich friends. 

 

I hope, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to hear a whole chorus of speeches from the other side trying to 

justify this tax because they can‟t sit still and keep quiet while anyone else is talking. Let them get up 

and try to justify putting this tax on. I‟m sure the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) will because like Don 

Quixote he rushes at windmills and tilts at them with the most reckless abandon. I want to see the 

member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) get up and I want to see the member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) 

get up and explain how their constituents feel about 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1447 

Mr. Speaker, there is one other objection. I am unable to find any provision in this bill for any voice by 

these rural people who are going to be taxed in the administration of their tax revenue. The Minister of 

Health (Mr. Steuart) spoke on second reading and said there was such a provision in the bill. I am unable 

to find it. If it is there, I hope he will point it out when he closes the debate because, quite frankly, 

although I usually accept without reservation every statement he makes, in this case I just happened to 

look at the bill and I couldn‟t find it. If the minister can tell us what section it is that he was referring to 

when he said that there is provision for representation from these areas, I would like to know what 

section it is. Because, Mr. Speaker, if it proposed to tax the people of my constituency to support the 

hospitals in Saskatoon — and as I say, there is some justification or merit in the argument, then there 

ought to be some voice by the people of my constituency in the administration of that money and that 

ought not to be a voice expressed through the channels of the Minister of Public Health. It should be a 

direct voice. They should have some means of electing somebody to some board to represent their 

interests in this matter. I can well remember that in the Saskatoon Health Region some years ago, the 

rural people voted in favour of a health regions but the rate-payers of Saskatoon city were persuaded by 

their then mayor that they should vote against it because it would just simply mean that, while they 

would get some revenue from the rural area, the rural people would have some voice in the 

administration of health policies and this would be disastrous in Saskatoon. So it was argued by the then 

mayor. 

 

Well, if the rural people are going to now be taxed for those health services in Saskatoon, I say that they 

must be provided with some forum where they can express the opinion and the views of the rural people 

as to the administration of those hospitals. I would remind the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) that a 

sovereign who was more absolute in his power than the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) had his wings 

clipped for trying to impose taxation without representation, and that sovereign was madder than the 

Minister of Health, I am told. I hope that the Minister of Health will take this fact into account and will 

not make the mistake that George III made of trying to tax people without giving them representation. 

 

There was a Boston Tea Party. I can‟t promise him a tea party if he comes to Hanley, but the people of 

Hanley will certainly object most vociferously if he is going to tax them without giving them a voice in 

the spending of their own money. So I make this representation on their behalf today, Mr. Speaker, 

because after the Premier gets through with what he has got in mind, I might not be able to make this 

representation. I, personally, would oppose this bill. 

 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to have a few words 

to say on this particular bill. I had the good fortune of attending one of the meetings that were held to 

discuss the possibility of putting this particular measure into effect. If, as the previous speaker said, that 

he just takes everything that the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) says as correct, well, then, I‟m going to 

begin to doubt what the minister says because I wouldn‟t be prepared to go along and accept everything 

that my friend across the way would so I think I‟m going to have to look things over pretty carefully 

from now on. 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1448 

However, with regard to the taxing for hospital purposes, I did have the opportunity of listening to one 

group of municipal people in this province representing the rural areas, representing urban areas, 

representing the union hospital organizations, who were quite prepared to admit, in spite of the fact that 

my hon. friend won‟t himself, that they should be paying their share and be making a contribution 

towards the hospitals of this province. I did hear the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) ask them if they 

knew of any better solution to the problem than the one that was being suggested by the Department of 

Health. I must say that on that particular date there wasn‟t any recommendation made as to a better 

method in which to improve the situation. Now my friend (Mr. Walker) across the way says it‟s terrible 

to be taxed and not have a hospital. Well, my people in my town have been taxed since 1947; they never 

had a hospital. What difference is there between the people in my area and the people in the town of 

Hanley or any other town in this province? My people haven‟t complained. They know that every town 

isn‟t going to have a hospital but they feel that it is fair that they should contribute to the upkeep of a 

hospital some place in this province and contribute as others are doing. I know there are going to be 

some of my constituents . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Will the member permit a question? 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — Yes. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Does that town have representation on the hospital board? 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — Yes, that town does have representation on the hospital board. The people 

of Hanley have representation in this legislature which will be in charge of the legislation that we are 

passing. I don‟t say it‟s the most satisfactory representation but they have one and I am quite certain that 

he has the same right as any other member to protect their interests and to see that the money that they 

are contributing to the provincial treasury for this purpose is spent in a proper fashion. If he is not able to 

carry out that function on behalf of the voters in his constituency then, of course, he shouldn‟t be here. 

Now when he talks about helping out the wealthy with regard to provisions of various Acts, he says 

anybody that pays income tax is my friend and anybody that doesn‟t is his. There isn‟t a group that I 

know of in my constituency that pays more income tax then the labouring people, the people that work 

for the CNR in the city of Melville. I don‟t think there is any group that pays more income tax. Those 

people are going to be assisted through the previous measure. You know there have been complaints 

from my friends in the past on the other side, that this government has been unfair to the urban residents 

and a little bit too fair to the rural people through taxation. Well, I‟m going to say that to some extent 

this balances the record a little bit because we all realize that the majority of the non-taxpaying people as 

far as income tax goes in this province are probably in the rural areas. In questions like this it will even it 

up. Practically every working man — I‟ve just worked it out here a few moments ago — who receives 

only $50 a week or $200 a month in many cases will be paying income tax and there are not many 

workers in this province that are working for a lower wage than $50 a week at the present time. They 

would be in a position . . . 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — On a point of order. Mr. Speaker, what are we discussing at 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1449 

this point, may I ask? bill 74 or the Income Tax bill? 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — The previous speaker in his address made reference to the very things that 

I have. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think it is in order for anybody to have the motion read when they call for it. The 

question before the House is on the proposed motion of the hon. Minister of Public Health, bill No. 74 

— An Act to raise revenue for hospitals and to provide for the levying of a tax in areas presently not 

contributing toward the support of a hospital, be now read the second time. 

 

Mr. Gardiner (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, to conclude my remarks, I might say that I was just making 

reference to arguments that were used by the previous speaker in this debate and I am quite certain I was 

in order by so doing. If the previous speaker (Mr. Walker) could refer to these matters I am quite certain 

I was quite in order in doing so. But I want to say here that I believe that, if most of the meetings were 

the same that I attended, the majority of those people in this province today who haven‟t up to now been 

making a contribution by taxes toward the upkeep of hospitals the majority of those people are prepared 

today to pay something. They felt they should have been contributing something in the past just as their 

neighbors were. This is going to make the situation more equal than it did in the past. It is impossible to 

make it completely equal over the whole province, because of course there are going to be some people 

that are going to desire more in the way of hospital services possibly than others, and they are going to 

have to pay more than two mills. It‟s going to be impossible to equalize them. But this is going to help 

the situation. This is going to mean that every person can say to himself that I am paying a share of these 

costs, I am paying a share of the costs just as my neighbours are in order to have these institutions in our 

province. So I say today that I am quite prepared to say that the people of my constituency that haven‟t 

been paying this tax feel that they should have some way in which they can contribute their share to the 

cost of the construction and upkeep of the hospitals throughout the province. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had some opportunity of discussing this bill 

previous to today with some of the officials of the Department of Public Health and I want in the 

beginning to express to the minister my appreciation for this. It helped me to better understand what the 

bill means for us in this House. I must say, even after that explanation, however, that I have some very 

definite reservations as to the effect of the measures that are being proposed today. I was glad to hear 

that in the first instance the bill was discussed with a committee representing the municipal 

organizations and the hospital organizations. My initial question would be, while the matters were 

discussed, as I understand, last year with the municipal bodies; have they actually concurred with the 

essentials of the bill, whether they would approve, in other words, the bill as it stands. 

 

Now having asked that question, I would put another and I think perhaps a more cogent query, one 

which has already been put by the member from Hanley (Mr. Walter). That is, have the municipalities 

that are directly affected and will be directly affected by this bill been consulted and do they agree? Mr. 

Speaker, I 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1450 

put this question because it seems to me that if we look at the whole principle of Union Hospital 

Districts and areas we find that they have been built on the premise of local agreement. Groups of 

municipalities have decided, over the years, to provide hospital services and facilities and agreed to 

support the construction of buildings and provide those facilities that they could not have secured if they 

did not band together. The underlying principle being the agreement of these municipalities, it seems to 

me to be rather unfortunate at this stage that we could not devise a means by which municipalities which 

are not to this time contributing would themselves concur in a method that would in some measure do 

what this bill is trying to do by some other means. This has not been achieved by the bill and, as has 

been suggested if not directly pointed out by others, regardless of any justifications that may be urged by 

this bill, the fact is that it is another tax that will be levied upon a group of citizens of some areas of the 

province to be paid for hospital purposes. 

 

I point out that while the bill seeks to achieve a measure of support for hospitals that are not now getting 

financial support from some areas of the province, it will be of little use in cases where patients come 

from union hospital areas to the hospitals in urban areas, as in Moose Jaw, Saskatoon and Regina, 

because the patient, as I say, is already a member of a Union Hospital District. I am not sure to what 

extent this exists, but I know that, to take the city of Moose Jaw as an example, a fair number of patients 

will come from the Swift Current Health Region for certain medical and other services that they wish to 

secure in the city of Moose Jaw. As far as I understand the bill, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it does 

not provide for any financial assistance for the hospitals that are giving the services to these citizens. 

Especially in the light of this, the allocation of funds that is proposed is rather rough and ready. It will 

not assist in respect of the utilization of hospitals by patients from some parts of the province. 

 

Now I also understand provision will be made by this bill and I frankly concede at this point I am not 

quite clear on what this bill does, and what the amendments we agreed to the other day do. In any case 

what this bill seeks to do, according to the explanation of the minister is to provide that where a private 

hospital accepts funds that are raised by the new hospital revenue tax it must also at the same time agree 

to a kind of public representation on the administration body of the private hospital. 

 

If you follow the logic of the bill this is a laudable enough objective. But how, Mr. Speaker, is this 

accomplished? As I am informed, many of the private hospitals have appointed as their executive, have 

appointed as their board, so to speak, one person. That one person is the administrator, that one person is 

the executive body in fact. Many such private hospitals have over the years formed by their own efforts 

— and I think it is a very good thing that they have done so — advisory boards. These advisory boards 

make recommendations to the administrator and on occasion, perhaps quite often, these 

recommendations are followed. It seems to that, unless the minister has other means devised, the only 

place where the public representation as such can be placed is on the advisory body of the private 

hospitals. This may pose a difficulty, I suggest. What I am sure we want to achieve in all we are doing in 

this bill is to get public representation where it counts as such, where it has some actual powers, not 

merely recommendatory. I agree that there are now only few difficulties in this area but the minister I 

am sure would be the 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1451 

first to acknowledge that there are difficulties that should in some way be overcome by the bill. I am 

afraid, at least as far as I read the bill, and I am subject to correction, that this objection is not overcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also observe that the revenue that will be raised by the hospital tax, some $400,000 each 

year on the estimate, is not simply for the purposes of constructing new buildings and facilities that have 

to do with hospitals but may be used, generally speaking, in any way that the hospitals receiving the 

benefits choose to use the money. I suppose in the nature of things and because of the problems of 

hospitals — and we have heard about these often enough, especially about the deficits that accrue each 

year to hospitals — that many of the institutions will wish to use the funds received for operating 

expenses. 

 

If this is a fact, and I believe that this is, what will happen is that much of this money will go to 

operating expenses. What will have been achieved is that funds that the province is now making 

provisions for will be provided by this new tax so that there will be an element of financial relief for the 

province which will not be paid by the municipalities that become subject to this new tax. Mr. Speaker, I 

would say this. The tax becomes effective in the current year, I would recommend that we hold this 

legislation until there has been a meeting of the municipalities that are affected so they can review the 

entire effect upon themselves and so that hopefully we could get either agreement to the measures that 

are being proposed or some suggested alternative arrangements. This temporary delay, Mr. Speaker, 

would also I think achieve something else. It would enable the government to go to the municipal 

bodies, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the Saskatchewan Association Rural 

municipalities, the Hospital Association, and discuss more specifically with these bodies the precise 

nature of the measures that are proposed. It may very well be that out of the urban municipalities 

meeting which is currently taking place, there will be a number of objections that the minister could take 

cognisance of; and the bill could be amended correspondingly. 

 

There are a number of other questions that I shall certainly wish to pose when the bill is in committee. 

At this time I have some real misgivings on the effect of the bill. While the bill may be attempting to 

realize a principle in theory it may not be able to achieve this in practice. Another thing that I observe — 

and I took a brief note of what the minister had to say the other day — was that the tax is to be levied on 

hospitals in areas that are not supporting hospitals by taxation. It occurred to me that there may very 

well be instances — and I believe there are, and there may be hospitals that have intentions on these 

lines as well — which have made outright and substantial contributions to either hospital construction or 

hospital operation. This does not mean I suppose that they contribute by taxation but they may not mean 

I suppose that they contribute by taxation but they may have made an outright grant without recourse to 

continual taxation. What happens to a hospital of this kind? Does that municipality become subject to 

the new tax? If so I think, Mr. Speaker, this would definitely not be fair and the application of this bill 

would certainly be most unwise in that particular respect as well. 

 

Now these briefly and as concretely as I can put them, Mr. Speaker, are my observations on this bill. I 

believe that while some of the questions might be discussed in committee, the matters that I have 

mentioned are things that should be dealt with, and could be dealt with most effectively by delaying this 

bill pending 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1452 

a discussion with the municipalities affected and with the municipal organizations that represent 

municipalities and with the Hospital Association of this province. 

 

Mr. B. D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, the one principle that is involved in this bill as I see it 

is the principle that all parts of the province that are serviced with hospitals should bear some portion of 

the cost of those hospitals. I think that this is a good principle. I want to remind my friends opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, that some 20 or 21 years ago in the setting up of the School Units of this province, there were 

many areas of this province that were not paying for the cost of education and at that time there were 

many sections of farm land that were taken into newly formed school units because the government at 

that time believed in the principle that all parts of the province that were served with schools should be 

helping to pay for the schools. I think, Mr. Speaker, that if this was a good principle in its relationship to 

education 20 years ago, it is just as good a principle today. It seems rather odd to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

people who believed in this principle 20 years ago don‟t believe in it today. I am most happy, Mr. 

Speaker, that the government has had the courage to bring in a bill like this, and I will be most happy to 

support it. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word or two about two or three 

things that have been said here today. It seems to me that land tax in itself is quite often a regressive tax 

and I know that we haven‟t found any substitute for a land tax or a property tax, especially a substitute 

for a farm property tax. Now it has been said in this debate that many of the lands that will be taxed or 

further taxed by this bill are quite often sub-marginal, outlying areas when people have great distances 

to travel. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that many of these people that will have this further burden of 

taxation placed on them, already have many handicaps. I can‟t disagree with making those people 

contribute who are not contributing now, but I resent the suggestion that they have not contributed in the 

past. This is not a problem at all any longer in my constituency because we have now formed a Union 

Hospital District in The Battlefords area. Prior to this we had a private hospital run by the Sisters and 

prior to this all the surrounding municipalities taxed themselves and provided contributions, cash grants 

and contributions to the maintenance of that hospital. They didn‟t need the long arm of the Premier to 

come reaching out to them and extract it from their pockets. They gave it willingly and generously. 

Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t very long after this outfit took over that the good Sisters decided 

that they couldn‟t take it any longer and packed up and got out. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I know they got out. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that the hon. member knows why they got out, but 

anyway, this is not the point and it is not apropos the argument. The argument here, and I am not 

arguing against this bill in itself. I am only arguing against the patent unfairness, especially right after a 

bill which reduces taxes for the wealthy substantially, that here we are placing a burden on farmers who 

could be faced with one, two, three or four crop failures in a row, and yet have their taxes remain 

constant regardless of their income, Sir. Regardless of their income they 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1453 

will continue to pay that property tax and that extra two mills that is going to be placed upon them by 

this bill. But the people who are fortunate enough to be blessed with good crops, with rainfall, good 

receipts from their stock will have a one per cent cut in their income tax and I say to you does this make 

sense? Is this fair? I wouldn‟t be so concerned about this if it didn‟t come right on top of a tax cut to the 

wealthy. I know that they are going to say that there will be certain low-income people that will get tax 

cuts. The member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) said that it won‟t even make up for the increase in their 

tobacco and cigars and certainly not on those 25 oz. mickeys that Thatcher is putting out now. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we are seeing this constant move, this trend is deliberate throughout the past two years since 

this government has taken office, to add an every increasing burden on those least able to pay. This bill 

once again is a bill moving in that direction. 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, just a few words in reference to this bill. As a 

matter of fact I want to ask a few questions. I concede most of what I intended to say has been aid. I 

think that when the government was considering bringing all people more or less into line, what they 

should have done is to start reducing taxes for those people who already pay hospital taxes. I recognize 

that the member from Yorkton said that we all benefit in all parts of the province, but I know this also, 

when we established a base hospital in Saskatoon, the government paid for it, and all the people of 

Saskatchewan benefited from it. Now in Prince Albert we are to construct a hospital which is a 

semi-base hospital. I happen to be on the board, the hospital board, and I visualize the future of this 

hospital, we who are in that particular area may have to pay twice or three times as much tax in the 

future as we are paying now. I see inequalities. To remove these I think the government would have 

been very wise to consider cutting out the property taxes and levying a general tax, as has been 

suggested by the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker). 

 

In perusing this bill — it seems this can be done in committee — I notice, however, that such areas as 

the Northern Saskatchewan Administration District is now incorporated into this bill and I can‟t help but 

think also of the communities of Creighton, I presume La Ronge and Buffalo Narrows and others will be 

affected by this bill. I would, therefore, like to point out to the hon. minister (Mr. Steuart) that there are a 

great number of people in that area now, in the Cumberland constituency, in the Meadow Lake 

constituency, and of course in the Athabasca constituency, who have small holdings, small businesses. 

Some of them have resorts out of which they barely make an existence and an extra levy will be an 

extreme hardship to them. I am surprised not to have heard from the two northern members on this 

point. Another question that I have in mind is: what does the government contemplate doing with 

Creighton? In Creighton they have hospital services, Mr. Speaker, but they don‟t pay hospital taxes. 

They have an arrangement with the company or at least they did have until the Minister of natural 

Resources (Mr. Cuelenaere) voided an agreement. I don‟t know if that part applied or not and I am still 

waiting for an answer whether they have ever signed a new agreement. 

 

Hon. J. M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Very smart. 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1454 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I hope you give it to me, Mr. Minister. But anyway, people there had an 

arrangement with the mining company which operates a hospital on the Manitoba side. A deduction is 

made out of wages and the contributions from wages go directly towards providing hospital and medical 

services. Everybody in that community can thus get free hospital services. There is no property tax for 

that purpose, and I think that‟s the way it should be for the whole province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Free enterprise. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, I hope your government brings that kind of free enterprise into effect in 

Saskatchewan so that there will be a general tax for all people, thus relieving communities or the 

government of levying a property tax. These are the kind of points we must consider. When we look at 

this bill we find that it doesn‟t answer these questions. The bill provides in one section that the 

government may exempt certain areas, but the Minister has not indicated what areas will be exempted. I 

am speaking particularly in reference to the Northern Administration District, the northern people and 

the northern communities. As it stands I cannot help but vote against the bill. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): Mr. Speaker, I am not going to argue about the merits of the bill. My 

colleague from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) has done a very good job of dealing with the proposals in the 

bill and the contents of the bill. In fact I would have to admit that the levying of this tax, so that all 

people in the province make some contribution to the capital cost and upkeep of hospitals, is something 

that you just can‟t oppose and I am not going to oppose the bill. But the Liberal party and this Liberal 

government should be hanging their collective heads in shame at bringing in this bill. They should hang 

their heads in shame. They did not promise that they were going to increase taxes to support hospitals, 

they didn‟t promise that they were going to increase good taxes. They promised that they were going to 

reduce all taxes and that they were going to give greater services. Time and time again we have seen 

them coming in with increased taxes. Now if this government had been, and this political party over 

here, had been honest about this thing I could have supported this bill with a lot better heart. I have to 

support it because I think the principle is right but certainly it is just another case of the Liberal party 

brazenly ignoring its promises to reduce taxes and instead of doing that bringing in a bill to increase 

taxation. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw your attention to the fact that the mover of the motion is about to close the 

debate. If anyone wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I found it rather refreshing to have the member from Kelsey (Mr. 

Brockelbank) stand up and say he intended to support the bill because it is evidently fair and equitable, 

and I agree with him. He had to spoil it as usual by showing his temper but then we have come to expect 

that. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I didn‟t show any temper. You‟re the guy . . . 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1455 

Mr. Steuart: — For the members opposite I would just like to review how we came to this point. 

Members opposite know very well the history of the formation of Union Hospitals. They came through 

the efforts of local government. Local people met together in municipalities, towns and villages and 

cities to support or to build, to develop, to extend hospital facilities and tax themselves. First the 

provincial government got into it here in Saskatchewan and eventually the federal government got into 

it. Both have supported to some degree the efforts of local people to build and to maintain their own 

hospitals. But there were areas that were left out. I don‟t think they were left out primarily because they 

wanted to be left out; there were areas left out around cities, the area around the city of Regina, for 

example. In the city of Regina you had a city-owned hospital that obviously didn‟t feel any need or any 

desire to join with the rural municipalities to form a Union Hospital District. The same situation prevails 

around Saskatoon. It prevailed around the city of Prince Albert for a number of years until the situation 

arose where they had to rebuild. Then they went to the surrounding municipalities and had good 

co-operation from them and from the government of the day in forming a Union Hospital District. The 

same thing happened in Moose Jaw. I don‟t know whether they had as much co-operation in Moose Jaw 

as they had in other parts but eventually they formed a Union Hospital District which operates extremely 

well. But several groups requested that the situation be changed after I became Minister of Health. This 

request came first from the SARM, it also came from the urban association, from hospital boards, from 

people who were in Union Hospital Districts and were paying money to support hospitals. Of course, it 

necessarily came from people who were not members of Union Hospital Districts. They said “We think 

we should be paying something and we would like to be involved in developing hospitals and paying 

our fair share.” they also said they wanted some representation on these hospital boards, if and when the 

time came that they were taxed to provide capital for renovation or even operating costs. But the request 

came from local government itself. So I help meetings with the executives of the urban municipal 

association, the SARM and with the hospital association, both the Catholic division and the general 

Saskatchewan Hospital Association executive. As a result of those meetings we set up a committee and 

asked the committee to look into what could be done and to make recommendations. 

 

But before that committee started to work I sent out a letter to every town, every village, every hamlet, 

every rural municipality that was not now a member of a Union Hospital District, to every local 

government jurisdiction that would be involved in paying taxes, if we did in fact introduce the kind of 

bill that we are contemplating here today. We had a meeting in Regina, another in Saskatoon and they 

were well represented. I won‟t say they were all there but they were all notified. In fact the orders went 

out that they be all notified. I had one complaint yesterday that one municipality wasn‟t notified and I 

am looking into it. I am told they were but I am looking into it, there may have been a slip up.  

But the intention was and I think it was fulfilled that every municipality, town, village and city was 

notified and most of them showed up. I would say 90 or 95 per cent of them came to these meetings. 

 

At both the meeting here in Regina and the meeting in Saskatoon, they voted unanimously to have the 

government amend the legislation or bring in legislation whereby we would collect some 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1456 

money from these local governments and pay it to the hospitals that their people were using. And so 

there was consultation. First there was the request from local government; then there was full 

consultation with the associations of local government and final full consultation and explanation. I 

asked them purposely, “Do you want this? I would like to know your feelings before we leave this 

meeting and a total endorsement by the very people that will be affected.” 

 

Now I will be the first one to admit, Mr. Speaker, that I think this is a less than perfect way of doing it. I 

think if any of us had a clean slate we certainly wouldn‟t set up the hodgepodge of overlapping of 

jurisdiction we have in Union Hospital Districts, they are changing all the time. As patterns of trade in 

our smaller rural centres change, our Union Hospital Districts are changing and I think that we will all 

agree, at least anybody that has made a study of the situation would agree, that if we were starting all 

over again we would have a far different system. But we can‟t start all over again so we have to take the 

situation as it is now, a situation that has developed for the most part during the time that the members 

opposite were in government. This hodgepodge and this unfairness and this inequity developed when 

you people were in government and you people had these requests, requests year after year to do 

something about it, but you either didn‟t have the intestinal fortitude or you ignored it, or both. 

 

Now the member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) raised some very good points, I think he said he was 

going to oppose it and he has every right to oppose it. But whether he opposes or supports it I think he 

raised some very sensible questions, questions we will try to deal with when we get into committee. But 

I have tried to deal with the facts. He questioned whether there had been local consultation. He did 

suggest we might wait. Well, I don‟t think we need to wait, I don‟t think we can wait. The reason I don‟t 

think we can wait is that many of our private hospitals are in a serious condition. 

 

They need this money, they need this help. If they don‟t get this help we are going to find that what 

happened in North Battleford will happen in other parts of the province. I am sorry that member has left 

his seat because if there is one man who should not have risen and made the speech that he made, it was 

the member for North Battleford (Mr. Kramer). I was shocked when he got up and said what he did. In 

the first place, one of the very major reasons that forced that order of Sisters which had served the 

people of North Battleford and district, for years and years and had given them wonderful service and 

were forced to leave was that they didn‟t have enough revenue. They couldn‟t depend on their revenue 

for capital expansion and they were faced with very, very major expansion. Why couldn‟t they depend 

on it? They did get some help from the city of North Battleford, and over the years they did get some 

help from the surrounding municipalities but the help wasn‟t large enough and it wasn‟t consistent 

enough, thus they couldn‟t depend on it. 

 

So they came down and said — this isn‟t the only reason, I‟ll be fair — “One of the major reasons we 

have to pull out of here and leave Saskatchewan is lack of financial support.” They were very sorry to do 

it because they had a great deal of their history here, a great deal of their time and efforts had been spent 

in that area and their roots were pretty deep. Consequently they didn‟t want to pull out. 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1457 

If this bill had been passed four or five years ago I suggest there is a good possibility that those Sisters 

would still have been there. We have formed a Union Hospital District in the North Battleford area. I 

suggest to those people up there that they are going to find that they are going to pay a lot more for the 

services they get from a Union Hospital than they every paid when they had the Sisters of Charity 

running the hospital for them. I hope the hospital is a success, I think it will be. The co-operation that 

has come from the city and the surrounding municipalities in forming that Union Hospital has been 

excellent. 

 

That is the reason why I think we should pass this legislation, why it should receive unanimous consent. 

 

But compared to the member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) the member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) as 

usual gets up, and thunders, and accuses, and gurgles all over the place. He didn‟t have the facts, one of 

the things that amazed me was that he can find nothing in this bill that gives these people representation, 

unlike the member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) who doesn‟t pretend to be a lawyer like the other 

fellow, Lord help his clients if he isn‟t any better at looking up a law, a little simple act when he is 

defending them in court than he can in this case. He couldn‟t find that there was anything in this act to 

give the people representation, I‟ll call his attention to section 13, subsection (3), clause (Board) which 

states that: 

 

A city or privately owned hospital would be eligible if it included in its board two representatives 

from areas in which the tax is being levied. 

 

It‟s there in black and white for anyone to see that we are asking them to give local representation to the 

people who put up the money. 

 

Now, again, it may not be perfect. We may have to change it when we get some experience, but it is a 

start and I think it‟s a start in the right direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the members opposite and that the members on both sides of the House will 

support this bill. It‟s not pleasant to come out and put taxation on people. It‟s not there to say this will all 

fall on the farmer. About 60 per cent of it will fall on rural municipalities. It might be 65 per cent and it 

might be less than that but there are cities involved. There are the cities of Estevan and Melville. There 

are some large towns like Humboldt. 

 

Now, at the same time we are doing this I would point out we are suggesting certain changes to the 

Union Hospital Act, to make it more flexible, because I hope that we put ourselves out of this business 

in a very short time. I hope that as a result of this legislation and the legislation amending the Union 

Hospital Act we are going to make it a great deal easier to form union hospitals. As it is now we can 

only form union hospitals to operate, own and run the hospitals, but if we pass this other act it will mean 

they can form a Union Hospital District just for the sole purpose of supporting a hospital. 

 

I will point out that by this law every cent that is paid into the government must be paid back out to the 

hospital. While the member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) is right that some of it 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1458 

may be used for operational costs, we are going to insist that the bulk of it is used for renovations or for 

building for capital purposes. if we don‟t what he predicts could come true. We could find it just 

lessening the levy, just being used for operational costs and defeating the very purpose of this bill. But I 

don‟t think we should be too rigid here because union hospitals can now look to their base, their tax base 

for some help occasionally in their operating costs and many of them do. So I urge you to support this 

bill. Private hospitals need help. Some of the present Union Hospitals need help and they will get help. 

If you have a small union hospital, or any kind of Union Hospital District, people from outside that 

district, who for one reason or another are not in that district, are using the hospital. This prevails; this 

prevails right now. Some of that money will probably be paid to a Union Hospital. Nothing can stop it 

being paid to a Union Hospital. Some of it will go to private hospitals. It will be used for the university 

Hospital, some of it, for example, if it‟s felt that they should receive some of this money. But make no 

mistake, many of the private hospitals and some of the Union Hospitals need this help and they need it 

right now. 

 

I think that if we fail to pass this, then we are saying that we are against equity, we are against fairness, 

because here you‟ve got a class of people right now who are paying the load; they are paying capital 

costs; they are paying for the building of these hospitals. You‟ve got another group of people using 

hospitals who are paying nothing. I don‟t think anyone can argue that this bill isn‟t fair and equitable. 

It‟s not perfect but it‟s a lot more fair and equitable than the situation is now. On the other hand I don‟t 

think anyone can deny or should deny that we need our private hospitals. We want them here and they 

need our help. They need our help right here in Regina. 

 

The member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) talked about what this would do. Well, St. Paul‟s in Saskatoon 

can use some help, I‟m sure. I imagine a great many of his people in his constituency have used that 

hospital for years. I‟m sure if you went and asked most fair-minded people in any constituency “Would 

you be willing to pay a fair share toward the capital costs of the renovations of St. Paul‟s that you have 

used for the last number of years?” I‟m sure they would say “Yes, we are willing to pay, we want to 

pay.” That is the message we get although no people like to pay taxes. So, Mr. Speaker, I urge all 

members to support this. Although it‟s not perfect, I think it is a step in the right direction. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Minister takes his seat would he answer one 

question? I‟m not sure of the position of a community which is served by a private hospital and has been 

contributing to that private hospital through its taxes. Is it now required to pay the two mills tax? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, if it‟s now contributing in a formal way, if it is paying taxes in a formal way and in 

an agreed manner then it wouldn‟t fall under this. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — It‟s been doing it voluntarily. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, well then I think it would stop. It would come under this 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1459 

and start paying. Right now, I‟ll just take a minute, Mr. Speaker. Many of these places are not talking 

very, very much about forming Union Hospital Districts to support these local hospitals and I think this 

is what will happen. 

 

The motion was agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 50 

 

Thatcher McIsaac Brockelbank (Kelsey) 

Howes MacDonald Davies 

McFarlane Gallagher Whelan 

Boldt Breker Nicholson 

Cameron Leith Dewhurst 

Steuart Radloff Berezowsky 

Heald Romuld Michayluk 

Gardiner (Melville) Weatherald Smishek 

Guy MacLennan Link 

Merchant (Mrs.) Hooker Baker 

Loken Coupland Snyder 

MacDougall Gardiner (Moosomin) Larson 

Grant Mitchell Robbins 

Coderre Lloyd Pepper 

Bjarnason Cooper (Mrs.) Pederson 

Trapp Wood Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Cuelenaere Nollet  

 

NAYS — Nil 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister 

of Mineral Resources) for second reading of bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I wish to thank the Assembly and my seat 

mate for having this motion adjourned so that I could say a few words on it. 

 

It‟s a good many years since the Oil and Gas Conservation Act was first passed in the province of 

Saskatchewan. At that time provision was made for unit operations of oil fields or pools. This was the 

first case in Canada where this kind of provision was made for the minister to issue unit operation 

orders. There were unit operations in other parts of the continent which came into effect by agreement. 

We looked at this question of bringing the unit operations into effect by agreement and there were some 

disadvantages to that. Now this bill proposes to allow a number of companies by agreement to establish 

a unit operation and it doesn‟t give the minister or the department any control. It only requires that the 

people in the unit will have the responsibility to file a copy of the agreement with the minister. I have 

serious doubts, doubts about the value of this because there are many smaller oil companies and in some 

cases individuals who must have the co-operation of the major companies if they are going to continue 

in business. 

 

They depend upon the major companies for getting land permits on which they can drill and getting a 

share of the oil if they 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

 

1460 

discover it. They depend on the major companies in a good many ways. I think we should realize that it 

is very important to any government in a jurisdiction which has oil to maintain as far as possible the 

number of small oil companies that will be in operation within that area. The small oil companies have 

done a wonderful job in stepping out and doing exploration sometimes when a major company wouldn‟t 

do it. They went out, they risked their money and a very large part of the present oil reserves that we 

have were discovered because of the operations of small companies. Now, there being so much 

difference between small companies who may have a legal subdivision or a quarter section, and big 

companies which maybe have the oil rights on ten or twenty sections of land, that there can be little hope 

of equal bargaining within this group. I think it would be much better to leave it the way it was, that 

when there is to be a unit operation all the people can submit their proposals. They can get together and 

have meetings. There will be public hearings. This goes a long way to ensuring that there will be little or 

no injustice in that agreement. But this present or proposed method does open the gate for injustices 

creeping into these agreements. 

 

I am not going to oppose the bill but I did want to sound this warning. I think the minister and the 

Department of Mineral Resources should scrutinize these agreements very closely. I would suggest that 

it would be a good thing to make provision for public hearings in cases where there may be some 

indication that everything is not just right. The department, its officers, and the fact that there are public 

hearings have been a real protection to all of the oil companies participating in these unit operations. 

They are complicated affairs and just by little adjustments in the sharing they could become very unfair. 

As I said, I‟m not going to oppose the bill but I did want to say these few words by way of warning of 

what might happen under the provisions of this bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I draw the attention of the House to the fact that the mover of the motion is about to 

close the debate. If anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I have a comment or two with reference to the remarks of the member from Kelsey 

(Mr. Brockelbank). 

 

There are certainly some grounds in what he has had to say in regard to voluntary unitisation. 

Unitisation, of course, as you know, has been a way of life for the oil companies in this province for a 

number of years. It‟s an accepted way of life. There are goodly number of units being formed today that 

are going to the Oil and Gas Conservation Board. Once an application is made, it takes some weeks 

before you have it presented; there is a certain waiting period before the board sits. Having gone to the 

board you find that there is no objection to the unitisation. Everyone is in complete agreement s to the 

operations of the unit and the sharing in the oil of the unit. There is no disagreement. This could just as 

well have been a voluntary agreement. More and more of our hearings are of that nature today. 

 

The companies, not only companies but the royalty holders, both the farmers and the company that is 

doing the drilling, and other interests, sit down and work out a mutually satisfactory arrangement 

outlining how they are gong to share in the operation, they present their arrangement to the board. It‟s 

automatically approved but they can‟t do it until they have an order of the board. Then it becomes an 

ordered unit. 



 

March 23, 1966 

 

1461 

These requests have come from both the Independent Petroleum Association and the Canadian 

Petroleum Association. They both asked for these amendments. We took the view originally that we 

thought the present Oil and Gas Conservation Act provided for it as it is. There are some that maintain 

that it does not. Some maintain there is some question whether or not you can have a voluntary unit 

under the terms and conditions spelled out in the present Act. So it was to remove this question of doubt 

that these amendments were brought forth. I understand there have been some voluntary units organized 

in the past in spite of the regulations in the Oil and Gas Conservation Act. But I want to say this. I don‟t 

hold that fear for the small independent companies that the member spoke of. Small independent 

companies have opposed the major companies at public hearings before the Oil and Gas Conservation 

Board. I can‟t follow the reasoning that would suggest that they would be intimidated in the formation of 

a voluntary unit. If any one of the partners to the agreement in a voluntary unit objects to the agreement 

and is of the opinion that his terms and conditions are not as favourable to him as they should be, he 

merely objects and there is no voluntary unit. Then they must request an application before the board. It 

then goes through the routine process of going before the board and the board orders what the terms and 

conditions in the sharing agreement shall be. They don‟t negotiate; they order and thus it becomes an 

ordered unit. This is equally true of the royalty owner. If he figures that he is not getting his rightful 

share he doesn‟t sign, and unless they have complete agreement of all the interested owners in the pool 

there is no voluntary unit. I don‟t think that fear is there to the extent that the member had indicated that 

it might be. The companies have asked for it and we think it will speed up activity in the formation of 

units. We believe the unitisation is a proper method of approach to development of Saskatchewan oil. 

We believe we should encourage it wherever possible. Those who can do it in a voluntary manner we 

think should have the right and the privilege to do so. Those who can‟t will appeal to the Conservation 

Board. In other areas where the companies may not be favourably disposed to unitisation then, of 

course, the minister has the power to order a unit whether or not they favour it. 

 

All of those rights are still preserved but given the extended right of the companies where they mutually 

agree to a method of unitisation and operation. If everybody is satisfied with the arrangement then they 

simply enter an agreement, file a copy of the agreement with the minister so that we know that the unit 

has been formed. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read the second time. 

 

On the motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart, the Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o‟clock. 


