



















































Hansard: March 24, 1966


1462 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

33rd Day 

 

Thursday, March 24, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

MOTION: CEASE-FIRE, PEACEFUL SETTLEMENT IN VIETNAM 
 

Mr. I. E. Nollet (Cutknife) moved, seconded by Mr. H. Link (Saskatoon City): 

 

That this Assembly, aware of the impossibility of resolving the conflict in Vietnam by military 

action or by negotiations on a bilateral basis, and fearful of the serious and tragic consequences of an 

escalated war, strongly urges the government of Canada to work diligently to achieve a cease-fire 

and to move negotiations for a peaceful settlement to the United Nations or a reconvened Geneva 

Conference. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I wish to emphasize and assure all members of this House that when speaking to 

this resolution I do so with a sincere desire to find a lasting and realistic end to all wars between nations, 

both large and small, regardless of ideologies. This is no time for recriminations or attributing blame. To 

do so would destroy the purpose of this resolution and all prospects of unanimity of purpose in our 

search for a new world of hope, peace and human understanding throughout the world. 

 

Peace is indivisible, it is an encompassment which includes people of all religious beliefs and political 

persuasion. Peace is the hope of and belongs to all mankind the world over. It is the cornerstone and the 

structure of Christian belief. If this structure is to remain and to stand as the ultimate goal of Christian 

and human aspirations we must, of necessity, after 2,0000 years of failure achieve this objective now. In 

the light of the present world situation, further procrastination and recriminating delays could well mean 

the destruction of the human race and all it stands for under God. This is no idle surmise, it is a growing 

reality. I recently saw and listened to a TV interview with a top United States atomic scientist, who 

amongst other things mentioned the possibility of an atomic war by accident. He referred to a 

considerable number of plane crashes in the United States which were carrying atomic bombs. The more 

recent crash off the coast of Spain emphasizes the possibility of atomic war by accident. This same top 

scientist also referred to atomic war, other than by accident. He stated clearly for all to hear that if such a 

war occurred it would all be over in a matter of 25 minutes. 

 

This is the point, Mr. Speaker, it will be all over. This indeed means peace, but not the kind of peace we 

all yearn for, peace for the living, but the peace of death and destruction. Mr. Speaker, it is beyond 

comprehension that intelligent so-called civilized human beings who claim to be creatures of one divine 

Creator could ever reconcile themselves to such a fate. This entire concept, in view of man‟s present 

unlimited potential to kill 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1463 

and destroy, is immoral, unrealistic, and is the epitome of frustration and fear that need not exist. This 

philosophy can no longer be justified on the political basis that if the other fellow does it we have no 

choice but to do it ourselves on a more mighty scale. This is merely the law of the deterrent which 

history proves has never worked. In fact, 2,000 years ago a contrary and more hopeful Christian 

philosophy was proffered for acceptance by the human race. It is now time we accept this as a more 

realistic and intelligent approach to relationships among the world family of nations. None of us are so 

pure and beyond blemish as to self-righteously claim they are justified in exercising their so-called 

sovereign right to attack others. It is high time that the rule of law be established in all aspects of 

international relationships. 

 

History records, Mr. Speaker, that nations are as a result of bitter experience moving much too slowly 

and much too painfully towards this objective. We have the example of the world‟s first Confederation 

of States in the United States and Canada on this continent, in which the states gave up sovereign rights 

to a national government which was made up of various nationalities, various ideologies and religious 

beliefs, living in peace and harmony together. We can all recall the international Peach Conference at 

the Hague many years ago and the establishment of an international Court of Arbitration in 1899. I wish 

at this point, Mr. Speaker, to repeat an excerpt from my old school history book the last copy of which 

was published in 1905. I thought it would be apropos at this time to read some excerpts from this, to 

indicate the position then in terms of relationships between nations and the situation that exists now. It 

says this in justification of the Hague Conference: 

 

It is most significant that, at the same time that these movements towards world unity have 

characterized progress in the political and moral realms, wonderful discoveries, inventions and 

developments in physical domain, the steam railway, the steamship, the telegraph, the telephone, 

wireless direct telegraphy, and a hundred others through the practical annihilation of time and space 

have brought the once isolated nations close alongside one another, and have made easily possible in 

truth, made necessary the inevitable formation of the world union. 

 

That was written a long time ago. Today when we look back at a statement saying that space has been 

annihilated, in the context of the present world situation, there is no comparison, Mr. Speaker. Not only 

have we developed faster and more adequate communications between one another but we have also 

done another thing; we have developed and carried to the ultimate our ability to destroy one another. It 

is on this basis that I moved this resolution in the House. To go on, Mr. Speaker, the court that was set 

up, the World Court that was set up at the Hague Conference, or the World Court as a result of the 

Hague Conference, did arbitrate quite a number of international disputes successfully, but it did not 

prevent the formation of power block alliances nor remove the fundamental cause of war, primarily 

because nations at that time were not prepared to accept and abide by the rule of international law as an 

alternative to war. I am saying here, Mr. Speaker, that this has long been the hope of mankind. Again I 

turn to my history book and in it when speaking in regard to world unity and the need for world peace, 

the writer of that time had this to say, Emmanuel Kant who wrote a thesis on Perpetual Peace, 150 years 

ago, 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1464 

said this and I quote: 

 

For nations and their relations to one another there can be according to reason no other way out of 

the lawless conditions which inevitably result from war than that they give up their lawless 

freedom just as individual men do, accommodate themselves to public restraining laws and so 

form an international state which will grow and at least embrace all the peoples of the world. 

 

This was said and written 150 years ago, so I wish to emphasize the urgency of now facing the realities 

of our existing situation. However, after the Hague Conference, and in the course of time, we again had 

the unhappy experience of the greatest world war up to that time. The cost in destruction and loss of 

human lives shocked the conscience of the entire world. Out of it, the war of 1914, came the League of 

Nations which did not obtain universal approval, nor was the rule of law firmly established and accepted 

as a total alternative to war. However, after World War I we once again witnessed the development of 

great power blocs bent not on collective security but collective aggression, such as Germany, Japan and 

Italy which gave rise to similar safeguarding alliances amongst other nations, all of which were contrary 

to, and rendered useless, the purposes upon which the League of nations was originally founded. 

 

The League of Nations rendered valuable service in the interest of peace for some 20 years but its work 

was finally scuttled by these more powerful power blocs. Once again, the nations involved ignored the 

concept of giving up their sovereign rights, to wage war as an instrument of international policy as 

against peace under the rules of world law and their enforcement by a single international sovereign 

authority. 

 

So some now say, as they said previously, this possibility is an idealistic dream. Well, more and more 

people in both low and high places now say it is an urgent reality. I am glad to note that the Christian 

churches and other faiths throughout the world now realize that man has got a common origin, that he 

also has got a common purpose, and that we all do have a common identity with one another. The World 

Council of Churches came out very strongly in support of an agency that would resolve the need for 

continued conflict and the courtship of ultimate disaster. 

 

His Holiness Pope Paul, as members all know, has taken quite an active role and a most constructive 

role in his endeavours to bring about peaceful understanding through nations. We all recall his recent 

trip to the United Nations and his subsequent efforts to solve the latest conflict in Vietnam. May I 

emphasize Vietnam is merely mentioned in this resolution because it is now the latest and the newest 

danger trouble spot in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the terrific destruction and loss of human lives in tens of millions of people again shock the 

conscience of humanity the world over. The advent of the atomic bomb and other mass killing devices 

frightened and stunned all mankind. The United Nations was born. It found its origin in the fear and 

misery of the past. It provided the only shred of hope and light for the future. It spoke of freedom from 

fear, freedom from want, freedom from oppression, and freedom of conscience. It envisioned a world of 

peace guided by men of good will for the common betterment of people everywhere. It held great 

promise for a total war 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1465 

of destruction. What have been its failures and its achievements and why? First of all, almost 

immediately after the United Nations was formed we witnessed bitter recriminations, escalating fears, 

suspicions and hatred, all of which weakened and undermined the good work the United Nations was 

intended to do. The post war period became a period of iron Curtains, Bamboo Curtains, in the hope of 

segregating and containing ideological evils. We became so obsessed by our own fears that we 

generated still greater fears. The law of the mighty atomic deterrent grew and developed to the point 

where a most dreadful fear now grips the entire world. The fear of total destruction now hangs over all 

of us; man has reached a new pinnacle in the art of his own destruction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, have we reached the point of now return? A firm Yes if we continue down this road in 

frustration and fear rather than choosing a more mature and realistic understanding of the problems that 

beset all of us. Our hope lies in the choice of a better, more reasoned, and more constructive pathway for 

human survival and a great hope for the future. 

 

The United Nations has accomplished much good. Its great potential for good must be strengthened, not 

destroyed by fears and recriminations, in the midst of the giant conflicts of views which have deterred 

the UN from its intended purpose. Canada has the distinction of having played a most prominent role in 

its endeavours to make the United Nations and its principles an effective means for peace and human 

progress. 

 

Here I might mention, Mr. Speaker, Canada‟s role in the Suez crisis, in the Cyprus disputes, and its 

intervention in the dispute between Pakistan and India, and just previous to that is intervention under the 

Geneva agreement in finding a solution to the regrettable Vietnam situation. Canada committed itself 

wholeheartedly in this regard as a member of the International Control Commission. Peace, Mr. 

Speaker, in this area of world trouble seemed to be assured, but most unfortunately the same area has 

now become a potential explosive area that could well become a major war with dreadful atomic 

overtones. This trend must be stopped. The logical alternative is that this matter, of necessity, must be 

placed entirely under the jurisdiction of the United Nations and/or that the principles of the Geneva 

Agreement be implemented as originally intended through the international Control Commission of 

which Canada is a member. 

 

I would, therefore, hope and trust that all members will support the resolution, keeping in mind that in 

these critical times there is no purpose at this stage of engaging in a long and hopeless debate as to who 

is right and who is wrong. Such a debate will not only be inconclusive, but it will fail in unanimity in the 

all-important matter of making the United Nations and similar peace keeping agencies achieve their 

objectives of world peace and human betterment. 

 

Let us, therefore, Mr. Speaker, unanimously support the government of Canada as a loyal adherent to the 

founding principles of the United Nations and its peach keeping mission and urge them to still greater 

efforts in this direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in begging leave of the Assembly to move this motion, seconded by 

Mr. Link (Saskatoon). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1466 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — I rise to oppose this motion, I think every citizen of 

Saskatchewan, I think every citizen of Canada, I am sure every citizen on this continent would like to 

see peace and would like to see the Vietnam crisis ended. But in order to have peace, you must have 

both sides desirous of it. I don‟t always agree with everything the Americans do. They make mistakes 

like other people. But I do get a little sick and tired of the attitude of my socialist friends opposite, in 

that they seem to be anti-American on everything. 

 

The line that we heard the hon. member for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) give today, even though he may have 

given it quite sincerely, was the Communist line, pure and simple. It was the line of the fellow traveller, 

the line of the Socialist in most parts of the world, but not the line of Prime Minister Wilson in Great 

Britain, thank goodness. Down through the years on a great many occasions of economic and military 

peril, we have had to depend on the goodwill, the hard work of the people of the United States. This 

relationship has been an umbrella under which Canadians have found shelter in many storms. Why then 

must we listen to the sentiments that have been expressed today? We have to admit that there is a great 

similarity between those sentiments and those which are expressed as I say by Communists everywhere. 

We‟ve seen the peace marchers, we‟ve seen the names of many of these Labor-Progressive supporters, 

members of the Communist party of Canada and so on. We want to see an end to the Vietnam crisis but 

we are unalterably opposed to any intervention by this legislature in a matter which involves our best 

neighbour, United States and a Communist power. We believe that sooner or later Saskatchewan would 

do a lot better if some of these sentiments were not expressed. In recent years, in recent months, we have 

watched the Americans and President Johnson make every conceivable effort towards bringing about 

peace in Vietnam. We know that if there was any reasonable way that the Americans could bring about 

peace, that they would do so. As I said a moment ago, we think that the Americans don‟t know how they 

can bring about peace unless those on the other side are willing to sit down to a conference. A few days 

ago I received notice in a letter on my desk intimating that this Saturday there will be a march on the 

legislature to discuss the Vietnam crisis. Who is it signed by? One signator was Mabel Hanley, former 

Communist candidate. A man called Jim Harding is very active in it. I don‟t know whether he is a 

Communist or a Socialist but he could be either. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that members of this 

government will not be here to meet this delegation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — My hon. friends opposite can do what they like. May I express the hope, Sir, that this 

delegation at no time will be permitted inside this Legislature Chamber. It‟s a free country, they can be 

outside of it if they want to. 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — They won‟t have any door kickers. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No, but maybe you‟ll have a few Communists on that side to meet them. Mr. 

Speaker, we on this side of the House believe we were elected to deal with provincial matters — 

improve agriculture and find jobs for our people. We believe we were elected to help Indians, to help the 

homeowners and so on. I think that 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1467 

resolutions like the one this afternoon is wasting the time of this House. I am going to have some more 

to say on this debate. In the meantime I would beg leave of the Assembly to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION: ABOLITION OF THE SENATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. A. M. Nicholson 

(Saskatoon City). 

 

That this Assembly believes that in order to implement the fundamental principle of democracy, the 

laws of Canada should be made by the elected representatives of the people, and to this end the 

Assembly urges the government of Canada to take immediate steps to bring about the abolition of the 

Senate so that for the second century of our history the parliament of Canada will consist of the Queen 

and the House of Commons; 

 

and the proposed amendment moved thereto by the Hon. Mr. Cuelenaere (Minister of natural 

Resources): 

 

That all the words after “That” in line one be deleted and the following words added: 

 

The matter of abolition of the Senate, being a provision to amend the Constitution of Canada, should 

not be finally determined without the widest possible consultation and debate so as to permit the 

opinions of all interested groups and individuals to be solicited and obtained. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina West): — I did want to address a few rods to the House on this matter, Mr. 

Speaker, because I considered with a good deal of care the amendment moved by the hon. member from 

Shellbrook (Mr. Cuelenaere) and I thought that on looking at it, it had a good deal of merit. 

 

I looked at the resolution as it was originally moved by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon (Mr. 

Nicholson) and noted that the essence of the resolution was that this Assembly urge the government of 

Canada to take immediate steps to bring about the abolition of the Senate. I then noted the amendment 

of the member for Shellbrook (Mr. Cuelenaere). He indicated that he felt that there ought not to be urged 

upon the government of Canada the taking of immediate steps to abolish the Senate before there was 

adequate consultation. On reflection, Mr. Speaker, I felt that the position taken by the member for 

Shellbrook had a good deal of merit and I am personally prepared to accept the general intent of the 

amendment. I think it may well be premature that the government of Canada take immediate steps to 

abolish the Senate. It seems to that perhaps the government of Canada should seek opinions all across 

this country. Perhaps it is presumptuous of this legislature to suggest that because of a particular point of 

view held by this legislature or a particular point of view held by the people of Saskatchewan, the 

government of Canada should 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1468 

therefore necessarily abolish the Senate. Perhaps the widest possible consultation of all interested groups 

and individuals ought to be solicited and obtained. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think there can 

be any doubt that one of the groups that ought to be consulted, one of the interested groups that ought to 

be consulted, and one of the interested groups whose opinion ought to be obtained is the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. I would think, Mr. Speaker, that his legislature ought to acknowledge the fact that it is 

simply one of the organizations, one of the groups which ought to be consulted. But having reached that 

conclusion that it was probably not reasonable — a shade presumptuous to suggest that because we, the 

legislature of Saskatchewan, felt in this particular way the Senate accordingly ought to be abolished, 

nevertheless it is fair to say that it is certainly not presumptuous of us to express an opinion on this 

subject. Because I believe it is a subject on which the people of Saskatchewan would want us to express 

an opinion to the government of Canada, and because I agree with the member for Shellbrook (Mr. 

Cuelenaere) that there ought to be widespread consultation and that one of the groups that ought to be 

consulted ought to be the legislature of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to the amendment moved by the 

member from Shellbrook, the hon. Mr. Cuelenaere, and my amendment is: 

 

That the proposed amendment be amended by adding at the end the following words: 

 

and that as an early step in the Canada-wide expression of opinion, the Saskatchewan legislature 

records and transmits to the Prime Minister of Canada its opinion that the Senate of Canada should be 

abolished. 

 

Seconded by the hon. member for Kelsey (Mr. J. H. Brockelbank). 

 

The sub-amendment was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 19 

Messieurs 

Cooper (Mrs.) Whelan Snyder 

Walker Nicholson Broten 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Berezowsky Pepper 

Nollet Dewhurst Robbins 

Blakeney Michayluk Brockelbank (Saskatoon city) 

Davies Link Thibault 

Baker   

 

NAYS — 31 

Messieurs 

Thatcher Loken Breker 

Howes MacDougall Leith 

McFarlane Grant Radloff 

Boldt Coderre Romuld 

Cameron Bjarnason Weatherald 

Steuart Trapp MacLennan 

Heald Cuelenaere Larochelle 

Gardiner (Melville) McIsaac Hooker 

Guy MacDonald Coupland 

Merchant (Mrs.) Gallagher Mitchell 

Gardner (Moosomin)   



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1469 

The amendment was agreed to. 

 

The motion, as amended, was agreed to. 

 

MOTION: RE — OLD AGE SECURITY PENSION 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. H. Brockelbank 

(Kelsey): 

 

That this Assembly is of the opinion that the government of Canada should increase the old age 

security pension to $100 per month payable at age 65 without a means test; 

 

and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. C. MacDonald (Milestone): 

 

That all the words after the word „should‟ in line two be deleted and the following words added: 

 

give immediate consideration to implementing the recommendations of the Special Senate Committee 

on Ageing so that all Canadians over the age of 65 be assured of a guaranteed minimum income. 

 

Mrs. Marjorie Cooper (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned the debate on this resolution 

before us, I had given reasons why I felt the original motion calling for an old age pension of $100 a 

month at age 65 was preferable to the amendment offered by the member from Milestone which asked 

the government, in effect, to implement the recommendations of the special Senate Committee of a 

guaranteed income at 65 of $105 a month for a single person and $185 a month for a married couple. 

Now I am not going to take the time of the House to repeat all the arguments that I made but I will, 

because it is a while since I made these arguments, remind you just in point form why I feel that we 

should vote for the motion rather than the amendment. 

 

First of all, and I think most important, the chief weakness inherent in the amendment is that many 

thousands of people who badly need that extra $25 a month would be left out under what is suggested in 

the amendment. These people could probably apply for extra money through the Canada Assistance Plan 

which would mean a humiliating kind of means test. We feel that this is not necessary, that these things 

should be given as a right. Then I pointed out secondly, that the cost of implementing a pension of $ 100 

at age 65 is not excessive. It is nothing like the figures that were quoted in the House of Commons by 

Prime Minister Pearson. I gave reasons and I will just restate them quickly in point form. 

 

(1) Because the government is already committed to lowering the pension age progressively to age 65 

and this will cost $475,000,000 in any case. (2) There is a surplus in the Old Age Security Fund of 

$216,500,000 that could be used and $100,000,000 spent by the federal and provincial governments now 

under the Old Age Assistance Act would be eliminated. Millions of dollars would be saved under the 

Canada Assistance Plan if the old age pension was raised to $100 a month, and if the Guaranteed 

Income Plan, as suggested in the amendment, is followed there would be substantial expense to the 

Income Tax branch in checking thousands of income tax returns to see if people were eligible to get this 

guaranteed income. There will be a sizable amount returned to the federal 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1470 

treasury anyway if the $100 a month is passed by extra income tax payments. I noted several ways in 

which money could be found if additional money was needed to pay this $100 a month. Answering 

further one argument of the member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) that pensions were a political 

football, I don‟t agree. I think the question of pensions is raised because the need is there, but even if he 

were right and it was a political football, I can see that it would be no less a political football under the 

amendment because pressure to raise the guaranteed income would be just as great a pressure as now 

exists. So, Mr. Speaker, I feel there is an urgent and an immediate necessity to raise the old Age Pension 

to $100 a month at age 65 and I feel that the principle of the universal Old Age Pensions a basic right is 

a good principle and one from which we should not depart. According to the amendment we would be 

departing from the principle, because that extra $25 would only be paid to a relatively small number of 

the population. We believe the universal Old Age Pension should be given as a right and should be 

universal. Because I believe such a plan could be financed without any undue burden on the economy 

and indeed such a move would spur the economy, and would leave thousands of needy persons without 

that additional financial assistance, for all these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion and vote 

against the amendment. 

 

Mr. A. M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, the member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) and 

the lady member for Regina West (Mrs. Cooper) have made excellent presentations, but I would like to 

make a last appeal to have a free vote on this particular resolution. I am aware that the Premier for many 

years has been advocating the introduction of the means test in connection with the Old Age Security 

payments. These views are not shared by most members across the way and not shared by the present 

Liberal government at Ottawa. in view of the fact that Mr. Pearson is committed to providing $75 per 

month at 65 within a few short years, I think the figures presented by the lay member for Regina would 

suggest that this is in the public interest. The passage of this resolution, if accepted by Ottawa, would 

relieve the Saskatchewan taxpayers of our share of the cost of Old Age Assistance which is a sizable 

item. Although the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan would be picking up this particular program. I am 

sure that there are many members across the way who do believe that before Canada is 100 years old we 

should have $100 a month for everyone at 65 without a means test. 

 

I wish to commend the member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) for the comments made with regard to 

the special Committee of the Senate on Ageing. I have referred to this excellent study. I would urge all 

members to read this report. On page two you will find that we have a relatively young population in 

Canada compared with other western countries. Using the 1960 statistics, follows: Sweden 12 per cent; 

United Kingdom 11.9 per cent; Norway 10.9 per cent; West Germany and Denmark 10.6 per cent; 

U.S.A. 9.3 per cent; Netherlands 9 per cent; New Zealand 8.6 per cent; Australia 8.4 per cent; Canada 

7.6 per cent. It may be of interest to hon. members that Prince Edward Island has the highest percentage 

over 65 of all our provinces with 10.4 per cent; B.C. is a close second with 10.2 per cent; Saskatchewan 

comes third with an average slightly above the Canadian average. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1471 

Other trends worth noting I think might be that the continuing trend from the farm to city continues in 

all provinces. Canadians live longer than they did a generation ago, chiefly as a result in the changes in 

infant rather than in adult mortality rates. Deaths fell in the first year from over 100 per thousand live 

births in the early twenties to a low of 27 in 1961. At present a male infant at birth has a life expectancy 

of 68 years and a female of 74 years, eight and twelve years more than in 1931. This establishes again 

the fact that the women are no longer the members of the weaker sex. The fact that women on the 

average outlive men goes a long way to explain why there are so many more widows than widowers in 

the population. According to the 1961 census, 71.6 per cent of the widowed population age 65 and aver 

were women compared with 66 per cent twenty years ago. 

 

One of the most serious and difficult problems faced by society in relation to old people is that of 

helping them maintain some satisfying foothold in the community and with it a sense of self-worth. I 

submit that this recognition by the Canadian public as we celebrate our 100th year would go a long way 

to indicate to this particular group that we appreciate the work they have done over the years. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s most serious problem which presents itself to those 65 and over is that they have lived 

through two World Wards, a worldwide depression and a serious drought. My friend, the late Professor 

Britnell in his book “The Wheat Economy — 60” wrote: 

 

A period of drought unprecedented in prairie settlement synchronized with the depression 

unprecedented in Canadian agriculture; and the province of Saskatchewan, in which the dried-out 

area chiefly lies, has had to bear an exceptionally heavy burden. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, that the members of this legislature, I think, should give special consideration to 

the needs of our people 65 and over and see to it that the federal government has the opinion of this 

Assembly that we should move immediately to provide pensions of $100 at the age of 65 without a 

means test. On page 74 of this report of the Senate Committee, we find some information that is not 

appreciated by most Canadian people. Would you believe, Mr. Speaker, that on the basis of the 1961 

census more than 11 per cent of the males between 65 and 69 received less than $500 per year and 50 

per cent of the women in this age group had less than $500. Those over 70 have been eligible for the Old 

Age Security and are in a better position, and so consequently only 1.5 per cent of the males had under 

$500 and 5.7 per cent of the females. Take the group $500 to $599 and a third group $1,000 to $1,499 

and we find that of the Canadians 65 to 69 receiving under $1,500 — 38.5 per cent are males and 85 per 

cent females. Again the Old Age Security improves the position of those over 70, but still 60.6 per cent 

of the males and 84 per cent of the females were in the position that they had less than $1,500 per year. 

This statement indicates clearly that older women have a much more difficult time finding adequate 

food, shelter and the necessary clothing than men. It is encouraging that no one opposite has made a 

good case for supporting the amendment and defeating the motion. I submit that someone should 

advance some good reasons because the electors of the members, of all members, will want to know 

why the members of this legislature id not consider it wise to pass an opinion and ask the federal 

government to move. There are two very popular Canadian welfare programs which have been 

identified by people in countries all over 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1472 

the world as being of public interest. I refer to Family Allowances and Old Age Security. These have 

made a valuable contribution to raise living standards and to help to build a buoyant economy. 

 

Mr. Pearson in speaking in opposition to Mr. Douglas‟ amendment in the House on the 20th of January 

referred to this $855,000,000 cost figure. My colleague from Regina has dealt with this argument very 

effectively. I think it should be noted that Canada‟s defence expenditures are still running over 

$4,000,000 per day. since the end of the Second World War we have spent on our defence over 

$22,000,000,000. There isn‟t anyone in his right senses who would suggest that the economy of Canada 

will not stand the spending of $855,000,000 for our elderly citizens. The lady member for Regina West 

(Mrs. Cooper) pointed out the providing of the extra $25 for those over 70 would only be a mere 

$225,000,000. She mentioned the surplus in this fund is $216,000,000. She might also have gone on to 

say that even in the event that it was necessary to raise additional funds it is hard to make a case for no 

one in Canada paying more than $120 out of income tax payments for this particular program. It really 

doesn‟t make sense, Mr. Speaker, that the citizen I spoke about in another debate was in the fortunate 

position that after paying all the high income taxes for people in his bracket he had over $300 a day, 

seven days a week, 52 weeks a year, and should only give $120 a year towards the old Age Security 

Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the House of Commons on the 8th of March, Mrs. MacInnis of Vancouver-Kingsway 

made an excellent case in supporting the resolution which is before us. Mrs. MacInnis is one of the very 

few people in Canada, I imagine, who was in Ottawa in 1926 and 1927, when the first old age pension 

legislation was introduced. She was there when quite a young woman as her father‟s secretary. She 

mentions three outstanding years, at least three years that should be outstanding, the year 1927, when 

Canada introduced its first old age pension legislation, the year 1951, when Canada moved to provide a 

pension to everyone without a means teat at 70, and hopefully, 1966, the year in which we would move 

to reduce that age to 65 and increase the amount to $100 a month. I am convinced that members across 

the way are really out of step with trends in Canada. I hope that some of them will show the good 

judgment to vote for this motion because it is my considered opinion that Mr. Pearson will be moving in 

this direction before many more moons. 

 

Mrs. MacInnis in her remarks referred to a letter that she received from one of her constituents. This 

woman wrote: 

 

I am 68, retired, and thought 20 years ago that I would be able to live comfortably on the pension I had 

arranged. What can I do? It costs 40 cents bus fare to get downtown, no tea, no meal; even 

window-shopping must be avoided as a way of life. Is this living? How does one enjoy oneself? 

People were never meant to be pigeon holed alone in one room. Even dogs to be healthy must have 

running room and, for just one of our top politicians for one week to try and live as a lot of our older 

folks are forced to do. How much fortitude would they have at the end of it? 

 

She ends her letter by: 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1473 

Let the last ten years of life be a reward and a blessing, not a curse. 

 

and I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the old people in Canada can‟t wait. The time is now for the members of 

this legislature to speak up for this very important group in Canada and especially in Saskatchewan. I 

hope that some of the members across the way will be voting against the amendment and for the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The amendment was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 32 

Messieurs 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Grant Romuld 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Bjarnason MacLennan 

Cameron Trapp Larochelle 

Steuart Cuelenaere Hooker 

Heald McIsaac Coupland 

Gardiner (Melville) MacDonald Gardner (Moosomin) 

Guy Gallagher Mitchell 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Pederson 

Loken Leith  

 

NAYS — 20 

Messieurs 

Cooper (Mrs.) Whelan Baker 

Nollet Nicholson Snyder 

Walker Dewhurst Broten 

Blakeney Berezowsky Robbins 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Michayluk Pepper 

Davies Smishek Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Thibault Link  

Motion, as amended, agreed to. 

 

MOTION RE TELEVISION OUTLET IN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the 

Opposition): 

 

That this Assembly 

 

(1) Notes with concern that Saskatchewan continues to be the only Canadian province west of New 
Brunswick which is not served by at least one CBC-owned and operated television station. 

 

(2) Urges the government of Canada and the Board of Broadcast Governors to authorize the CBC to 
proceed immediately with construction of a television outlet in Saskatchewan. 

 

and the proposed amendment thereto, moved by Mr. MacLennan: 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1474 

That all the words after the word “concern” in line two be deleted and the following words added: 

 

That many areas of Saskatchewan continue to be served by only one TV channel and urges the Board 

of Broadcast Governors to award additional franchises in those areas where applications are pending 

for alternate channels and that careful consideration be given to the location of satellite stations so that 

the interests of those areas which have insufficient populations to warrant originating stations would 

be best served. 

 

Mr. A. M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, when this amendment was moved by the 

member for Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) the other day, I didn‟t have a copy and consequently I 

adjourned the debate. Now that I have had a chance to read the original and the amendment, I hope that 

members opposite will have a second thought about what they are suggesting. They are asking that all 

the words after “concern” in line one be struck out. They do not seem to be concerned that 

Saskatchewan continues to be the only Canadian province west of New Brunswick which is not served 

by at least one CBC owned and operated television station. I cannot think of any member in this House 

who is happy that Saskatchewan continues to be in this position. I am sorry I wasn‟t able to watch 

television last night but a bright young girl from Mikado was appearing on a TV program from 

Montreal. I think it is a great pity that young artists in this province have to go to Winnipeg or Calgary, 

or Edmonton, Vancouver or Toronto before having a chance to appear on the television programs which 

are so much of our everyday life. This girl and her husband have had the good fortune to study in 

Vienna and in Paris. I am sure there are very few members in this House who ever heard of a place 

called Mikado, but here is a young couple who have a distinguished record and many more could be 

named who have left Saskatchewan who would continue to live here and would make a contribution to 

the life of Saskatchewan, if we had a CBC owned and operated television station. I think that members 

on both sides of the House have had representations from a great variety of organizations, urging that the 

government of Canada and the Board of Broadcast Governors authorize the CBC to proceed 

immediately with construction of a television outlet in Saskatchewan. 

 

I saw in the Leader Post some time ago that the Wascana Site had been set for a TV station. our friends 

in Saskatoon haven‟t yet conceded that Regina should be the logical place but certainly either Regina or 

Saskatoon should be selected. The junior member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) suggests Moose Jaw. 

Yes, I have no objection to Moose Jaw, but some place in Saskatchewan should be selected. I hope the 

member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) will be opposing the proposal made here. I notice that the 

Conservative member for Meadow Lake had a motion in the House of Commons on March 14th of this 

year. His motion was: 

 

That in the opinion of this House the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation should take steps to carry 

out its duty to provide television coverage by immediately establishing transmission facilities in 

northwestern Saskatchewan including Buffalo narrows, Uranium City and on to Fort Smith, Hay River 

and Yellowknife. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1475 

Mr. Speaker, there is a very large important area in Canada within the boundaries of Saskatchewan and 

immediately to our north and to the northwest of us that people of this House should not forget about. I 

was interested in reading a presentation made by the Canadian Broadcasting League when they appeared 

before the Board of Broadcast Governors at a public hearing in Ottawa. It was on the 7th of March that 

they made their submission. They point out that they speak for a number of organizations and represent 

a large cross-section of Canadian society, for example, the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, the 

Canadian Labour Congress, Co-operative Union of Canada, Federated Women‟s Institutes of Canada, 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Canadian Association of Consumers, Catholic Women‟s League, Crop 

Insurance Services, and a number of others. This is not a new fly-by-night organization; it has been 

working for over thirty-five years with three objectives. First, to protect the public interest in 

broadcasting, to safeguard public ownership, especially as representatives of the CBC and to speak for 

the consumers, the viewers, the users of broadcasting, and to work for high quality programming. 

 

Their submission points out that the group is not a group of long-haired intellectuals as they have been 

pictured; they speak for hard-handed farmers, for workers, for women and mothers, for ordinary citizens 

who are deeply concerned about what comes into their homes over the air waves. I will mention two or 

three of their points in their submission. They point out first that the airwaves belong to the people of 

Canada, not to broadcasters. I license to broadcast is given as a public trust, a privilege granted and may 

be revoked when not properly used. 

 

We want the CBC to fill a central, national and predominant role; and we don‟t want to see anything 

done that might prevent or erode the effectiveness or lessen the coverage and influence of the CBC. We 

believe that all networks should be under public control. A network is too powerful an instrument to be 

given over to private profit interests. We believe that a network should not be in the hands of private 

people for the same reason that Trans Canada highway and the Post Office should not be in private 

hands. 

 

Another paragraph which is also important makes an appeal to a great many who watch television. We 

are opposed to the present dominating influence of the advertisers‟ programs. At its best advertising is 

pretty poor broadcasting fare, and a great deal of advertising on radio and TV today is an unworthy use 

of the airwaves. We don‟t believe broadcasters have a right to pummel viewers and listeners with silly 

commercials. The present influence of the advertiser induces poor broadcasting and represents a 

distortion of social values. The public is not well served where a commercial interest is paramount and 

where profits for investors are the main objective. We are not purists about advertising, but if we must 

have advertising let it be in good taste, not pitched to the lowest common denominator. We object to 

advertising that offends by its frequency and its intrusion and we don‟t think the Board of Broadcast 

Governors has to guarantee the profitability of the private broadcasting sector or any particular private 

station or the CTV network. The private broadcaster goes into a free enterprise venture with his eyes 

open in the hope and expectation of making profits. If he fails he shouldn‟t come crying to the BBG to 

be released from the conditions under which he got his license to broadcast. If the CTV is bankrupt, that 

comes from the risk which the free enterpriser takes. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a good deal more information that 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1476 

could be advanced in this general field. I remember hearing the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) 

deliver the Quance lectures at the university of Saskatoon, back in 1959. His reference to the CBC in the 

field of education was of special interest. Here is a paragraph on page A of the Role of Government in 

Canadian Education: 

 

Out of the Aird Commission report in 1929 and the findings of a subsequent parliamentary committee 

in 1932, came the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission, later the CBC, and the assumption of 

some public responsibility in the field of communication. In justification of this new role of 

government, Mr. Bennett, then Prime Minister said „No other scheme than that of public ownership 

can ensure the people of this country, without regard to class, or place, equal enjoyment of the benefits 

and pleasures of radio broadcasting‟. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition in the Quance lectures went on to say that in many ways the CBC had 

been a factor in Canadian education development in school as well as out of school. Television‟s power 

as a means of communicating ideas and influence is so tremendous as to be almost frightening. It seems 

essential that parliamentary government representative of the people should be vested with the 

responsibility of guaranteeing reasonable access to the transmission and receipt of such an influence. 

 

One more quotation, Mr. Speaker, Mr. R. B. Bennett, when the legislation was introduced — he was the 

Prime Minister back in 1932 — had some wise words to say: 

 

Canadians have the right to a system of broadcasting from Canadian sources equal in all respects to 

that of any other country. 

 

and he declared the intention of the government to have the House appoint a committee to inquire into 

the whole system of radio broadcasting. Then a few years later in 1936, when Mr. Bennett was the 

Leader of the Opposition, another very well known Canadian, C. D. Howe, brought in the legislation 

establishing the CBC. It was interesting to have these wealthy Canadians who had made their fortune in 

the free enterprise system recognize that in the field of radio — no television in those days — the public 

had a vital interest. I am aware that in Saskatchewan the existing TV facilities have performed a very 

useful role and they are covering the province. I understand that many of them would like to have in 

Saskatchewan the establishing of a CBC facility because no private organization has the resources and 

the possibilities of developing that would be available to CBC. So I hope that members on the 

government side will have had a second look at the improvident proposal made by the member for Last 

Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) and defeat this amendment and support the motion which was so well 

received and so well presented by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) when he moved it initially. 

 

The amendment was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 31 

Messieurs 
Thatcher MacDougall Leith 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1477 

 
Howes Grant Radloff 

McFarlane Coderre Romuld 

Boldt Bjarnason Weatherald 

Cameron Trapp MacLennan 

Steuart Cuelenaere Larochelle 

Heald McIsaac Hooker 

Gardiner (Melville) MacDonald Coupland 

Guy Gallagher Gardner (Moosomin) 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Mitchell 

Loken   
 

NAYS — 22 

Messieurs 
Lloyd Whelan Snyder 

Cooper (Mrs.) Nicholson Broten 

Nollet Dewhurst Robbins 

Walker Berezowsky Pepper 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Michayluk Pederson 

Blakeney Smishek Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Davies Link Thibault 

Baker   

The motion, as amended, was agreed to on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 50 

Messieurs 
Thatcher McIsaac Brockelbank (Kelsey) 

Howes MacDonald Blakeney 

McFarlane Gallagher Davies 

Boldt Breker Thibault 

Cameron Leith Whelan 

Steuart Radloff Nicholson 

Heald Romuld Dewhurst 

Gardiner (Melville) Weatherald Michayluk 

Guy MacLennan Smishek 

Merchant (Mrs.) Larochelle Link 

Loken Hooker Baker 

MacDougall Coupland Snyder 

Grant Gardner (Moosomin) Broten 

Coderre Mitchell Robbins 

Bjarnason Lloyd Pepper 

Trapp Nollet Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Cuelenaere Walker  
 

NAYS — 3 

Messieurs 
Cooper (Mrs.) Berezowsky Pederson 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE BILL NO. 19, AN ACT RESPECTING THE CREDIT 

GRANTORS REGULATION ACT, 1966: 

 

Hon. members will recall that on Friday, February 11th, when Bill no. 19, entitled An Act respecting 

The Credit Grantors Regulation Act, 1966, standing in the name of the hon. member from Hanley (Mr. 

Walker) was introduced by leave and read the first 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1478 

time, its further proceeding was made subject to the customary Speaker‟s caveat as to its being in order. 

I listened with interest to arguments as to its admissibility so ably presented by hon. members on 

Tuesday, 1st march, and I wish to express my thanks to them for the benefit of their advice, which has 

helped me to discharge one of the most difficult duties which falls on the Chair. 

 

Standing Order No. 45 of our legislature states in part as follows: 

 

Any vote, resolution, address or Bill introduced in the Assembly for the appropriation of any part 

of the public revenue, or of any tax or impost to any purpose whatsoever or to impose any new or 

additional charge upon the public revenue or upon the people shall be recommended to the 

Assembly by message of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, before it is considered by the 

Assembly. 

 

Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 355, states in part as follows: 

 

The Recommendation of the Governor General must be obtained before any Resolution or Bill for 

the appropriation of any part of the public revenue or of any tax or impost is presented; 

 

and again in Citation No. 246, subsection 3: 

 

An amendment infringes the financial initiative of the Crown, not only if it increases the amount, 

but also if it extends the objects and purposes expressed in the communication by which the Crown 

has recommended a charge. 

 

Erskine May states on page 779 of the 17th Edition of Parliamentary Practice: 

 

It is not always easy to determine whether a particular proposal for expenditure actually imposes a 

charge and therefore requires the Queen‟s Recommendation. The practice of the House has 

evolved certain tests for deciding this question which may be summed up as follows: In order to 

constitute a charge upon public funds expenditure must be (1) new and distinct; (2) payable out of 

the Exchequer; (3) effectively imposed. 

 

Examples as stated by May of Bills requiring the Queen‟s recommendation are as follows: 

 

(1) Charges upon moneys to be provided by Parliament for salaries and other expenses caused by 
the imposition of novel duties upon the Executive Government by the legislation of the 

session; and 

 

(2) The expenses arising out of the imposition of new duties on an existing department or 
authority. 

 

Bill no. 19 provides for the regulation of credit grantors for which purpose the Deputy Provincial 

Secretary shall be the Registrar of credit and that he shall amongst other things, exercise general 

supervision over credit grantors and over the business of credit granting in the province; that he shall 

conduct studies, inquiries and surveys, and that he shall disseminate information respecting the methods 

of obtaining or granting credit; the practices of credit grantors; the costs of loans; the facilities available 

for obtaining loans or credit; and such other 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1479 

information as he considers desirable for the purpose of informing the public respecting such matters. 

 

I have looked at the precedents in this matter, and I agree with the hon. member for Hanley that our 

practice in the past does not appear to have been consistent. To mention one instance he drew my 

attention to the Cemeteries Act, 1955, which imposed additional duties on a public agency by requiring 

it to issue licences, examine financial statements and so forth. This Bill was not given the Lieutenant 

Governor‟s recommendation. Yet in 1965, another Cemeteries Act was passed which re-enacted many 

of the provisions of the 1955 Act as well as imposing new duties on the authority responsible for 

overseeing the administration of cemeteries. This 1965 Bill was given the Lieutenant Governor‟s 

recommendation. 

 

I might add that the other Bill mentioned by the hon. member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) as not carrying 

the Lieutenant Governor‟s recommendation — namely the Bill respecting the Department of Industry 

and Commerce — was in fact given that recommendation. The hon. member may have been misled by 

the fact that the recommendation was given not on first reading as is usually the practice but on second 

reading. 

 

Despite this and other variations in past practice, however, I am clear that in relation to the authorities 

already cited, the terms of Bill no. 19, if enacted, would effectively impose a new and distinct additional 

charge upon the revenues of the Province of Saskatchewan by the imposition of new duties upon an 

existing department, namely, the Provincial Secretary‟s Department, and by extending the objects and 

purposes of that department. 

 

Moreover, and in addition to the foregoing, I would draw the attention of the House to further examples 

as stated by may, of money resolutions requiring the Queen‟s recommendation: 

 

(3) Contingent or prospective charges upon the Consolidated Fund; and 
(4) any proposal whereby the Crown would incur a liability or a contingent liability payable out of 

money to be voted by Parliament. 

 

So strictly has this ruling been applied in the British House that in the session of 1933-34, a guarantee of 

the principal and interest of the stock issued by the Government of Newfoundland was required to carry 

the Royal Message of Approval. 

 

In the light of the foregoing it becomes necessary to define the meaning of the term “contingent 

liability”. This term is ably defined on pages 367 and 368 in Volume 17 of that complete work of legal 

reference, “Corpus Juris Secundum”, as follows: 

 

1. A liability which is not absolute but depends on an uncertain event. 
 

2. A liability which may or may not occur. 
 

3. A liability which has not accrued, but may accrue on the happening of some future event. 
 

A contingent liability is not an absolute liability existing in the present, but one which may become an 

absolute liability upon the happening of a future event. 

 

Bill no. 19 makes provision for an appeal by any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Registrar, to 

a Judge of the 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1480 

District court. Where an appeal lies, a defence is implied. It follows, therefore, that it would be the 

responsibility of the Registrar to defend his decision in court, if it were appealed. The Bill therefore 

creates a contingent liability to the province for any costs in connection with the defence. 

 

It is my firm belief that those charged and entrusted by the people with the work of raising the provincial 

revenues must be the sole arbiters of the institution of new or additional expenditures and that the 

privilege of initiating legislation which will be a new or increased charge upon the people must therefore 

be the absolute prerogative of the government. 

 

I believe this principle to be fundamental to the preservation of self-government. It does not limit the 

right of members to place their views before the House and the public and to test the opinion of the 

legislature, for though they may not introduce a Bill involving money which would, if passed, be an Act 

of the legislature binding on the government, they are not prevented from moving a properly worded 

resolution or recommendation in general terms seeking the consideration of the House and of the people. 

Resolutions of this nature are permissible because, if adopted, they have no operative effect and no grant 

is made or burden imposed upon the people. 

 

Accordingly, I rule that Bill No. 19 is out of order. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Your Honour, may I say on my own behalf, and I‟m sure on behalf of 

the House, that the House is very much indebted for the learned and scholarly ruling which Your 

Honour has given and I, for one, will be grateful to be able to refer to that ruling from time to time in the 

future. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition) moved second reading of Bill No. 30, An Act to amend the 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in supporting the motion to give second reading to Bill no. 30, an Act to amend 

the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act, I should like to divide my remarks roughly into two parts. One part 

will be a description of the machinery by which the proposed amendments would extend and protect the 

rights of Saskatchewan citizens. The second part will be concerned with the reasons why in our opinion 

we think such amendments are necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may be noted that this Bill is one of four proposals which those of us on this side of the 

legislature are seeking to have the legislature approve of this year. These four proposals all aim at 

extending the basic rights of the people of Saskatchewan by adding to the machinery whereby those 

rights may be protected. in doing this, of course, our objective is to guarantee better than we have, the 

individual freedom of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The first of those proposals was the resolution with respect to investigating the position of Ombudsman 

as it might apply to the province of Saskatchewan. It was turned down by the government after being 

moved by my colleague, the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). It may be called that outside of 

the House, the member from Regina West promised to reintroduce it next year and 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1481 

the Premier has rejected it already for next year. In the light of that, it‟s worth noting I believe the two 

recent editorials, one in the March 18th issue of the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, indicating that in Manitoba 

a proposal there by the Liberal party later supported by the NDP, for the appointment of a provincial 

Ombudsman, has now been adopted by the provincial administration of that province. Just following 

that, of course, there was an endorsing editorial in the pages of the Regina Leader Post. 

 

The second of these proposals to extend human rights in Saskatchewan is the one to which I am now 

speaking, Mr. Speaker. The third one is the one which stands next on the Order paper which proposes 

similar amendments to the Fair Employment Practices Act. The fourth one was to have been the Bill 

with respect to consumer protection. This we have not been able to proceed with because of the rules of 

the House. We will seek to draw attention to it in later action in the legislature. 

 

Now I turn more specifically to the legislative proposals of these amendments. They propose to clarify 

certain rights established under the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. The amendments propose to do so 

by including, among the beliefs and activities concerning which one ought to be able to express himself, 

concerning which one ought to be able to take reasoned and reasonable and appropriate action, those 

beliefs and activities which relate to participation in politics as a right of individual citizens in 

democracy. To achieve this purpose the amendments propose some added definition of rights. They 

propose some machinery also. They propose that an individual believing he has a grievance with regard 

to the violation of these rights, may use the machinery which already exists in the Fair Employment 

Practices Act. This machinery, Mr. Speaker, provides that any person claiming to be so aggrieved may 

complain to the director appointed under that Act. The director is one who is designated by the minister 

to receive and deal with such complaints. When the director receives such complaints he is, by the Act, 

required to have the matter investigated and in the words of the Act “shall endeavour to effect a 

settlement”. In addition to this the minister may appoint a commission. This commission operates under 

the authority of the Public Inquiries Act. The minister may issue and again I quote “whatever order he 

deems necessary to carry the recommendations of the commission into effect”. Later the Act states 

“every personal shall comply with the order”. 

 

The Act also provides for court reference and establishes penalties for violation and non-compliance. 

The final section of the Act states in part, “The provisions of this Act shall bind the Crown . . . ” In 

establishing why we think it is necessary to move these amendments, I want to take a few minutes to 

deal with the history of this kind of legislation in Canada and in Saskatchewan. “An Act for the 

Recognition and the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms was passed by the 

Parliament of Canada on August 4th, 1960. This Act states in part this: 

 

It is hereby recognized and declared that in Canada there have existed and shall continue to exist 

without discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, religion or sex, the following 

human rights and fundamental freedoms namely, (d) The Freedom of Speech; (e) Freedom of 

Assembly and Association. 

 

It should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that it does not say freedom of speech “except with regard to political 

matters”. Nor does it 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1482 

say “freedom of assembly and association” except those intended in political action. 

 

In Saskatchewan almost 20 years ago we passed the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights. Section four of that 

Bill now reads: 

 

Every person and every class of person shall under the law enjoy the right to freedom of expression 

through all means of communication including speech, the press, radio and the arts. 

 

It does not say, Mr. Speaker, shall enjoy the freedom of expression “except on political matters”. 

 

Section five adds: 

 

Every person and every class of person shall enjoy the right to peaceable assembly with others. 

 

The section does not exclude peaceable assembly for political purposes. Section seven says: 

 

Every qualified voter resident in Saskatchewan shall enjoy the right to exercise freely his franchise in 

all elections. 

 

It says “exercise freely his franchise”, and freedom in exercising his franchise is more than just the right 

of secrecy while in the polling place putting an X on the ballot. 

 

The proposed amendments which are in this Bill are introduced because we in this group believe that 

there have been violations of the spirit and of the intent of these principles, which were set out as law in 

this legislature almost 20 years ago. Mr. Speaker, I admit that the amendments don‟t provide all of the 

corrections and all of the guarantees which would be of advantage to Saskatchewan people. They don‟t 

do that because there are limitations on the type of legislation which the rules of the legislature allow an 

opposition party to introduce. During recent months I have frequently urged establishment of a 

Commission on Human Rights. This commission could do more by way of giving comprehensive 

guarantees that freedom would not be denied or abridged in these times in our province. However, the 

very proper rules of the legislature prevent an opposition from introducing such legislation. 

 

Admittedly also, Mr. Speaker, legislation by itself can‟t fully guarantee all of the necessary rights and 

freedoms of people in an intelligent democracy. The effective guarantee of such rights depends in large 

part on the people themselves. It depends on the responsible acceptance by people of the right to speak 

and to organize according to the dictates of one‟s conscience and mind. This indeed is a cherished right. 

It depends on the willingness of people to insist that governments or employers or others shall not be 

allowed to destroy or abridge these precious rights. It depends on the fervent belief of people that only in 

this way can everybody achieve full meaning and dignity and make a complete contribution to the 

general welfare. Also, of course, regardless of the goodness of any law its effect depends in part on how 

it is administered by the government of the day. 

 

Now, in speaking of the events which give rise to concern about the danger of human rights in 

Saskatchewan I find it advisable to go to some which admittedly the proposed amendments 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1483 

cannot correct or prevent, would not have prevented had they been in force. While there is this admitted 

limitation, my hope is that the amendments will provide at least a finger in the dike mechanism and may 

prevent the flood which may be inevitable, unless there is some such action taken. 

 

One writer has pointed out to us that “the ultimate value of a free economy is not production but 

freedom”. I submit that that value is being eroded as a minimum, that it is being ignored by some of the 

emphasis and some of the motivation in today‟s scene in Saskatchewan. our aim in Saskatchewan ought 

to be production with freedom. There is no reason why Saskatchewan people ought to be denied either 

production or freedom. The struggle for freedom is, of course, one of the telling characteristics of our 

days. The story of this struggle for freedom is the main ingredient of such of today‟s news of the world. 

We can make a contribution in our province. We can make it in part by our example, that is, by putting 

our own house in order and keeping our own house in order. It was my privilege a number of years ago 

to be in Eastern Africa at the time the United States Supreme Court made some very far-reaching and 

wise rulings with regard to integration in the school system in that country. It was amazing the extent to 

which that ruling brought forth a great wave of hope in the hearts of Africans, in nations many 

thousands of miles away. Obviously the ruling that we seek here today is not of that consequence. But it 

is important. It has not been infrequent at all in Saskatchewan history that a candle lit here has become a 

beacon in all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Freedom, Mr. Speaker, must steadily become inclusive of more people. It must in a sense 

become increasingly inclusive of more aspects of life. To some extent freedom is constantly being 

redefined. To a very large extent the freedoms of yesterday are kept safe only by the extensions of today. 

As a minimum we can‟t afford to go backwards. 

 

let me turn to some more specific matters, to examples which convince us in this group that the rights of 

freedom of speech and the freedom of association have been eroded by recent events in our province, 

that these rights may well stand in danger of further erosion and that the actions which have resulted in 

this erosion have been without need and have produced no public good. 

 

First of all I refer to the right to do business, to do business without fear of reprisal from the government 

because of differing political opinions. I hole that this right has in fact been destroyed for some in 

Saskatchewan and has been threatened for others. As one example, in community after community, we 

know of supposedly independent businessmen who contract to sell government insurance was cancelled. 

no notice was given. The standard procedure was to cancel the contract the day before the agent received 

the notification. The fact of good production performance on the part of the agent was of no help in 

continuing his right to sell. the circumstance of being a veteran of two World Wars, supported by a 

petition signed by many in the community, the supporting resolutions of municipal councils, these were 

considered to be entirely irrelevant. No reason was given for this action. The minister hides behind the 

curtain of claimed privilege because of public interest. The agent in these cases had no right to know 

why continuing business opportunities were denied him. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1484 

He had no opportunity to sell the business. His business was simply wiped out by the stoke of the pen 

whose scratchings were dictated by a Liberal cabinet minister in Regina. The right to do business while 

differing with the government is threatened in this province. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that such threats are 

not confined to SGIO agents. I want to urge all businessmen to be concerned and remind them of a very 

old and very wise saying “ask not for whom the bell tolls. It tolls for thee.” 

 

I submit for example, that the bell tolls rather loud and rather clearly for many people in business in the 

remarks of the chairman of the conciliation board with respect to what has been called the Basken case. I 

admit that he wasn‟t a government spokesman, that‟s true. He was chosen by the government and I 

submit that inadvertently perhaps he expressed government philosophy when he used these words taken 

from the transcript. He said this: 

 

Let‟s take the case of a corporation that does spend money actively supporting one political party, 

and it loses the election — this party is not elected, but it has been out actively campaigning to 

elect the losing party, should that company be surprised if it suffers the consequences — the 

political consequences of its actins? 

 

I submit, that suggests Liberal policy. The chairman went on to say this: 

 

Suppose it . . . 

 

(that is the company that has been supporting a political party that didn‟t win.) 

 

Suppose it loses its licenses, or fails to get something that it comes to the government to ask for at a 

later date — should it be surprised that it doesn‟t get these things? 

 

I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the right to do business, free from go reprisal, has been destroyed for some 

and is threatened for others. 

 

Secondly, let me go on to the treatment of some public employees, because I find there also some added 

violations of basic human rights. I give just a few examples of the many which are available. First of all 

one which is very close to us in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. For many years, starting back before 1944, 

the Sergeant-at-Arms in the legislature Assembly was a distinguished soldier, one of Canada „ Victoria 

Cross holders. He continued in that position, except for absence during the Second World War, until his 

death of just a few years ago. At that time the government appointed another good citizen of Regina, one 

also who had been a soldier of good repute. In recent months, just a few weeks before the legislature 

was to open, he discovered accidentally that he wasn‟t to be appointed this year, that his appointment 

was not to continue. The familiar pattern again reappears. No notice was given. No reason advanced, no 

courtesy nor consideration applied. In the end, when this person did complain he did then, on his request 

receive a letter. But he didn‟t receive a letter from the Premier nor from a cabinet minister. He received 

a letter from a civil servant who had been, I presume, told to write it. I submit that in this case the 

members of the cabinet and the Premier refused to accept their responsibility and required a civil servant 

to write in an attempt to explain their action. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1485 

I would like to refer briefly to that letter, Mr. Speaker, it was tabled in this legislature on February 18th; 

the letter was dated January 31st. It says first of all: 

 

I can assure you that this decision in no way reflects on the adequacy of the manner in which you 

carried out your responsibility in that role over the years. 

 

There was no fault to be found with the gentlemen‟s work. It goes on to say that: 

 

The decision of the government was predicated on a change in circumstances that arose with your 

cessation as a full-time employee of the Saskatchewan government. 

 

In other words he was no longer a full-time employee and the argument in the first part of the paragraph 

is that this interfered with his re-appointment. In the same paragraph it goes on to say: 

 

It was felt that with the relatively short period which the Sergeant-at-Arms is required during the year, 

it would be preferable to place in this position, persons interested in carrying out duties for only a 

short time of the year. 

 

Which, of course, exactly explains the position of a man who was not reappointed or who was 

dismissed. He was told first of all it was because he was no longer a full-time employee that he was not 

considered to continue at employment. He was told secondly that the employment was available only to 

people who were part-time employees. Then the following paragraph is: 

 

For that reason . . . 

 

It doesn‟t say which one. 

 

For that reason the government embarked on the course it is now pursuing. I trust this will adequately 

explain the policy of the government in this regard. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I leave to anyone who can read whether or not that explains adequately or otherwise, 

the action that was taken. 

 

Mr. R. A. Walker (Hanley): — Some minister must have drafted it. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, I turn to a second example, which to me demonstrates that human rights have been 

violated in this province. The must discussed dismissal of a Power Corporation employee must be 

named for what it is or what it was. It was and is a destruction of the right of free speech and of the right 

of political expression. It was and does demonstrate a willingness on the part of the government that sits 

opposite to make political rules unilaterally and to apply them retroactively. Mr. Basken, the citizen 

concerned did engage in political activity. He did so on his own time. He did so while on leave of 

absence without pay. This leave of absence without pay was properly granted by those with proper 

authority to grant it under a collective bargaining agreement signed between the union and the 

government and properly ratified in every way. All this the government ignored. I submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that Basken broke no law, that he violated no agreement with his employer; that he abused no rights 

which were not accorded to him. He was accused of something or other. He was accused by whom? We 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1486 

don‟t know. The government says in effect “You have no right to know”. He was accused of what? We 

don‟t know. The government says in effect, “You have no right to know”. 

 

His accusers to this day remain faceless, nameless and, to the public, voiceless. But he was fired. A 

Conciliation Board was established. This board, with minority dissent, refused to allow the public to 

hear the evidence. This decision was commented on in the Leader Post in an editorial, January 28th, 

1965. The editorial concluded with these words: 

 

The people are entitled to a full disclosure of the facts in the Basken affair. But they can obtain it 

only if the hearings are conducted in the open. The right of the people to be informed is involved 

directly, a right which is abrogated by conducting hearings behind closed doors. 

 

The editorial, Mr. Speaker, is appropriately entitled “Abrogation of Right”. 

 

Nevertheless the procedure was followed of excluding the public from any chance to hear these 

discussions. The board again and again, with minority dissent, accepted the claim of privilege by the 

government with respect to certain relevant information. As a result the board was unable to examine all 

the facts in the case. The government, according, at least, to the Minister of Labour, had planned to keep 

the text of the report secret. I refer to a Leader Post news item on December 16 which reads as follows: 

 

The Minister (that is the Minister of Labour) told the Leader Post the hearings of the board were 

held in camera and the complete text of the report would not be made public. 

 

Let‟s make certain we get those words, Mr. Speaker. He told the newspaper that “the complete text of 

the report would not be made public”. And he held to that position, that attempt to preclude the public 

from knowledge about this case, until after the union concerned pointed out that the minister could not 

rewrite this particular law, could not do so unilaterally and retroactively. Then the decision was changed 

and the report was made available to the public. 

 

To the extent that it was made available is perhaps the only way in which we can say that the procedures 

stopped short of being a Star Chamber performance in all respects. I want to ask the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, to contrast what has happened in this case with a statement made by the Premier on May 22nd, 

1964. He was at that time addressing representatives of the Saskatchewan Government Employees 

Association, and his words were printed in the Dome, a magazine issued by the organization in June, 

1964. I read the direct and exact quotation: 

 

I want to reiterate again today what I have said so many times in the past, that civil servants have 

nothing to fear from the new government. Their jobs will be secure and their political 

independence will be respected. I believe the politics of the civil servants is his or her personal 

affair so long as that policy is conducted on their own time. 

 

It didn‟t take very many months, Mr. Speaker, until that statement was forgotten entirely. Nothing could 

more thoroughly repudiate 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1487 

the Premier‟s speech than the action that was taken in the case of which I have just spoken. More 

recently, in a telecast, the Premier put forth some other claims about this case. he claimed that it has 

been handled by management. This was news to the people because this claim had not been made 

before. Well, he supplied no evidence about this statement, however, and this and some other statements 

which he made are denied by the evidence which the law forced the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) to 

make available when it forced him to make available the text of the report. 

 

But let me raise some questions about this statement. If it had been handled by the management why 

then did the Acting General Manager inform Mr. Basken on September 24th, six months after the 

election, that “we”, meaning management, “have received word from higher authorities that you are to 

be moved, September 24th”. Secondly, if Mr. Basken was dismissed for political activity while working, 

why did the corporation not present such evidence to the Conciliation Board? Never at any time did the 

management of the corporation make any such claims. Not in any single word does the testimony before 

the board support this particular claim. Thirdly, if it had been handled by the management then why, 

according to the transcript of the Conciliation Board hearing, did the Premier in front of several 

witnesses say this and I quote from the transcript: 

 

Let me set the record straight. The action and the instructions came from this desk, from my desk. 

 

I want also, Mr. Speaker, to contrast this treatment given to one public servant with that given to at least 

one other public servant. I refer to Mr. Odishaw, who was until last year the Executive Assistant to the 

Premier. Last year in this legislature it was demonstrated that he not only carried on political activities 

but continued to hold political office while fully employed, presumably, the government of this 

province. 

 

Let me go into some more recent events. Contrast again the way in which he was treated with the way in 

which Mr. Basken was treated. The North Battleford News Optimist on September 14th, 1965, had this 

to say about Mr. Odishaw: 

 

He (meaning Odishaw) hit the campaign trail on Saturday while he waits for the party‟s official 

nomination day of October 2nd. 

 

Let‟s note those dates. September 14th the paper says that Mr. Odishaw “hit the campaign trail” — 

September 14th. On September 29th, two weeks later he was writing and signing letters as the Executive 

Assistant to the Premier. I know because I have one of such letters. Again, Mr. Speaker, Return No. 31 

in this House this year, tabled on March 18th, confirms that Mr. Odishaw was paid until October 2nd, 

more than two weeks after he had “hit the campaign trail” in the federal constituency of The Battlefords. 

He hit the campaign trail without leave of absence from the government, while receiving pay from the 

government, while still writing letters as the Executive Assistant of the Premier. 

 

Mr. I. A. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — He did this on his own time. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I suggest, while receiving pay 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1488 

from the government that might have been his own time? Without leave of absence from the 

government, that might be his own time? There is no record of him having applied or received leave of 

absence from this government. Let me refer to a second gentleman in the same area. Still employed by 

the government, Mr. Norman Rebin, according to a report in this House had no leave of absence and 

asked for no leave of absence from the government and presumably he was on full pay. He was on full 

pay for a while in North Battleford, according to news reports, looking for the federal nomination. He 

withdrew afterwards, after having his qualifications described in the most glowing fashion. (I hope 

everybody has read about what a valuable person they have) and after saying that his duties were going 

to take him out of the province so that he could no longer run. Just recently, evidently there was a 

change in plans, because while still on government salary he, too, has announced that he is going to be a 

candidate, or will be seeking to be a candidate in the provincial election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not saying that Mr. Rebin for example should not be allowed to take this kind of 

action he is doing. But what I am saying is: contrast this with the situation with respect to another 

employee, namely, Mr. Basken. It was alright for them, but for Mr. Basken to do this, on his own time, 

while on properly granted leave of absence, without pay, so wrong that it results in being dismissed from 

his job. 

 

Let me go on, Mr. Speaker, to still another aspect of the situation, and one which leads me to say, as I 

said earlier, that further erosion of these rights are threatened in the province of Saskatchewan. You 

know in 1916, that is a long while ago now, there was a report of the United States Commission on 

Industrial Relations. In part this report said and I quote: 

 

Political freedom can exist only when there is industrial freedom. 

 

It goes on, I quote again: 

 

There are now within the body of our Republic, industrial communities which are virtually 

principalities, oppressive to those dependent upon them for a livelihood and a dreadful menace to the 

peace and welfare of the nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of us would have said that this situation couldn‟t exist in Saskatchewan 50 years after 

such a statement was made in the United States. It has, I submit, come to pass here. My reference is to 

the fact that the government of this province through the minister in charge of the Power Corporation, 

the Minister of health (Mr. Steuart) has recently proclaimed the Saskatchewan Power Corporation as its 

own political principality. A form of state rule which most people thought had long disappeared. 

According to an editorial in the Star Phoenix on January 21st, 1966, and I quote: 

 

D. G. Steuart, the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation issued a warning that the 

corporation would not „accept, all or condone political activity in the provincial field by its 

employees‟. Such activity the minister said would result in dismissal. 

 

They would not “accept, allow or condone political activity by its employees. Such activity, the minister 

said, would result in dismissal”, and some hon. members over there say Hear, hear. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1489 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, Mr. Speaker, it is only illegal if you happen to do this in support of the wrong 

party, that is what the government demonstrates by the events of recent months. 

 

Contrast this statement declaring the Power Corporation being a political principality owned by the 

Liberal party with the request contained in a Resolution passed by the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees Association at its 1965 convention, less than one year ago. According to the same Star 

Phoenix editorial, this Association which comprises the majority of public employees in the province of 

Saskatchewan, public employees of the provincial government, has this to say, again a direct quote: 

 

At that convention, a Resolution was passed during the government to adopt the policy which would 

permit political freedom except for formal political activity during working hours or for using one‟s 

position in a political way. 

 

Again, I ask you to note, the conflict in the statements of policy announced by the minister in charge of 

the Power Corporation, and the deliberative request of the Saskatchewan Government Employees 

Association. One says that there will be no political activity. If there is it will result in dismissal. The 

other urges freedom of speech, conscience, and of freedom to associate with others in the interests of 

respectable ends (meaning in political activity) except, and this I agree with and all of us will, for formal 

political activity during working hours or for using one‟s position in a political way. Regardless of this 

expression of hope — I think we must call it — Mr. Speaker, on the part of the employees, the 

government made the announcement to which I refer. Regardless of that request, one large group of 

public employees have been told that to express a political view is to place their employment in 

jeopardy. That is all they have to do, is to express a political view, although one might add “which does 

not agree with the political view of a minister of the government”. They place their employment in 

jeopardy. They received this information, how? This is an important other part of the story. They 

received it through the press, or on the radio, or on the television. There was no discussion, there was no 

agreement, just the raw dictum issued by the political head for those who live in his self-claimed 

political principality. 

 

May I submit this, that if this rule of the new Liberal state in the province of Saskatchewan is extended 

to other public employees — and we have no reason to expect that it won‟t be — it naturally also affects 

the freedom, the right to speak out and act according to one‟s beliefs and conscience of their immediate 

families as well. They, too, will come under this same sort of stricture. This is a significant step in the 

attempt to “thought control” of at least 50,000 Saskatchewan citizens, and cognisance ought to be taken 

of it by this legislature. 

 

Let me add some still further reasons for being concerned with regard to freedom in this province, with 

regard to believing that the right to work ought not to be dependent upon how one things or talks 

politically. Again, I refer to a Star Phoenix editorial, under date of September 18th, 1965. It is entitled 

“Explain Civil Service Firings”, and it comments on a number of people who are missing from the Civil 

Service. It speaks again of one very close to many of us in this legislature who have been here over a 

period 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1490 

of years — Mrs. Nellie Johnston. I quote the words in respect to her, and this is the Star Phoenix 

editorial I am referring to, “without prior notice”, the latest in a lengthy list of departures from the 

province Civil Service since the Liberal government took office — in the public service 30 ½ years, a 

few years short of retirement. A fairly steady exit of senior employees — Mr. Blackburn of the SGIO, 

members of the Crop Insurance Board (I could have added the Labour Relations Board and Board of 

SPC.) They do mention J. A. Christie, D. J. Vansickle, Chief Electoral Officer. In another editorial, this 

one dated October 25, 1965, there is mention of three other SGIO employees. They report this most 

interesting incident. One of their reporters questioned the minister in charge, this time the venerable 

Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) as to whether or not he didn‟t fee the public had a right to know 

what was going on. The minister was his dogmatic best, he said: “No, the public has no right to know”. 

Mr. Speaker, at that point, click went the lock on the door of the Liberal closet of information. Well, the 

Minister of Health, (Mr. Steuart) had somehow seemed to disagree with this locking of the door on 

information because in reply to, or in comment on the previous editorial, he has said that “an 

explanation would be forthcoming in about 10 years”; in about 10 day, excuse me. I was probably right 

the first time. But you know, even the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) doesn‟t escape the restraining or 

other kind of hand of the Premier from time to time. The 10 days came and the 10 days went, 

presumably the Premier came back from Europe or somewhere else and again click went the lock on the 

door and it has never been opened since. 

 

Mr. Speaker, such locks don‟t, unfortunately, prevent the drain which results in Saskatchewan losing 

many of its most valuable employees. Part of the tragedy of this whole series of events is this. 

Saskatchewan at one time was known as the province with one of the best — frequently people outside 

the province not connected, said — the best public service in Canada. That recognition and reputation is 

one more item which the Liberal government, it must be admitted, has sold and sold at high cost to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Too many of these people have left. Some were dismissed, not all of them have been. Some were simply 

dismayed, some were disgusted. I wish the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) would keep calm 

because I have some names for him in a minute. Some were disillusioned. Others I must admit left for 

other reasons, or perhaps they are included in these reasons, but not the reason of socialism, I should 

think. I think of people like Mr. Odishaw, whom we talked about, Mr. Noonan, who has been talked 

about, Mr. Loran, Mr. Wilson, last heard of by the way as campaign manager for Hazen Argue, now 

Senator Argue. Even those whom they selected themselves have in considerable numbers become 

disillusioned at what is going on. 

 

I admit, Mr. Speaker, that my Act wouldn‟t correct that particular situation. As I said earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, I realize that the amendments here can‟t counteract what has happened. That, if they had been 

in effect, they wouldn‟t necessarily have prevented all of this from happening. I do think it is necessary 

for us in this legislature to recognize what has happened and recognize it for what it is. It is not just a 

problem of one employee. It is not just a problem for any one group of employees, or for any one class 

of businessman. I submit, Mr. Speaker, it is something for you and me and indeed all the people not only 

of our province but of Canada, to be concerned about. That is why this 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1491 

issue of human rights — that is what it is — this matter of the opportunity for full dignity and decency 

and freedom in Saskatchewan, in employment or in business, must be raised in this legislature and ought 

to be discussed in every community of the province. To remove the present threat that there is to the 

right of freedom of speech and the right to organize according to conscience, is not just our challenge, I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, it is the responsibility of this legislature and to do something about this 

responsibility, I would beg leave of the Assembly to move second reading of Bill No. 30, An Act to 

amend the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, just a few comments on this 

Bill. I listened with a great deal of interest to the Leader of the Opposition, (Mr. Lloyd), I must say my 

interest was much greater at the beginning than it was at the end because when he began to speak of the 

needs of the Bill of Rights and what the Bill of Rights had done for the province of Saskatchewan and 

what it had done in other places of the world, I thought he was really concerned about human rights, 

human dignity . . . 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Social Welfare): — They were just concerned about Socialists. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . and the freedom of opportunity for individuals. I thought that perhaps this man 

was sincere in attempting now to extend this Saskatchewan Bill of Rights and make it broader by 

bringing in the amendment that would bring in political creed as well as creed and religious creed. I 

thought perhaps there was some merit in looking at a suggestion of this nature. I couldn‟t follow him 

when he said this is not a cure-all; there are many things yet to be done in Saskatchewan to guarantee 

human rights and human dignities and civil rights. He said, however, it will at least be a finger in the 

dike. He said we are at least making a beginning, and, therefore, he said, I propose these amendments to 

the Bill. 

 

I wondered where was this great champion of human rights when he was a school teacher, when he was 

first elected to the legislature, when he was first appointed a cabinet minister, when he saw in those days 

the rankest form of discrimination Saskatchewan has ever witnessed. Where was he during the first eight 

months of office of the government which he supported and was a cabinet minister, when according to 

official returns tabled in this legislature, in the first eight months 107 civil servants were fired? Where 

was his heart bleeding for these people? Why did he not cry out in the name of humanity and in the 

name of civil rights? In the first eight months of the CCF government when he was a responsible cabinet 

minister, 462 others resigned for devious reasons. Why didn‟t he ask the reason for this? Why didn‟t he 

look into it when the bulk of these were cooks, nurse attendants, jail guards and other people in the low 

echelons? These were the little people of the province of Saskatchewan, these were the ordinary men. 

Why didn‟t he cry out in those days for the plight of these little people? If his heart was as pure then as 

he professes it to be today, he would have been in conscience-bound to resign from a government that 

would indulge in that type of discrimination. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1492 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — But no, the real purpose of the introduction of the Bill came forth, as I though it 

might do, after he got on into his address. It is evident to anyone who would see that the purpose of this 

amendment is to have a forum to review the Basken case, and all other people in the province who have 

left the government service, and try from this to make a political issue on the grounds that he is 

protecting human rights and civil liberties. This is the man, this is the man who condoned these things in 

1964 . . . 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Instigated . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . 1944 to 1948. Now he repents or leads us to believe that now he is dressed in 

sackcloth and ashes. I have a letter which someone just handed to me, written to the Minister of Social 

Welfare, dated February 1st, 1966. This is from a man who says: 

 

I have been following the sessions of the legislature, and I have heard a great deal of talk about civil 

servants leaving the province, of others being fired without reasons, and I just want to report to you 

my incident. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Is the hon. member going to table the letter? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Oh yes, I am. He said: 

 

In 1957, (I believe he was an SGIO agent, and the Leader of the Opposition made reference to SGIO 

agents‟ contracts being cancelled in the dark of night without even a notice) I was an agent for the 

government; I was an SGIO agent, I was an issuer of license plates, and without warning, without 

prior notice, a man appeared on my doorstep and he said „I‟ve come to collect your plates you have on 

hand and I‟ve come to collect your documents in regard to Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and 

to notify you that kin a few hours someone will be around to pick these up‟. 

 

He asked for a reason. The answer: he was being relieved. To this day, Mr. Speaker, of course, he has 

received no reason. He knows the reason, I know the reason, the Leader of the Opposition knows the 

reason, and yet he would put on this air of purity today as a great battler for human rights. He said 

“When the bell tolls for one, it tolls for all”. How often did he toll that bell in 1944-48? He kept on 

pulling it until they were out of office. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, and as I have a few more remarks 

to bring forth I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Walker: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member said he was going to table a letter 

and I think he should do so before he forgets. I think we took him at his word and he hasn‟t done so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — To tell the honest truth, I didn‟t see him reading from a letter. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — No, I didn‟t read from a letter at all. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1493 

Mr. Walker: — Well, he said he would table it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, he will have to go through the usual procedure, either tabling the letter or taking 

full responsibility therefore. 

 

Mr. Walker: — On that point, Mr. Speaker, he said he would table it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Mr. Speaker, may I on a point of order, this is why I adjourned the debate. I want to 

deal with this very man tomorrow, or the next time it comes up. He asked me if I was prepared to table 

the letter. I said yes, I was prepared to table the letter, I‟ve not finished my address, and I will certainly 

table the letter but at my pleasure when I sit down in this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition) moved second reading of Bill No. 39, An Act to amend 

The Fair Employment Practices Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a companion Bill to the one of which I have spoken. It includes the 

same kind of machinery. As I have indicated earlier how that machinery operates I think it is not 

necessary to make any further extended remarks at this time. I move second reading of the Bill. 

 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, because it is very near the supper 

hour and I haven‟t had the time I would like to have had to discuss this Bill, I would beg leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

SPEAKER’S RULING 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Hon. members will recall that, when Bill No. 51, standing in the name of the hon. 

member for Regina East (Mr. Smishek) was introduced by leave and read the first time, its further 

progress was made subject to a Speaker‟s caveat as to its being in order. 

 

I have read the Bill and considered its contents. It is in substantially the same terms as a Bill introduced 

last year by the hon. member (Mr. Smishek). I ruled that Bill in order, and accordingly I find Bill No. 51 

also to be in order. 

 

Mr. W. E. Smishek (Regina East) moved second reading of Bill No. 51, An Act to amend The Hours of 

Work Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I see more members coming in. I believe the members of the Assembly seem to 

be a wee bit tired and draggy as the weekend comes near. It is probably quite appropriate that we should 

be discussing hours of work. I hope that in the not too distant future we will make some amendments to 

make the hours of work applicable to the members of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to speak at any length in 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1494 

respect of Bill No. 51. It is the same proposal that I put forward before the Assembly last year. It was 

then entitled Bill No. 61. Last year I discussed the Bill at some length. It seems to me that the arguments 

presented last year by myself are as good and cogent and as valid today as they were a year ago, except 

that the need I suggest in respect of reducing hours of work has become much more urgent as we face 

the future with the introduction of more automated machinery, more technical equipment in our 

industries and the resulting unemployment which is occurring. 

 

The Bill, Mr. Speaker, involves relatively simple amendments. There are six main features to this 

particular Bill: even though it is a lengthy document, it is nevertheless not a document that presents any 

extreme changes. The Bill provides for a 40-hour workweek for all centres of 1,000 population or more. 

The 40-hour workweek would also apply to mines and factories in operation or under construction 

anywhere in the province. the hours of work in centres small than 1,000 generally speaking would be 

reduced from 48 hours to 44 hours a week. 

 

It provides for the maintenance of same take-home pay when hours of work would be reduced. It also 

provides that when a public holiday occurs in a workweek the workweek would be reduced by eight 

hours, thus making the legal workweek 32 hours where a 40-hour workweek applies and a 36-hour week 

where a 44-hour week applies and the same take-home pay would follow in this respect. It ensures that 

in order to facilitate rotation of shifts where shift-work applies and hours of work are averaged, then in 

such a case the minister cannot give an authorization to average hours in shift rotations unless the 

authorization has been requested in writing by a trade union representing the employees directly 

affected, or, where no trade union represents employees, then requested by a majority of the employees 

affected. 

 

It provides that the regular hours of work shall be confined within a period of nine and one-half hours 

consecutively in any one-day and no employers shall require or permit employees to work or to be at his 

disposal on more than two occasions during that period. This means that there would be a no split shifts; 

the eight hours‟ work would be confined within a 9 ½ hour period, thus providing a maximum one and 

one-half hour lunch period. the Bill would come into force on June 1st, 1966. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the present legislation governing hours of work in Saskatchewan was introduced back in 

1947. It provides for a 44-hour workweek and provision is made for an exemption from it under which 

the 48-hour week for smaller centres applies. At present all employees in cities are covered by a 44-hour 

workweek, and shop and office employees in some 70 towns have a 44-hour workweek. The 44-hour 

workweek also applies to factory workers, and the balance of the workers come under the 48-hour legal 

workweek in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the International Labour Organization in its report dealing with hours of work a few years 

ago agreed that it is generally recognized that shorter hours of work frequently lead to an increase in 

productivity. With shorter hours there would not only be less absenteeism but the pressure on the family 

would also be relieved. Additional leisure is of greater importance today in the light of the increase of 

fatigue and nervous tension in modern society. Shorter hours enable the worker to improve his 

qualifications in order to keep up with a changing technology. The most satisfactory workweek is not 

that which provides for the greatest 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1495 

amount of goods and services, but something markedly shorter, a workweek that provides the happiest 

combination of production factor and leisure factor. Hours‟ reduction tends to ease adjustment to major 

technology change, to minimize labour displacement and stabilize employment opportunities and to aid 

in maintaining generally a prosperous condition. A shorter workweek makes it possible for older 

workers to compete more effectively with younger workers. A shorter workweek enables the husband to 

help with the family responsibility where the wife is also working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I read through some of the presentations that were made a year ago in the House of 

Commons when the Canada Labour (Standards) Code was introduced. I note that the Minister of 

Labour, Mr. MacEachen, when he introduced the Canada Labour (Standards) Code, made the following 

observation concerning hours of work. Let me quote: 

 

It is generally recognized that excessive hours, worked over long periods of time do not contribute to 

industrial efficiency, are injurious to health and can be an important factor contributing to industrial 

accident. 

 

Technological advances and gains in productivity have already brought substantial benefits to most 

workers in the form of shorter hours as well as in other ways, and will no doubt produce more and 

more leisure time in the future. We must seek means of absorbing this leisure by providing for a more 

equitable sharing of it. The enactment of a 40 hour standard is thus intended not only to benefit those 

employees under federal jurisdiction who still work longer hours but also to help spread employment 

among the work force. 

 

It seems to me that the question of spreading employment is a very key issue today. The results of 

technology are beginning to have an impact on our economy, on our society. I notice, Mr. Speaker, that 

in a MacLean‟s Magazine, published in January, 1965, the January 23rd issue, a lengthy article appears 

under the heading of “Crisis in our Classroom”. The article deals extensively with the problems 

automation is posing. It notes that we are now in a period where some 1,000 young people a day are 

entering the labour market in Canada and in this same period some 4,000 jobs a week are disappearing 

as a result of automation. There are several paragraphs of this article that are important for us to consider 

in this discussion regarding the reduction of hours of work. Let me quote a paragraph or two from it: 

 

They say that today‟s children are standing on quaking ground. Those now in colleges have been 

warned that they will go back to school three times in their working lifetimes to keep up with new 

developments. Those now in high school can expect to change their occupation up to five times as 

automation permeates every business and trade, and science and profession. Public school students 

will become adults in a well-to-do economy that has few jobs to offer. Economists of all people are 

urging that they be educated for leisure. As for this year‟s crop of babies, some claim that 90 per cent 

of them will never hold a job at all. Some claim that Canada‟s current low level of unemployment is a 

picture of false health like the pink cheeks of advanced tuberculosis. 

 

According to their analysis, Mr. Speaker, there are at the present time some 1,250,000 youngsters that 

are going to be 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1496 

entering the labour market. These are the post-war babies and I note that jobs for these people in the 

years ahead will be very few. The article points out that in the United States where automation is about 

three years ahead of Canada, the Under-Secretary of Labour, John F. Henning, has calculated that during 

the sixties more than 12,000,000 young people will be ready to enter the labour force and during the 

same ten years some 24,000,000 jobs will disappear because of automation. This article notes the 

situation in the oil industry. It says: 

 

Imperial Oil Limited, for instance, increased its Canadian production by 20 per cent over a five-year 

period during which it actually reduced its staff by 20 per cent. Three thousand jobs disappeared. 

There were few dismissals and these were confined mainly to relatively new employees. A secretary 

working in the office said, „It‟s so strange when people retire around here or leave for another job their 

desks just vanish and we carry on exactly as we did before. It‟s really weird‟. 

 

The resulting unemployment as I said because of automation is something that we are legislators must 

become really concerned about. in Saskatchewan it has been estimated that there are approximately 65 

per cent of our non-agricultural labour force now on a 40-hour workweek or less. This means that 

approximately 35 per cent of our non-agricultural labour force is working more than 40 hours a week. It 

is these people that would be affected by the Bill that I have brought before this House. I note, Mr. 

Speaker, according to a most recent publication entitled, “Working and Living Conditions in Canada”, 

in the edition for May, 1965, published by the Economic and Research Branch of the Canada 

Department of Labour on page 49, the following appears: 

 

A large proportion of employees from Canada work a five day forty hour week. This is most general 

in the highly industrial province of Ontario and in the western provinces. In the largest of the major 

Canadian industries 83 per cent of the plant employees and 96 per cent of the office employees were 

working a five-day week in 1964. For most non-office employees in Canada the standard workweek is 

40 hours or less and for most office employees 37 ½ hours a week or less. A standard workweek of 

five eight-hour days is almost generally in effect in such industries as railway transportation and 

public utility operations. The hours of work tend to be slightly longer in the retail trade. 

 

Also the statistics that are shown tell us that among the non-office employees 71 per cent work a 

40-hour workweek or less; 29 per cent work more than a 40 hour work week. The standard work week 

for office employees under 37 ½ hours, 34 per cent; 37 ½ hours, 36 per cent; over 30 hours, 7 ½ per cent 

and under 40, five per cent; 40 hours a week, 22 per cent and only three per cent of office employees 

work over 40 hours a week. 

 

In the Department of Labour report for the province of Saskatchewan, the 21st Annual Report — in case 

some of you have not had a chance to study it — I note the hours of work figures for 1964 are as 

follows: In the mining industry the hours of work averaged 41.1 hours; in all manufacturing 39.2 hours; 

food and beverage, 38.6 hours; all construction, 40.6 hours; and service 38.2 hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the figures that are published here only take 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1497 

account of those workers who are employed in industries or in plants and in those industries which 

employ less than 15 employees where hours of work are the longest and it is these people that would 

benefit most from this type of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, getting back to the question of unemployment, I note that while we have had some drop in 

unemployment in the last year, the situation is far from anything to be smug about. If you review again 

the last report for the Department of Labour you will notice that in January of last year, over 21,000 

workers in Saskatchewan were unemployed; in February — 21,240; in March — 20,500; in April — 

18,000; in May — over 10,000; it dropped to 5,683 in mid-summer. By December of last year we were 

back on the climb, 13,574; and by now my estimate would be that we are back to having about 20,000 

workers unemployed. This, I submit, is a serious situation. I submit that despite the fact that we are 

making progress in industrial development, the number of people who are subject to unemployment 

because of the changes that are taking place in industry seems to remain constant. Even in the best 

months of the year, during the summer months, when we consider that our non-agricultural labour force 

in the province of Saskatchewan is slightly over 200,000 we find approximately 10,000 workers looking 

for employment. This is only taking into consideration those workers who register with the NES offices. 

Thousands of workers, for one reason or another, do not register with the National Employment offices, 

therefore, the records are not kept for these numbers of unemployed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also important for us to take a look at the analysis that has been made by the Economic 

Council for Canada, for here they warn us about the problem of employment that is going to face us in 

the next few years. on page 33 of last year‟s report the Economic Council of Canada notes that the 

number of people in, and I quote: 

 

the 20 to 24 age group in the labour force is expected to increase by 33 per cent from 1965 to 1970, 

and by 57 per cent over the decade as a whole. Whereas the male labour force in this age group 

increased by 25,000 in the decade of the 1950s, in the 1960s it will increase by 27,000 or more than 

ten times as much. In other words the average increase for this group each year will exceed the 

increase which took place over the whole of the last decade. 

 

Another striking aspect of the labour force growth is the rapid increase in the number of workingwomen. 

The female labour force numbered a little over 1,000,000 in 1950 and over 1,500,000 in 1960. By 1970 

it is expected to number about 2,500,000, accounting for almost one-third of the Canadian labour force. 

By the end of the decade about three out of every ten married women are expected to be in the labour 

force compared with only one out ten in 1950. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year when we considered a Bill similar to this, after second reading the Minister of 

Labour (Mr. Coderre) undoubtedly with the approval of the government, chose to move a six-month 

hoist to the Bill. I do hope, Mr. Speaker, that in considering this Bill the government and the minister 

will not try to take an easy way out. I submit that it is too important an issue for us to dodge. It‟s too 

important an issue for us to shelve. Mr. Speaker, I am not that much concerned whether it is this Bill in 

its exact content that is adopted. Certainly, we on this side of the House, will be prepared, Mr. Speaker, 

to consider amendments if the government feels that there are particular sections they would not be 

prepared to go along with at this time. But I 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1498 

would urge that if there are those sections that might not be palatable at this time, let us not take the easy 

way out — by shelving the whole Bill. Let us bring the kind of amendments that the government would 

be prepared to consider. I think that the time is urgent that we do move with a reduction in the hours of 

work. Canada, some years ago endorsed the ILO convention that the time is ripe, the time is now for a 

reduction in the hours of work. Economists tell us that we must move in the direction of Labour for 

Canada, Mr. MacEachen, introduced the Canada Labour (Standards) Code which established the 40 hour 

work week, it was the wish of parliament that the provinces would follow in the pattern established by 

the government of Canada. I think it was their hope that the provincial governments would not wait for a 

long time to follow the lead established by the parliament of Canada. In going through the promises that 

had been made to the people during the last elections I note that one of the promises that the Liberal 

party held out was that they would maintain, and improve workers‟ wages, vacations, hours of work, 

compensation and trade union rights and security. Well, if the member s opposite intend to live up to this 

pledge that they made to the people, I submit that the time is ripe to proceed in that direction now. In 

closing, may I urge the members opposite to give this Bill earnest consideration. Because the Bill was 

introduced by a member of the opposition, it should not be automatically opposed. There are, I‟m afraid, 

some people who will tend to take this kind of a position. I submit that this is too important an issue for 

us to ignore at this time. I do urge and plead with the members opposite to give the principle of this Bill 

unanimous approval. As I said before, if there are some amendments that the government would like to 

discuss with us, we certainly would be willing to discuss and consider them. But let‟s move on the road 

of reducing hours of work in 1966. Let us ensure that on Canada‟s 100th birthday, next year 1967, the 

workers of the province of Saskatchewan can enjoy a maximum 40-hour workweek, Mr. Speaker. I, now 

beg leave of the Assembly to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to say a few words on this Bill I 

presume I will be sandwiched between the two mighty moguls, the member for Regina East (Mr. 

Smishek) and the senior member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies). 

 

The hon. member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek) was just saying that this is too important an issue to 

let stand by because of the unemployment figure as we see it. He mentioned as well that in 1947 the 

Hours of Work Act was changed. in 1964 when the people of Saskatchewan decided they had had 

enough of them, they turned them out; that‟s about all they‟ve done from 1947. 

 

I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, that in the short time that this government has been in power and before we next 

go to the people, I‟m sure we‟ll have accomplished more than the Socialists have done in 20 years. let‟s 

review the facts, Mr. Speaker. In 1947 they said they brought in this Hours of Work Act. They‟ve done 

little, or any changes since then. We find on Table 6 on page 8 of the Department of Labour report that 

in the winter of 1956 there was an average of 15,612 unemployed. You‟ll find that in 1957 it increased. 

In 1958 it went to 22,000; 1960 it went to 23,000; 1961 it was 23,009. If it is so important today because 

of the high average of unemployment, then it was much more important in 1960-61 to do something 

about it. They‟ve been there for 20 years 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1499 

and now they are in the opposition and they are trying to tell the government what to do. The 

unemployment figure has declined since this administration has taken over. In 1965 the yearly average 

then was down to 17,000 and it‟s down considerably more since then. While they were the government, 

Mr. Speaker, for 20 years they didn‟t take action to update and bring the hours of work where maybe 

they should be. Now, they are in the opposition, Mr. Speaker, it‟s easy to talk. They are already up on 

their feet ready to talk and ready to promote all type of legislation. 

 

Now, I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that I don‟t believe that this government requires the opposition to 

tell the government when and how to bring legislation. They can oppose the legislation and try to 

modify it when it‟s brought in, but I don‟t believe that this government is prepared to go ahead and take 

legislation proposed by the opposition at any time, especially when they have had 20 years to do it. They 

have had a whole 17 years to upgrade it themselves. 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Poor excuse. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Let‟s look at some of the suggestions that they have made. A section would extend the 

limits of radius where present hours of work would apply. I believe it would be desirable to extend these 

regulations all over the province. However, as I have indicated previously, the government is studying 

all these matters and will move at the appropriate time without having to be told by members of the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw): — You said that last year. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Sure I said that last year. But what have you been doing for the last seventeen years 

that you were in power? You‟ve been taking the cudgel up for labour all the time. For seventeen years 

you didn‟t move in this respect. Now you are already to blow. 

 

Mr. Davies: — You know that‟s nonsense. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — This section also has a provision, Mr. Speaker, which holds any mine or factory under 

construction, wherever situated, would be subjected to the eight-hour day or the forty-hour week. I 

submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that this is work that‟s usually of a seasonal nature. Now, this could make it 

most difficult for many of the people involved in that area. We are all agreed to that, most of the 

constituency work being summer and early fall and sometimes last fall work; workers in the 

constituency industry like to take advantage of the overtime, in other words, to make hay while the old 

sun shines because when the winter months come along, because of the climatic conditions that we have 

in this province, it‟s not altogether possible to continue that. Therefore it seems to be illogical at this 

time particularly during the peak of our constituency season that our unemployment figure has dropped 

down to 1.6 per cent. 

 

Now, there is another point in the Act, we have always interpreted the Act to mean that the employee 

was entitled to wages for the time permitted for meals. But we have never required this to be part of a 

notice which is mentioned in the Act. It‟s not required to have it. They know what they have to do. As 

well, this Bill would require the hours of work to be reduced to 32 hours and to 36 in rural areas, at the 

peak employment period 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1500 

where the unemployment figures drop to a low 1/6 per cent. This in fact is below the normal average 

work pool that it is desired to have. Most of these, of course, I indicated a moment ago, are untrained. At 

peak periods of maximum employment that this province now enjoys because of the expanded industrial 

development I don‟t believe it‟s opportune to bring this in. If and when organized labour has bargained 

these provisions in their own areas where they have that right to bargain them, then I‟m sure that the 

government will move in the proper direction to bring everybody in. I don‟t believe, Mr. Speaker, a 

government that fully recognizes the right of bargaining between labour and management, should 

arbitrarily set the hours of work anywhere. our trade unions, I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, can do a better job 

in this area. 

 

There are two other sections, of course, which are very much similar to what I have just said. Apart from 

providing a 40-hour week, the suggestion that members made would prohibit the minister from issuing 

an authorization unless authorization has been requested in writing by a trade union or where there is no 

trade union, by a majority of these employees. At the present time I would like to assure this House the 

minister does comply with this type of regulation. This is granted only after a proper investigation and 

this I believe should be left as it is. 

 

There is another section, Mr. Speaker, which would prevent an employee from working the 9 ½ hours in 

any day, assuming that he has had no meal break. In other words it means that an employee would have 

to have completed his day‟s work within 9 ½ hours from the time he started and he would not be 

required to break this period on more than two occasions. Working an eight hour day and assuming that 

one 30 minute period was permitted for meals, the employee could never earn more than one hour of 

overtime in any one day, regardless of his wishes, or the need of such overtime to be worked. I think this 

is quite a stringent thing to put in any Bill. Most people, Mr. Speaker, do want to have the opportunity to 

earn as much as they can during the working season because of our climatic conditions. Any attempts 

now in this direction, I believe, in playing with the hours of work, will only accelerate the inflationary 

trends noticeable at present. 

 

I would like to assure this House, Mr. Speaker, that the government is every watchful of the hours of 

work and the conditions of work. I can assure this House, Mr. Speaker, that at the opportune time the 

government will act. I‟ll take full responsibility, Mr. Speaker, for rejecting this Bill this time. I can‟t 

support the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the members to the fact that the mover of the motion is 

about to close the debate. if anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I am keenly disappointed in the expressions of the Minister of Labour 

(Mr. Coderre). I had hoped that the minister would have at least expressed the view that the time is ripe 

for us to move in this direction. The only thing that the minister did was to criticize the proposition and 

say that the time is not ripe. He made reference that the government will follow what organized labour 

will do. Well, Mr. Speaker, if through collective bargaining the workers achieve the forty-hour 

workweek, they will not be looking to the government for a forty-hour workweek because they will have 

gained it themselves. There are, Mr. 



 

March 24, 1966 

 

 

1501 

Speaker, I submit, many workers, some 70 per cent or close to that amount who are not organized. There 

are according to statistics at least 35 per cent of workers who are working something more than a 

40-hour workweek. They need the help and assistance of this legislature to improve their working 

conditions. 

 

Reference was made to the constituency industry. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that a large proportion of the 

constituency industry is now on a forty-hour workweek and this would have little if any effect on them. 

It is people in other areas, that would gain mostly from this kind of legislation rather than the 

constituency people; and I submit, that the minister was bringing in a red herring in this respect. 

 

We heard the minister speak the other day on a matter that was somewhat related to this. He told us that 

the government has endorsed the Canada Labour (Standards) Code. If this is the case, Mr. Speaker, then 

the minister just a few minutes ago contradicted that endorsement, because if the government had 

endorsed it and believes in the principle of the 40-hour workweek, then I say it is compelled to vote for 

it. Otherwise he did not mean what he said, that they endorsed the forty-hour workweek contained in the 

Canada Labour (Standards) Code. I do appeal to the members opposite that they give consideration and 

when the vote is called, I would hope that at least some, the more reasoned, more progressive, the 

younger people opposite will rise with us to vote for Bill No. 51. 

 

The motion was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 19 

Messieurs 

Cooper (Mrs.) Whelan Snyder 

Nollet Nicholson Broten 

Walker Kramer Robbins 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Dewhurst Pepper 

Blakeney Berezowsky Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Thibault Link  

 

NAYS — 31 

Messieurs 

Thatcher MacDougall Leith 

Howes Grant Radloff 

McFarlane Coderre Romuld 

Boldt Bjarnason Weatherald 

Cameron Trapp MacLennan 

Steuart Cuelenaere Larochelle 

Heald McIsaac Hooker 

Gardiner (Melville) MacDonald Coupland 

Guy Gallagher Gardner (Moosomin) 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Mitchell 

Loken   

 

On the motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart, the Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


