



















































Hansard: December 08, 1966


165 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 
 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

10:00 o‟clock a.m. 

 

The Assembly reconvened at 10:00 o‟clock a.m. 

 

NOTICE OF SPECIAL SESSION 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I beg to inform the Assembly that, pursuant to an Order passed by the Assembly on 

September 8th, 1966, dealing with the adjournment of the Assembly, I gave notice to all Members by 

registered mail as follows: 

 

Regina, Saskatchewan 

 

November 14, 1966. 

Having received a request from the Government to reconvene the Third Session of the Fifteenth 

Legislature, I hereby give notice that in pursuance to an Order of the Assembly passed on 

September 8th, 1966, I have set December 8th, 1966, 10:00 o‟clock a.m. as the day upon which the 

Legislative Assembly will meet. It is requested that you govern yourselves accordingly. 

 

And the telegram read: 

 

November 14th, 1966, Regina. 

 

Notice given herewith that I have set December 8th, 1966 at 10:00 a.m. as the date of reconvening 

the Third Session of the Fifteen Legislature. 

 

And in addition to the above I also caused the substance of the said notice to be published in the 

Saskatchewan Gazette, dated November 18th, 1966. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Hon. Members will also recall early this fall the wife of a former Prime Minister of 

Canada passed away. I thought hon. Members would wish that we should send a letter of sympathy to 

her husband and I did accordingly write on your behalf the following letter: 

 

Rt. Hon. Louis St. Laurent, 

Quebec City, P.Q. 

 

Dear Mr. St. Laurent: 

 

I am sure that Members of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan would wish me 

to extend to you on their behalf our deepest sympathy on the occasion of the passing of your good 

wife, Mme. St. Laurent. It is our hope that the grief felt by you and your family will be somewhat 

alleviated by the knowledge that it is shared by others. 

With warmest personal regards, 

Yours sincerely, 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

166 

 

An acknowledgement was duly received. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS, MR. GARDINER 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Hon. Members will recall at the commencement of this session the following notice 

was given to the effect that the hon. Minister of Public Works, the member from Melville, Mr. 

Gardiner, due to the absence and sickness of the hon. Minister of Public Health, Mr. Steuart, would 

occupy the seat formerly occupied by Mr. Steuart. I wish to draw to the attention of all the hon. 

Members that the Minister of Public works (Mr. Gardiner) will now revert to his former seat which he 

occupied during other sessions of the Legislature. 

 

FIRST READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to Amend The Income Tax Act 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that House for unanimous consent to 

introduce a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Members of our group are generally aware of the 

Government‟s wish to complete the proceedings with regard to Bill No. 3 at today‟s sitting and we are 

generally sympathetic to that point of view. At the same time, however, I want to draw attention to the 

fact that there is standing on the Order Paper under my name a resolution which in the minds of this 

group is an extremely important one and which we feel ought to be and indeed must be discussed during 

this session. We are prepared to give the consent which the Premier has asked for on a stage by stage 

basis, presuming that there would be no blocks or, may I use the term, no use of the Government‟s 

authority to prevent full discussion of the motion which stands as Resolution No. 1 on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry I can‟t give that assurance. I think that is up to Mr. Speaker 

to decide. However, if the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) does not wish to finish the House‟s 

business today he can, of course hold up giving unanimous consent on second or third reading of Bill 

No. 3. So I don‟t think at this stage anything will be lost if he goes along with the first reading. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, with due deference to what the Premier has said, this is the first information 

we have directly, officially one might say, from the Government with regard to proceedings, and it 

seems to me that this is a proper time in which to inform the Members, as best we can, just what the 

whole order of events and proceedings will be during the day. It seems to me a very simple matter to 

come to an agreement. The Premier has mentioned the matter of the Speaker. I do not see any possibility 

of the Speaker having access to any rules which would prevent the discussion. I think the discussion 

could only be prevented if the Government apparently wished to use its majority to adjourn the House at 

some particular point, which it would be entitled to 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

167 

do as I understand, if it wished to. I think it would be highly preferable and certainly conducive to 

smooth running of the day‟s proceedings if we could have an understanding at this time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, may I, just before you make the ruling, suggest that this matter should 

be debated in the normal place. It will be up within three or four minutes and as I say there is nothing 

lost by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) if he lets us get into second reading. I cannot give him 

the assurance he asks. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Premier has asked for the unanimous consent to introduce this particular Bill. 

Is unanimous consent granted? 

 

Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to inform the Assembly that his Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor having been informed of the subject matter of this Bill, recommends it to the consideration of 

the Assembly and I move that the said Bill be now read a first time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The hon. Premier has asked for leave to introduce a Bill to amend The Income Tax 

Act. Is leave granted? 

 

Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 3 read a first time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — By leave of the Assembly later this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I think it would be quite reasonable for the Premier to 

give to the House some assurance. All the assurance that is being asked is that the Government will not 

use its majority to stop debate on the resolution which is standing on the Order Paper. Now, if the 

Government continues to refuse to give this assurance and continues to be in the position where at any 

time by a motion to adjourn the House it can cut off the debate, it is going to make it very difficult for us 

to give unanimous consent to proceeding with this Bill. I don‟t think we are being unreasonable at all, 

Mr. Speaker, and we certainly can‟t blame you because it is not a question of what you have to do. You 

would be quite willing, I know, to carry on with the business of the House in the regular way; but all we 

want is that if we are going to give up some of our rights, the rights to have time to look at the Bill and 

study it, then we just want a normal assurance that the Government will not use its majority to prevent 

the discussion of this resolution. After the Bill is passed we are no longer in any position to say we want 

to discuss this resolution. I have seen the Premier on previous occasions cut off debate with this kind of 

step. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

168 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — With respect, Mr. Speaker, I think the Opposition at any time can stop proceedings 

on this Bill on second or third reading just as effectively as on first. So you can hold it up. All I suggest 

is we debate this matter, which you have mentioned, at the appropriate time, in two or three minutes, but 

I cannot give you the assurance that you have asked. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — On a point of order, the appropriate time for debating this question that 

we are debating now, which is a question of order and procedure in the House, is now, not three or four 

minutes after consent is given and then when the next consent . . . 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart: — On a point of order, there is no position to debate this now. You either get 

permission or you don‟t get permission. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER, ORDER!! 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Why don‟t you make up your own mind? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — We can make up our minds. It‟s my hon. friend the Premier that is 

having difficulty in making up his. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We‟ve made our beds 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — What I wanted to point out is that this is the time to debate this question of order 

and procedure in the House. Sure, I don‟t want to have to say „No‟ but the Premier may force me into 

that position. I don‟t want to be forced into that position but if the Premier want sot force me into that 

position I can say „No. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Leave not granted. When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — At the next sitting of the House. 

 

ANNOUCEMENT RE ERROR IN PRESS REPORT 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to draw to the 

attention of the Government and of the press to an error of December 6th under the heading „North 

Master Farm Award Presented to Aylsham Family‟. The Minister of Agriculture was there, Mr. 

McFarlane. It goes on to say and I want to quote from the Leader Post: 

 

Other guest included Harvey Jasdahl, MLA for Kinistino . . . 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

169 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I want to say that I was not invited, I was not there. I don‟t know whether Kinistino 

has become a dual seat. If it has I would like to know if we are going to have two members. I know that 

Mr. Pederson would like to have an extra member. I would like to know whether this was a court 

decision or a Cabinet appointment or what it is. You know, I am in a sort of embarrassed position and I 

would like to know what is taking place, but I want to draw to the attention of the press whether this 

man was posing as MLA. I doubt it very much because he is a fine chap. But anyway I would like to 

know where I stand, whether I have a right to sit here. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE CHANGE IN GOVERNMENT POLICY 

WITH REGARD TO POTASH DEVELOPMENT 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce to the House the change in Government policy with 

respect to potash development. When the original potash companies came to Saskatchewan a 

particularly low royalty rate was established. These rates were lower than anywhere else on the North 

American continent. They are applicable until 1981 to all companies presently committed to production. 

A year ago the Government introduced a production tax on all potash mined on other than crown lands 

which did not yield any revenue to the crown. In the interest of the people of Saskatchewan we do not 

believe that these low rates should pertain to all future potash developments. I, therefore, wish to 

announce that any company holding potash rights in Saskatchewan which fails to commit, to sink a 

shaft, or establish a plant on or before October 1st, 1967, will be subject to higher royalty and 

production rates than those which are enjoyed by the companies presently committed. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the hon. Premier a question on that subject? As 

I understand it the original agreement, when I had something to do with the business, was that there 

were two companies that were guaranteed this royalty. I doubt if it was the lowest on the continent but it 

was low. This was the way we drove out potash companies, of course. Two companies were guaranteed 

this royalty for the first twenty years of production, now did the Government extend that and guarantee 

this royalty to all the others besides just these two pioneer companies, the Potash Company of America 

and IMC? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, for competitive reasons it was felt that when the first two companies had been 

given these ridiculously low rates by the former government that we had no choice but to extend them, 

but from this time on we are going to try and get resources and revenue for the people, to which we 

think they are entitled. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, Just a supplementary question there. When this new and 

higher royalty comes into effect what kind of competitive position are you going to be in then? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, circumstances have improved, of course a great 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

170 

 

deal in the last two and a half years so we think we will be alright. 

 

QUESTION RE PRODUCTION FROM DEVONIAN AND MISSISSIPPIAN LEVELS 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I‟m glad to see that the Government is getting wiser. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet I would like to ask the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) 

a question. I notice it is reported that there is production in a new well down near the United States 

border near Minton and the report states the production zones are fifty feet in the Devonian and two 

zones of 50 feet and 25 feet in the Mississippian. It gives the amount of production as it‟s on test, I 

think, 250 barrels a day. Could I ask the Minister if this production from the different zones is being 

produced separately? Can you tell what we are getting from the Devonian and what is from the 

Mississippian? 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Maple Creek): — The 250 barrels a day is from the Devonian. There are dual 

and three zones that they may produce from. The well at the present time is under production tests. That 

250 barrels was the test of production on the Devonian and is from a 50 foot zone in the Devonian. 

There are likewise two upper zones in the Mississippian, one with 50 feet as you say and one with 25. 

This is not the accumulative total of the three zones. It is a 250 barrels a day from the Devonian. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Well, the report would give us to understand that this was the total 

production from the well from all three zones. I hope the Minister is correct in answering. 

 

QUESTION RE THE BASE HOSPITAL 
 

Mrs. M.A. Hunt (Regina West): — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a question to 

the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant). I would like to ask, has any of the money that was allocated 

in the 1966 budget towards the construction or the planning of the base hospital, been spent or what 

progress has been made to date towards either the planning or the construction of the base hospital for 

Regina? 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, to date there have been no expenditures 

from the fund set aside for this purpose. Good progress is being made in the recruiting of personnel for 

the board and we are meeting with the area planning people regularly on various procedures that we will 

have to face in bringing this base hospital into reality. 

 

QUESTION RE PAYMENTS FOR FARMERS AFFECTED BY BUILDING CANALS 
 

Mr. H.A. Broten (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Government a question regarding 

the policy of return to the farmer on land that is being used for canals. In my constituency a canal is 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

171 

going across the whole constituency. There is a tremendous amount of concern because of the formula 

that is being used now that sufficient monies are not returned to the farmer for the use of that land for 

the canal. I would think that there should be a review in this area at an early date because there has been 

some evidence of some of these things being taken to court in order to plan an actual value. I would like 

to get assurance that this would be done at this time because all the land for canals in my constituency 

hasn‟t been bought as yet. I think that it‟s important that we do have review on this because the value as 

far as most of the farmers is concerned isn‟t nearly sufficient, for one thing to compensate for loss of 

income which we think is not taken into consideration under the present formula to a degree that it 

should be. 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Melville): — I would just like to report with regard to this question, that as far as 

the purchases that have taken place so far by The Water Supply Board, on the route that the hon. 

Member speaks of, these settlements for canals have been in the majority obtained by voluntary consent 

of the owners. The most difficult phase has been in the purchase of land for reservoirs. There is some 

indication that we may have perhaps to upgrade payments in this area. But we are definitely taking into 

consideration the problem that the Member speaks of and I am quite certain that when it is finalized, if 

we can‟t satisfy everyone, we are going to do the best we possibly can. 

 

QUESTION RE CANADA PENSION FUND ALLOTMENT 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Premier. 

Because of the emergency caused by the Local Government Board‟s refusal to approve bylaws endorse 

by municipalities and school boards, will any of the Canada Pension Fund allotment made available to 

the Provincial Government be used to establish a fund to provide monies for financing local municipal 

projects such as elementary and secondary schools? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No. 

 

QUESTION RE CHRISTMAS BONUS FOR SOCIAL WELFARE RECIPIENTS 
 

Mr. A.M. Nicholson (Saskatoon City) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher). I believe it was while the Premier was in Ottawa that the Minister 

of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) intimated that social welfare recipients who had received a Christmas 

bonus when aid was administered by municipalities would not receive an extra allowance this 

Christmas. In view of the substantial increase in living costs since the welfare schedules were 

established, would the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) reconsider this question so that this group 

might have a happier Christmas in such an affluent year. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this Government doesn‟t believe in just giving Christmas 

bonuses. We have given six per cent across the board to all recipients all over the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

172 

 

QUESTION RE SIGNING OF AGREEMENT WITH HUDSON BAY 

MINING AND SMELTING COMPANY 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to ask 

the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Steuart) a question. For some two years, as is known to this 

House, the people of Creighton have been held back in constructing a school for some nearly 200 

children due to the fact that an agreement had not been signed by the Government with the Hudson Bay 

Mining and Smelting Company. I would like to know now whether that agreement has been signed? 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Natural Resources): — Yes, we have signed it. It‟s up to Creighton to 

sign it now. 

 

QUESTION RE SUBSIDIZATION OF INTEREST RATES ON HOUSING 
 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 

question to the hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) that in view of the announcement last 

week — I believe it was, or the week before — that the interest rates on housing loans are to be 

increased from 6 3/4 to 7 1/4 per cent, whether the Government of Saskatchewan will be providing 

subsidies for home owners in order to keep the interest rates down similar to what is being done in the 

province of Quebec. This has also become more urgent in view of the Government‟s policy to 

discontinue the $500 bonuses for winter construction of housing. Is the Government of Saskatchewan 

considering any bonuses or subsidization of interest rates on housing? 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. Member 

we are giving no such consideration to this proposal at this time. 

 

QUESTION RE INVESTMENT OF MONEY IN CANADA PENSION FUND 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Provincial Treasurer, in view 

of the answer he gave about the use of the money Saskatchewan has at its command from the Canada 

Pension Fund, if he could have his department prepare for the Members of the Legislature — this I think 

should be very easy — a statement showing the amount received and its disposal, or where this money is 

invested, or what it has invested in the Canada Pension Fund. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I don‟t see why we couldn‟t do this. I‟d be glad to look into it. I‟m not sure whether I 

can have it for tomorrow but if not I will have it for you very shortly. I may say that almost all of the 

Canada Pension Funds in this province, indeed all of them, have gone to SPC, to the Telephone 

Company, and possibly a small amount to the University. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

173 

QUESTION RE ROYALTY FROM DEVONIAN PRODUCTION 
 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I would like to ask another question of the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron). In view of the fact that the Premier is very anxious to get more revenue from 

potash, what royalty are you getting from the production of oil from the Devonian? 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, if I‟m going to answer the 

hon. gentlemen‟s question you will understand it will take me two to three minutes to do so because his 

implications are quite broad. In the first place, in regard to potash I may say that the present royalty 

regulations are established until 1974, so all potash companies enjoy this low royalty until 1974 as set up 

by the former administration. Coming to the Devonian discovery we have just clarified that they are 

producing 250 barrels per day from the Devonian. Two wells are in production now. Two new rigs were 

moved in the day before yesterday. And all during the winter and early spring there will be numerous 

rigs putting down more wells to extract more production. This is the first time that we have struck 

Devonian oil in the province and the extent of the production certainly indicates that here is an area that 

can cause excitement to all the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Furthermore, the Devonian discovery was struck in an area as we say, unassociated with the salt bed, in 

an area where we didn‟t think you could find Mississippian oil. Mississippian oil was found in this new 

area, unassociated with the salt beds. On the way down they struck three levels of production in the 

upper horizon from which they can produce the Mississippian oil. Now then, I would like to inform the 

House that this amazing and exciting discover, we believe, was induced by the incentive program of this 

Government to bring them in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And any oil from the Devonian or lower depths will receive a royalty-free period for 

three years. All oil producing from the upper horizon from these extra three production zones will pay 

the same royalty as in all other oil. And so we estimate we will receive sufficient royalty and more from 

the upper three horizons to take care of what we may have to await for on the Devonian plus some 

increased surge in exploration all across the province which will bring us in exceptional bonus bids, 

which in all will give a terrific boost and an amazing impact to the whole industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Yes, I‟m quite happy. Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the hon. Minister 

another question and maybe we‟ll get just as long an answer. I never saw anybody take so long to say 

„No‟ as he did. He should take a lesson from the Premier. He knows how to say „No‟ quick. And the 

answer, of course, was you‟re getting no royalty from the Devonian. Then he said there is a three year 

royalty-free period. I don‟t think it is a three year 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

174 

 

royalty free period. I think it is a royalty free period to a certain date. Is that not correct? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What is the question, Brock? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Is that not correct? You wouldn‟t understand, Mr. Premier. I think the 

Minister may. What is the date? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What is the date? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Well, it isn‟t a three year free royalty period. It is royalty-free up to a 

certain date, 1971 or something like that. What is the date? 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Royalty-free period until December 1, 1971, which would give this company when 

they are actually in production about a three or three and a half year period of royalty because of course 

this was instituted to encourage the men with the full knowledge it would take from two to three years to 

get the necessary research and development before the first discovery so they are not going to qualify 

except for the remaining period from here until December 31st, 1971, which is a tremendous strain for 

the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — On a point there, not only did the Minister take a long time to answer 

but he gave me the wrong answer, when he said three years. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Natural Resources): — I wonder in view of the terrible hardship that 

is being worked on the farmers of western Canada and of Saskatchewan by the longshoremen‟s strike in 

Vancouver, in view of the fact that the NDP opposition have repeatedly said that they are the friends of 

the farmer and that the farmers have the same interest as the labor unions, I wonder if the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) could inform the House what vigorous action he has taken, what public action 

. . . 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Order. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . he has taken . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . or as usual have they done nothing when their friends in the labor unions are out on 

strike. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, do our rules now permit members to ask questions 

of individual Members or are we restricted to asking questions of Members of the Government. If the 

rules are the other way, as now interpreted by the Member . . . 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

175 

Mr. Steuart: — I don‟t want an answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If the rules are the other way then I will be happy to take advantage of them. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER! Now a point of order has been raised in connection with the rules concerning 

the asking and answering of oral questions in this House. I wish to draw the attention of all hon. 

Members to the fact that in this Legislature there is now no formal established procedure for the asking 

and answering of oral questions of any kind or nature whatsoever. Presently oral questions are asked and 

answered here fairly as a matter of courtesy according to the wisdom and the good nature of the House. 

In Westminster, in Ottawa and in other Legislatures there is a formal procedure for the asking of oral 

questions and they are not asked without due notice. They all go on the Order Paper. The unstarred 

questions, that is, those which don‟t have a star opposite them, are questions which are asked in a 

written fashion and receive a written answer. And no oral question is asked or oral answer given. Starred 

questions, that is, those which have a star opposite them on the Order Paper, are so designated in order 

that everybody will know that they will be asked in the House orally and an oral answer will be 

expected; due notice of the nature of the question and moment of asking and answering having been 

given. 

 

We have no established procedure in this House for the asking and answering of oral questions. The 

House has allowed a wide latitude this morning and I think properly so, in view of the fact that we are 

reconvening after a lengthy recess and I think that matters which came up during that period of time 

upon which members might wish to ask a question should receive an answer. But there is no procedure 

in this House for the asking and answering of oral questions except by the courtesy of the House, and 

therefore all oral questions, if one applies the rule rigorously, are out of order 

 

There has been raised a further point of order. This is the question regarding who may be asked a 

question. I quote from page 350 of the 17th edition of Erskine May‟s Parliamentary Practice: 

 

Questions addressed to unofficial members relating to a bill, motion, or other matter connected with 

the business of the House, for which Members are responsible have been allowed; though a question 

addressed to a Member, the Leader of the Opposition, inquiring the course he intended to adopt 

regarding a motion by the Government was not allowed. Questions may not be asked regarding 

statements made by Members outside the House; and a question to an ex-minister with regard to 

transactions during his term of office has been ruled out of order. The former usage, by which 

questions were addressed to Members who were placed on royal commissions or were trustees with 

the British Museum, if relevant to their official duties or position is not in accordance with modern 

practice. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

176 

 

I think that covers the matter fairly well. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, since the Minister did direct a lengthy and inaccurate question to me, may I 

be allowed the right of answering it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be better calculated to show the blind and uninformed 

prejudice of the Liberal Party than the question which the former Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) and 

the present Minister of Natural Resources, directed to me. He should consult with his blood brother in 

Ottawa, the Minister of Labour there, who has just declared that the fault with respect to the work 

stoppage on the West Coast was not the employees but the unreasonable attitude of the employers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I just wondered what action he took before he got that little place to hide 

in, which was nothing of course as usual. 

 

MEMBERSHIP OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON REGULATIONS 
 

Mr. Steuart: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I could move, seconded by Mr. Trapp, by leave of the 

Assembly, that the name of Mr. Cameron be substituted for that of Mr. Cuelenaere, in the list of 

members composing the Select Committee of Regulations appointed on April 6th, 1966. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the hon. the Minister of Natural Resources, Mr. Steuart, 

seconded by the hon. the Minister of Education, Mr. Trapp, by leave of the Assembly that the name of 

Mr. Cameron be substituted for that of Mr. Cuelenaere, on the list of members composing the Select 

Committee on Regulations appointed on April 6th, 1966. 

 

Is leave granted? 

 

Motion carried. 

 

QUESTION RE FREE ROYALTY FOR KALIUM COMPANY 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have another 

question to direct either to the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) or to the Premier (Mr. 

Thatcher). 

 

For some time, as you know, the Premier made representations to Ottawa to have the Kalium Company 

exempt from royalties in the potash mine; somewhere in Belle Plaine I think it is. Could we have an 

answer whether this is now the case that they have a three year free royalty from the Federal 

Government and have they a free royalty from the Provincial Government of any kind? What is the 

situation in solution mining? 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

177 

Mr. Thatcher: — I‟ll take that question under advisement. I just didn‟t understand it the way the 

Member asked it. 

 

MOTION: SPECIAL LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEE COST OF LIVING INQUIRY 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition) moved the following Resolution (No. 1): 

 

That this Assembly, seriously concerned by the sharp increases in consumer prices in Saskatchewan, 

led by an 18-month increase of 10 per cent in retail food prices, and fearful of the impact of price 

increases on the real wages of working people, on the living and production costs of farmers and 

particularly on the well-being of those on fixed incomes, urges the Government to give consideration 

to establishing a special legislative committee to conduct an enquiry following prorogation or 

adjournment of this Assembly into all matters relating to the effects on levels of living of recent price 

increases in Saskatchewan and their causes, and to recommend measures to halt the price spiral. 

 

He said: 

 

Yesterday‟s news and an Order in Council, which the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) was good enough to 

make me aware of yesterday, indicated that after a period of three months, a long and costly and 

economically frosty period for the consumers of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

DISCUSSION OF POINT OF ORDER ARISING THEREFROM 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — I take it that the hon. the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) is now addressing himself to the motion. This being the case I would like to raise a point of order 

that this matter is now sub judice and I would like to refer, Mr. Speaker, to some citations. The rule of 

sub judice is well known and is stated in May‟s Parliamentary Practice and I quote: 

 

That a matter awaiting or under adjudication by a court of law should not be brought before the 

House by a motion or otherwise. 

 

This rule doesn‟t apply to bills of course. It does, however, apply also to debate: 

 

Matters awaiting adjudication of a court of law should not be brought forward in debate. 

 

The practice followed by Westminster has also been adopted in Ottawa and the sub judice rule does 

apply in Ottawa. I would refer you, Mr. Speaker, to a reference to Beauchesne, fourth edition, citations 

100, 149, 171. Now the purpose of the rule, I suggest, is not to avoid a conflict between the House and 

the courts but to avoid the House setting itself up as an alternative forum. A Canadian Speaker has ruled 

that a question cannot be before two public bodies at the same time. This reference is in Beauchesne, 

also fourth edition, citation 153. So the rule is clear so far as matters before the court are concerned. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is the position with regard to 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

178 

 

matters before Inquiries under the Public Inquiries Act? This question has been decided by a Speaker of 

this Legislature. It was Mr. Speaker Agar in 1940. I think I should just read a bit of his decision at that 

time. It is contained in the Journals of this Assembly, 1940 session at pages 38, 39 and 40. He said and I 

quote: 

 

When a matter has been submitted to be fully and completely inquired into and investigated to a 

tribunal properly constituted under the Law of the province and by a method of procedure long 

recognized as most efficient and effective in such circumstances, it scarcely would be proper for this 

Assembly under whose Law it is constituted to derogate from the prestige, dignity and authority of 

that tribunal by constituting itself a second tribunal to determine the same cause. 

 

Thus he ruled out of order discussion of matters referred to a Royal Commission under the Public 

Inquiries Act, which is the same Act we moved under yesterday, until the report was properly before the 

House. The ruling was sustained on appeal and I believe stands as the only substantial statement of this 

rule in the province of Saskatchewan. The position then on a point of order briefly, Mr. Speaker, is that, 

since this matter was referred by Order in Council, passed yesterday, to an inquiry set up under the 

Public Inquiries Act, this Commission has full powers to examine witnesses under oath, subpoena 

records and so on, and that the matter is therefore sub judice and therefore the motion is out of order at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief comments at this time. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) 

while he hasn‟t made all things clear, has certainly made some things clear. He has made clear the 

reluctance of the government just a little while ago to clear the way for discussion on a matter which is 

of great importance to the people of Saskatchewan. Probably also he has made clear the reason for the 

delay on the part of the Government in coming to decisions and perhaps even the reason for choosing 

this particular time for the inquiry. It all seems to indicate that the Government is most anxious and 

unwilling to have this matter discussed in the House. On one point, as I say the Attorney General is to be 

congratulated on making some things clear at least. 

 

With respect to another point, the same announcement with regard to the same Commission was made 

yesterday by the government of our neighboring province of Manitoba. I understand that the same rules 

apply; the same personnel are appointed to the Commission and the same substance is to be looked into. 

When this matter was raised in the Legislature in Manitoba yesterday, so I am informed, there the 

assurance was given that the appointment of the Commission in no way interfered with the discussion of 

the matter in the House there. It seems to me that if this kind of rule is effective in Manitoba, it should 

also of necessity, since we use the same kind of rules to guide us, be effective here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important matter and even if there is some substance to the Government‟s 

reasoning that this is the best way of proceeding with it, it seems to me that this Legislature has a 

responsibility, which it can only get at as a result of discussion at this time. At a later time is not good 

enough, 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

179 

because certainly one of our responsibilities as a Legislature is to attempt to outline for the guidance of a 

commission, if it is to be set up, something of the scope and something of the intensity which this 

Legislature feels the Commission ought to attach to its inquiry. This cannot be done at the next regular 

session, this cannot be done by the introduction . . . 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, what point of order is the 

Opposition Leader making? He‟s not making a point of order, he is making a speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ORDER, ORDER!! We are listening to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, such as I was saying when I was so briefly interrupted by such a brief person, that 

this is a necessary part of the pursuit of this whole inquiry. This Legislature has a right, and surely has a 

responsibility to indicated to the Commission, into whose hands we put certain materials for inquiry, 

what we think ought to be done. This cannot be done in another resolution at the regular session next 

Spring. This cannot be done by the introduction of any other question at this time. This is a matter of 

such immediate urgency that it should be discussed at this time. This is the only opportunity that the 

Opposition will have in making any guiding comments, and it seems to me the Resolution ought to be in 

order on those grounds alone. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — I wonder what Your Honour‟s consideration is to the fact that this 

Resolution was placed before this Legislature on a previous day of this Legislature. It is true that we 

have had an adjournment between times. Under what rule can a government take a motion off an Order 

Paper where it has been placed by a Member of this Legislature in referring to a body outside of this 

House and then tell the Member who has placed the motion on the Order Paper that he has no right to 

discuss what was placed on the business of this House at a previous day? I think that, if that is permitted, 

it would then be putting us in a position where we would never know whether we could bring a thing to 

the floor of this Legislature as a Member, if the Government by action could remove it from the floor. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If I don‟t hear any more discussion on this particular point of order, I‟ll answer the 

question raised by the member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst). Now, no motion has been taken off the 

Order Paper, neither can any motion be taken off the Order Paper that was previously placed there save 

by that motion being out of order. Now the question that the House is being asked to decide and that the 

Chair is being asked to decided right now on the point of order taken by the hon. the Attorney General 

(Mr. Heald), is whether or not the motion is in order. Now the motion was never taken off the Order 

Paper and it could not be. I hope I have settled the question and made it abundantly clear. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Mr. Speaker, if I may 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

180 

 

correct, I didn‟t mean to infer that it has been taken off, but what I did mean to ask was under what rule 

can a government, in dealing with a motion that was duly in order and everything else, bring in an order 

of the Executive Council setting up a Commission to bar a motion being discussed which is on the Order 

Paper where it was placed at a previous time? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We‟re discussing a point of order here. The question before the House, the question 

that the House is going to decided, is whether or not the motion is in order, not whether or not the 

Government is taking it off the Order Paper. That is just out of the picture altogether. It is either in order, 

in which case it can be discussed, or it is out of order, in which case it cannot be discussed. But I don‟t 

think that the question raised by the member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) is particularly relevant in 

that regard. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, if I may just say a word on the point of order. Your Honour is 

correct when he says there is no doubt it is a question of whether the motion that is before us is in order. 

But it should be pointed out that the only issue determining whether it is in order is whether some 

executive action taken by the Government should prevail against this Resolution being debated at this 

time. Now the hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) has cited the public interest as the basis for the rule 

and he says that it wouldn‟t be in the public interest for a debate to occur in the House and for 

consideration to be given to a similar matter in two different public bodies at the same time. If this is the 

basis for the rule book then I submit that this constitutes a sufficient basis in this instance for the rule to 

be relinquished so far as this particular question is concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no matter of more urgent public interest to the people of Saskatchewan at the 

present time that the cost of living. Secondly the Government by its own action taken only yesterday, the 

day before this House was to met, has deprived this House, or at least the Attorney General is arguing 

that it should deprive this House, of the right to discuss this question. Now if the Government had been 

concerned about the public interest of this matter, it was in the hands of the Government to have 

deferred the taking of executive action until tomorrow and the Commission could then have had the 

benefit of the discussion of the peoples‟ representatives. And I submit, though all my friends may laugh 

about the rights of the people‟s representatives, and I am sure this is the note of scorn and contempt 

which they really feel about public institutions, that the people‟s representatives are entitled to be heard 

on this subject. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) sets before this House as the reason why the people‟s 

representatives should not be heard some executive action taken by this Government on the very eve of 

the meeting of this Assembly. 

 

I say that, if the Government was really concerned about the public interest, and that is the basis on 

which the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) bases his rule, the Government would have served the public 

interest much better by taking the executive action which they did the day after the session rather than 

the day before. And I say that the Government places itself under a cloud of suspicion by having taken 

this action, as it did, on 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

181 

the very day before the House met. So I say that, if the Government really doesn‟t want to be under this 

cloud of suspicion, it ought not now to raise its own wrongful acts as a basis for prescribing debate in 

this House, and the Government ought now to say that the Attorney General‟s point of order is 

withdrawn, so that the people of the province may have the benefit of the discussion of this very 

important matter by their representatives in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Heald: — If I might make one or two observations as a result of the remarks just made by the hon. 

member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) . . . 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Is he closing the debate? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We have no formal debate as such. On the point of order I will be happy to listen to 

the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) and the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). 

 

Mr. Heald: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The point that I was trying to make on this point of order, 

public interest, yes, but the point which Mr. Speaker Agar made in 1940 when he made this ruling was 

and I would like to quote it again because I think there has been some misunderstanding of the rationale 

of this decision: 

 

It scarcely would be proper for this Assembly under whose Law it is constituted to derogate from the 

prestige, dignity and authority of that tribunal by constituting itself a second tribunal to determine the 

same cause. 

 

This is the point. We have set up an independent Commission consisting of representatives from the 

provinces of Manitoba and Alberta and Saskatchewan, headed by a District Court Judge. Are we then to 

debate the same matters encompassing in this Legislature and put strings on the kind of depth 

investigation that we sincerely hope this Commission is going to make. And that‟s the point and that‟s 

the point of order. Now having set up this Commission we shouldn‟t try to hamstring it or give it 

instructions. It is an independent Royal Commission and it will do a good job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest that the arguments that 

are used by the Attorney General here today have really no substance, because we are not here 

suggesting a resolution that would duplicate the work of the Commission. We are asking at this point for 

consideration to be given to establishing a Special Legislative Committee to conduct an inquiry. None of 

the discussion, Mr. Speaker, at this stage duplicates or takes away from any of the rights of any 

Commissions that may have been set up prior to the consideration of this Resolution. So I am suggesting 

to you, Sir, that the arguments of the Attorney General at this point are really not on all fours with the 

question before use. We are asking for consideration for the establishment of a Committee. It might well 

be that, if there were an affirmative response given to the Legislature, the Government might 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

182 

 

change its mind; but the fact whether another tribunal might contradict the work of the tribunal which is 

now being set up, is surely a question for the decision of the Government in any case. But this body is 

not at this point debating the same questions that would come before the Commission that the 

Government announced would be set up yesterday. And I would suggest in any case, Mr. Speaker, that 

the announcement by the Government yesterday should not be permitted in any case. It is a prior right of 

the Legislature in discussing a Resolution which was placed before this body more than three months 

ago, in which period of time significantly the Government has done nothing whatsoever to make any 

announcement which would go towards meeting the questions that are suggested in this Resolution. But 

my main point, Mr. Speaker, is that the Resolution here before us does not duplicate, take away anything 

that would be discussed by the tribunal. We are talking about consideration and not talking about setting 

something up at this stage. That is a matter for the Government and the Government alone, and for those 

reasons his remarks do not apply. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I simply wanted to say a few words on this topic 

and I really want to say them under three headings. Firstly let‟s look at the question we are being asked 

to decide. We start out with the proposition that this Resolution was on the Order Paper, and that it was 

in order on the Order Paper. There is not a suggestion nor has there been a suggestion, not even from 

that source of far-out suggestion, from the member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) that this Resolution 

was not in order when placed on the Order Paper. The motion was in order and was called for debate. 

Now, the question then is this; can a Resolution which is on the Order Paper and being in order for 

debate on Day One be rendered out of order on Day Two by the passage of an Order in Council 

appointing a Royal Commission? Now that is the question we are asked to decide and I suggest that the 

answer is no. I suggest that once the Resolution is on the Order Paper it cannot be rendered out of order 

by subsequent act of the Government. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . never on the Order Paper. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Why is it printed then? But the facts are that it was presented to the Legislature, was 

on the Order Paper, and if it was valid then, it is valid now unless the passage of the Order in council 

renders it invalid. And I am suggesting to you that there is nothing in the rules of this House which will 

render a Resolution properly on the Order Paper an improper subject for debate by reason of executive 

action pursuant to the Public Inquiries Act. And if we rule otherwise we will be setting a very interesting 

but dangerous precedent that anytime a Government finds itself in difficulty or in any resolution whether 

it is in the middle of a debate or otherwise, it may come in and lay an Order in Council on the table and 

say “Ah ha, we have established a Royal Commission, debate ends”. Now this I would suggest would be 

an abuse of the powers of the House and I suggest that the rules don‟t call for us making this sort of 

extreme decision. That‟s my simple point number one. 

 

Now my point number two is this, that a good deal has happened since Mr. Speaker Agar made his 

decision. I haven‟t 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

183 

had an opportunity to examine it but we have entered into an altogether new phase of Royal 

Commissions. There are Royal Commissions on everything these days, as is well known. There are so 

many in Ottawa that they virtually need a Department of Royal Commissions. Would it have been for 

one moment suggested at Ottawa that any subject with respect to health was an improper subject, let us 

say a question on the Order Paper at Ottawa because the Hall Royal Commission was sitting headed by a 

judge for three or four years? Is that a reasonable proposition? Was it ever accepted at Ottawa? And the 

answer of course is no. Where we have Royal Commissions which are fundamentally commissions of 

inquiry as opposed to commissions of judicial findings, this analogy between the sub judice rule and 

Royal Commission is quite wrong. It is true that if a Royal Commission is set up to decide a narrow 

judicial point there may be some analogy between the court wherein the rule is clear and a Royal 

Commission which is to decide a narrow point. But where the Royal Commission is one which, if I may 

quote the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) “has sweeping powers”, and can inquire into “all sorts of 

things”, then is it reasonable to say that nothing within the purview of these “sweeping powers”, nothing 

within the purview of “all sorts of things”, can be discussed in this House? Now we will hear next 

session, Mr. Speaker, that this Royal Commission can inquire into the costs of agricultural machinery 

and then we are not to discuss that subject in the House. 

 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Hurrah! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — “Hurrah” says the member for Athabasca, that great farmer, with the sweeping 

farmlands in Athabasca. But his is the sort of proposition the Government is putting before this House 

and I think merely to put it is to refute it. You cannot argue that a Royal Commission with these 

“sweeping powers” can thereby preclude discussions in this House of everything that might come under 

the purview of those powers. We have seen this clearly at Ottawa, we have had Royal Commissions; the 

most conspicuous example is Health Services. It did not in any way preclude all sorts of discussion in 

the House of Commons about matters which came under the purview of that Royal Commission and we, 

Mr. Speaker, are governed by the same fundamental rules as they are. 

 

Now my third point, Mr. Speaker, is the point made by my colleague from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), and 

that is that the Royal Commission is not going to inquire into the same subject as the Resolution deals 

with. The Resolution deals with the advisability of setting up a Legislature Committee. This is the 

operative word in this Resolution. Should we set up a Committee? That‟s what we have to decide. Now 

is this Royal Commission being asked to decide that? The answer is obviously No. The Royal 

Commission is being asked to look into something. We in this House are being asked to decide one 

question. Should the House set up a Committee? 

 

Now there are good arguments for saying the House might set up a Committee; it perhaps should be set 

up by way of a Provincial Royal Commission, without Alberta and Manitoba connections. You can 

argue that it ought to be inquired into in some other way. That is the issue before the House and that 

issue will never come before the Royal Commission. So the member for Lumsden, the Attorney General 

(Mr. Heald) has misconceived 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

184 

 

the fact that I may say that it is in all likelihood that the decision given by Mr. Speaker Agar dealt with 

another topic. It dealt with the topic of whether the subject matter before the Royal Commission could 

be debated in this House. Now that is not what we are talking about. We are not talking about the subject 

matter that is before the Royal Commission. We are talking about whether or not a Legislature 

Committee is a useful vehicle, and that subject will never be before the Royal Commission. To say that 

you can set up a Royal Commission and thereby preclude debate on whether or not a Legislative 

Committee is a useful vehicle is to me to pervert the whole question. He‟s gone off on a tangent. The 

subject which we are asked to decide is — should we have a Legislative Committee? That question will 

never be before the Royal Commission. It may be a good argument against the motion that we already 

have a Royal Commission. It may be an argument that the member for Lumsden (Mr. Heald) will want 

to raise but this is no way makes it out of order. Just because you may have a pretty good argument 

against setting up a Legislative Committee is no reason for saying that a resolution calling for it is out of 

order. And I think if we turn our mind to the precise subject of this Resolution — should we set up a 

Legislative Committee? — we will find that that Resolution is never before any Royal Commission as, 

of course, it could not be, and therefore there is no identity of subject of inquiry. Accordingly it is quite 

wrong to rule that this Resolution is precluded from debate in this House by the setting up of a Royal 

Commission. 

 

Those, Mr. Speaker, are my three points and I think that on consideration you will decide that this 

Resolution is entirely in order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. J.H Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I really must confess that I don‟t think much needs to be said on 

this question that has been raised by the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) but it is so important that I cannot 

resist saying a few words on it. 

 

The point first raised by the member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) was that, if this Resolution is out of 

order according to the arguments of the Attorney General, it puts the Government in a position where 

any time the Legislature is discussing or is about to discuss a subject which the Government does not 

want discussed, after the House adjourns at night it has a Cabinet meeting and passes an Order in 

Council and consequently it is out of order the next day. This is a ridiculous situation. This point was 

emphasized by my colleague from Hanley (Mr. Walker) and my colleague from Regina who just sat 

down (Mr. Blakeney). The strong point is that if this were adopted it would make complete nonsense of 

British legislatures and parliaments. Members of legislatures would become mere rubber puppets 

because they would have no power within themselves to discuss anything. Under our system the 

Members of the Government are a part of the Legislature but they are not masters of the Legislature. 

They must always get the support of the majority of the Legislature in regard to the conduct of the 

Legislature‟s affairs. And to propose that the Government when the House is in session, and this House 

has been in session since September, can by any means make a subject out of order which otherwise 

would be in order 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

185 

is an insult. It is an insult to the Legislature, certainly a monstrous idea and would destroy the whole 

principle of British responsible government, legislatures and parliaments. 

 

I want to make just one more point. Sometimes the evidence is so common that we never think of it. 

You know here in Saskatchewan we had a McLeod Commission on the question of taxation. Sir, my 

hon. friends who now sit on the Government side sat on this side. They certainly discussed taxation, and 

lots of it. They discussed taxation and they would have been most highly offended if we had suggested 

they couldn‟t discuss taxation because it was before a Royal Commission on taxation. The suggestion of 

the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) is absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to thank all hon. Members for their views and opinions that they have extended 

to me at this time, which I think hon. Members will all agree open up a very wide field of discussion on 

a rather important principle of parliamentary procedure. I wonder if the House would be good enough to 

allow me fifteen minutes together with the Clerk to collect my scattered thoughts, more or less to gather 

the arguments that I have heard. Will all of you return to the House at the call of the bell? 

 

I wish to thank Members of the House for their views and opinions expressed in regard to the ruling you 

have asked me to make, and I also wish to express my personal thanks for the courtesy which you 

extend to the Chair when you allowed me a reasonable space of time in which to consider the subject 

and bring in a ruling on the matter. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

As I see it, the issue before the Chair is to decide first whether the motion standing on the Order Paper in 

the name of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition is in fact proposing an inquiry by a legislative committee 

into the same matters as are presently being inquired into by a commission established under The Public 

Inquiries Act, Chapter 19, Revised Statues of Saskatchewan, 1965, and if so whether the motion is out 

of order under the sub judice rule. 

 

A resolution submitted to the Legislature must always be considered in the light of its effect if passed by 

the House and the effect of this particular resolution would be to order the establishment of a legislative 

committee. In essence the motion proposes that a special legislative committee be established to conduct 

an inquiry “into all matters relating to the effects on the levels living of recent price increases in 

Saskatchewan and their causes, and to recommend measures to halt the price spiral”. 

 

A Royal Commission has been established under Order in Council No. 2394/66 dated December 7, 

1966, “(a) to inquire into the causes of price increases and of the general rise in the cost of living . . .; (b) 

to inquire into the various factors which may have contributed and are now contributing to price 

increases and to the general rise in the cost of living . . .; (c) to investigate, as the Commission deems 

expedient, matters relating to 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

186 

 

the effects on standards of living of recent price increases of food and other commodities . . .; (d) to 

make such recommendations as the Commission from time to time deems appropriate and in the public 

interest to combat the price spiral and assist consumers to ameliorate the problem of increases in the cost 

of living”. Moreover, the powers granted to the Commission by both the Act and the Order in Council 

are such as to enable it to conduct a judicial inquiry into the matters referred. 

 

The terms of reference of the commission appear to me to be as broad as the terms of inquiry implied by 

Resolution No. 1. It would seem to me, therefore, that if Resolution No. 1 were debated and passed we 

would be in the position of having two public bodies investigating the same matter at the same time. 

 

The application of the sub judice rule in this case can be sustained by certain precedents of this House. 

As the Attorney General pointed out, a ruling by Mr. Speaker Agar in the Journals of 1940, page 38, is 

as follows: “it scarcely would be proper for the Assembly, under whose law (a commission of inquiry) is 

constituted, to derogate from the prestige, dignity and authority of that tribunal by constituting itself a 

second tribunal to determine the same cause”. 

 

Members should also refer to Beauchesne‟s Fourth Edition, citation 153, where a Speaker‟s ruling is to 

be found to the effect that a “question cannot be before two public bodies at the same time”. Again, in a 

report of a select committee of the British House of commons appointed at the session of 1962-63 to 

examine the sub judice rule it was stated that “the purpose of the rule was not to avoid a conflict 

between the House and the Courts, but to avoid the House setting itself up as an alternative forum”. 

 

It should be noted that in ruling on the resolution it is not so much as question of what should be 

discussed but whether or not two public bodies should discuss the same subject concurrently. Thus a 

discussion of prices and costs of living as such is not necessarily out of order, but the discussion as to 

whether the legislature should establish a committee to inquire into the same is out of order, since 

another official body already has the matter under discussion. 

 

Moreover royal commissions are established to conduct impartial and unbiased inquiries and produce 

impartial reports. Discussion of the motion to set up a further official body might imply lack of faith in 

the commission therefore derogating from its authority. 

 

I must therefore rule that Resolution No. 1 is out of order on the grounds that the matter is indeed sub 

judice. Nor by ruling this motion out of order is any member deprived of the right to state his views fully 

before the commission. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to appeal from your ruling. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question before the House is: Shall the ruling of the Chair be sustained? Is it the 

pleasure of the House to adopt the Motion? 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

187 

During proceedings in the House I ruled that Resolution No. 1 was out of order on the basis of the sub 

judice rule. My ruling has been appealed by Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey). The question before the House 

is: Shall the ruling of the Chair be sustained? 

 

The Speaker‟s ruling was sustained on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas — 31 

 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Romuld 

Howes Grant Weatherald 

McFarlane Coderre MacLennan 

Boldt Bjarnason Larochelle 

Cameron Trapp Hooker 

Steuart McIsaac Coupland 

Heald MacDonald Gardiner (Moosomin) 

Gardiner (Melville) Gallagher Mitchell 

Guy Breker Pederson 

Merchant (Mrs.) Leith Loken 

Radloff   

 

Nays – 25 
 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Willis Wooff 

Hunt (Mrs.) Whelan Snyder 

Wood Nicholson Broten 

Walker Dewhurst Larson 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Michayluk Pepper 

Blakeney Smishek Brockelbank (Stkn. City) 

Davies Baker Thibault 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, if I might have the consent of the House to just say a word. 

I would be just as happy as anybody to see the business of this session finished today if we can so 

arrange it, but I did want to make sure that we did discuss this deal with this Resolution. We have dealt 

with this Resolution that was on the Order Paper, and may I say parenthetically, in a manner which is 

entirely satisfactory from a political point of view. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You haven‟t done anything. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I would be quite willing if we could have the noon recess to consider 

withdrawing my objection to the unanimous consent, if the Premier wants to suggest that we now take 

recess until 2:30 and come back and see then if he can get unanimous consent to proceed, if he wishes to 

do that. 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the suggestion of the hon. member 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

188 

 

for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) and I would so move then that we adjourn until 2:30. We will then 

endeavour to get unanimous consent. 

 

The House recessed at 12:30. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Heald (Attorney General) that the Order of the 

Assembly made this day setting down Bill No. 3 and Bill No. 4 for second reading of this next sitting of 

the House be discharged, and the said Bills be set down for second reading later this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the hon. the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and seconded by the hon. 

the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) that the Order of the Assembly made this day setting down Bill No. 3 

and Bill No. 4 for second reading at the next sitting of the House be discharged, and the said Bills be set 

down for second reading later this day. The motion is in order. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher: (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 3, An Act to amend the Income 

Tax Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, in initiating debate on this particular Bill, I should point out that in view of the Federal 

Government‟s various rulings we have little choice but to adopt it. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I think that if the Member is 

moving second reading of this Bill he should ask consent of the House. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I thought I had so done. 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — No, they were put down for second reading later this day. I don‟t 

know whether this gives unanimous consent or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It seems to me that the House has just moved that the said Bill be sent down for 

second reading later this day. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well now the purpose of this special session is to establish income tax rates for the 

1967 taxation year. This session also affords an opportunity to review first the major changes to the 

current tax sharing agreement which terminates March 31st next; second, the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan on various aspects of the proposed new agreement. 

 

I would like to make it clear that we propose no changes in either the provincial individual income tax 

rate or in the provincial corporation income tax rate in 1967. Unfortunately, we inherited a 6 per cent 

income tax surcharge from the pervious Government. This year, we reduced that surcharge to 5 per cent. 

Next year, we had hoped to make an additional reduction. 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

189 

However, we face a difficult fiscal situation in 1967-68 for two reasons: first, because of an estimated 

decrease of $10,600,000 in equalization payments; second, because the Federal Government postponed 

introducing its medical care program which would have provided about $8,000,000 to Saskatchewan 

next year; that is for nine months only. For these reasons, we cannot reduce income taxes at this time 

further, without curtailing essential services. 

 

I want to describe briefly each of the major elements of the proposed new agreement. It should be noted 

that the Federal Government, in compliance with our proposal, in compliance with the proposal for 

several other provinces, has agreed to review the agreement within two years instead of the customary 

five. 

 

For several decades equalization payments have been a significant source of revenue for Saskatchewan. 

This year, we will receive from equalization payments between thirty-three and thirty five million 

dollars, or at least 12 per cent of our revenues. Equalization grants are, as most Members realize, 

unconditional payments made to the less wealthy provinces, to permit them to provide a uniform level of 

services across the country. This Government subscribes unconditionally to the principle for 

equalization payments. We believe that the richer provinces should help the poorer provinces to 

maintain minimum standards in education, health and welfare services. 

 

Under the present formula, equalization payments are based on the per capita yield of three major taxes 

— 24 per cent of the basic personal income tax; 9 per cent of taxable corporate income; 50 per cent of 

the federal rate of the estates tax. Equalization payments are made to provinces to raise the per capita 

yield of these three taxes to the same level as that of the two highest provinces in Canada, that is, 

Ontario and British Columbia. In some provinces a deduction is made from the equalization payment. 

This deduction is made when a province receives higher revenues from its natural resources than the per 

capita average of the whole country. The deduction is equal to 50 per cent of the difference between the 

national average and the provincial revenue from natural resources. 

 

Now under the proposed new equalization formula, a province‟s revenues would be equalized to the 

national average, rather than to that of the two highest provinces as in the past. According to Finance 

Minister Sharp this proposal is an attempt to better measure the availability of revenues to each 

provincial government. Thus, under this formula, equalization payments would be made to any 

province, in which the national average tax rate yields less per capita than the yield in the country as a 

whole. After examining each revenue source, if it is found that the total of all provincial revenues in a 

province yields less than the national average, then the Federal Government will make an equalization 

payment to make up the difference. 

 

Now it is very natural that our Government should be gratified to receive from Ottawa confirmation that 

our province is not eligible for membership among the “have” provinces, along with Ontario, British 

Columbia and Alberta. This is objective proof, of course, that our economic picture in Saskatchewan has 

greatly improved since the Socialists left office. At the same time, we recognize that our development is 

so recent that we feel we require a further period of adjustment in order to achieve a well- 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

190 

 

balanced and diversified economy. It is a fact that our economy is still basically tied to agriculture, 

which we all realize is subject to forces over which we have no control. At the same time Saskatchewan 

is faced with growing expenditures, that are facing all other provinces in the fields of education and 

public health. For example, Mr. Speaker, as you know, we are spending millions and millions and 

millions more on education than the former Government did. In addition, we have many expenditures 

which are unique in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is obvious to us, therefore, that the loss of an estimated $37,000,000 in equalization during the 

1967-68 fiscal year, would be disastrous. We, therefore, at the conference proposed to the Federal 

Government an alternative formula. We suggested a formula which would continue to equalize the 

province‟s share of the standard taxes to the top two provinces or the top province, and equalize all other 

provincial revenues to the national average. Honourable Members will recall that this was the same 

basic formula proposed by the Government of Saskatchewan in 1959. 

 

Our proposal was not accepted. Instead, under a transitional agreement, Saskatchewan‟s equalization 

will be reduced to $27,200,000, in 1967-68, and the decline will be approximately $7,000,000 a year 

until it receives no equalization by the year 1971-72. In addition, we will not receive approximately 

$3,000,000 a year increase, which would have been available under the old agreement. As provincial 

and municipal expenditures necessarily increase sharply throughout the next five years, the loss in 

equalization payments will present an extremely difficult financial problem for Saskatchewan. We 

haven‟t all the details yet, but we would think that, altogether when you add it up, likely in the next five 

years Saskatchewan will lose up to approximately $150,000,000 in equalization payments. 

 

One aspect of the new proposal provides some assurance that essential services could be continued in 

the event of a serious economic recession. As a result of very strong recommendations, very strong 

representations that our Government made to Ottawa, the Federal Government has guaranteed that the 

general revenue of no province will fall below 95 per cent of the previous year‟s revenue. In other words 

if we had a crop failure and our revenues dropped drastically, the Federal Government will bring our 

revenues back up to that 95 per cent figure. Should this situation arise, the Federal Government will, as I 

say, make a stabilization payment. 

 

There will be no net increase in the share of federal taxes given to the provinces. During the current 

five-year agreement, the provinces received an additional nine percentage points of individual income 

tax from the Federal Government. In our case, one percentage point is worth about $1,300,000. In the 

past five years, the number of percentage points given to the provinces escalated each year. In the next 

fives years, we cannot count on an increased share of the income taxes to finance expanding provincial 

and municipal services. At the conference, Saskatchewan joined with the other provinces to point out 

that, in the period ahead, the fiscal position of the provinces and municipalities will deteriorate, while 

that of the Federal Government will improve. We said that in such a situation either funds or taxing 

powers should be transferred from the Federal Government to the provinces to make for a more 

balanced situation. We argued 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

191 

that once such a balance was struck both the Federal and Provincial Governments would then be in a 

position to carry out their responsibilities for essential services. At the same time, we shared the Federal 

Government‟s concern that it must retain sufficient fiscal leverage to be able to manage the economy. 

We agree that all governments must be concerned not just with the matter of tax-sharing, but with the 

tax burden imposed on Canadians. 

 

At the conference in Ottawa, the Federal Government proposed to withdraw from three social programs, 

by offering a new form of fiscal compensation to the provinces. They propose to withdraw from (1) 

hospital insurance; (2) the Canada Assistance Plan; (3) the continuing portion of the national health 

grants program. 

 

They proposed that in 1967 they would begin a new form of compensation. Under this proposal, 

Saskatchewan‟s share of individual income tax points would increase from 28 to 45. These points 

would, of course, be equalized to the national average. In addition, there would be an adjustment made 

each year. By this adjustment, the Federal Government would, where necessary, until 1970, make a 

payment, so that total compensation would be equal to the federal share of the actual cost of each of 

these three programs. After 1970 the adjustment will not be tied to the cost of these programs. Instead, 

the increase in this adjustment will be equal to 1 1/2 times the growth rate of personal income in Canada. 

 

Saskatchewan naturally took exception to these proposals, and, I may say, most vigorously. We believe 

that the federal proposal would leave the province in a situation where rising costs during an economic 

recession could jeopardize any one of these programs. We asked that the proposed „opting-out‟ formula 

should contain a guaranteed minimum growth rate. Or as an alternative we suggested the making of 

block grants to the provinces for such broad functions as health. We argued that these block grants be 

increased annually to compensate for increased costs in the programs each year. No province accepted 

the federal proposal in this regard and so temporarily, at least, the proposal is lying dormant. 

 

At the Ottawa conference, the Federal Government announced that is proposed to terminate all per 

capita operating grants to: 

 

(1) universities, 
(2) technical and vocational institutes, 
(3) apprenticeship training programs effective March 31st, next. 
 

The exception would be a phase-out of the present capital grants program for the construction of 

technical and vocational training facilities. In return for this, the Federal Government offered to the 

provinces an unconditional fiscal transfer comprised of four percentage points of personal income tax 

and one percentage point of taxable corporate income, equalized to the national average. So that is the 

Bill which is now before us. 

 

This will be supplemented by special program equalization grants which would bring the total fiscal 

transfer up to 

 

(1) either $15 per capita, or 
 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

192 

 

(2) one-half of the cost of post-secondary education operating costs. 

 

While this proposed transfer of funds is unconditional, the level of assistance in the future would be 

governed by the level of post-secondary education spending by the provinces. After the first year under 

this new proposal, the $15 per capital operation would be escalated according to the percentage of 

increase in the operating costs of all post-secondary institutions in Canada. The 50 per cent option would 

be escalated by increased operating costs of post-secondary institutions within the province. 

 

As for federal sharing in the capital costs of vocational high schools, technological institutes, trade 

schools and other such facilities, Saskatchewan would receive an allotment of $23,000,000. This would 

be in addition to the present allotment of $35,000,000. At the same time, the Federal Department of 

Manpower and Immigration would accept responsibility for the payment of employment-oriented 

training courses to adults meeting certain qualifications. 

 

The program and the financial implications of the federal proposal are difficult to assess. They say that 

another conference has been called in Ottawa on the 20th and 21st of December where the various 

provincial treasurers will meet again with the Minister of Finance to try and finalize the details of some 

of these proposals. 

 

Our Government is concerned that the proposal may distort the pattern of development of educational 

institutions. For example, the Federal Government‟s definition of “post-secondary students” could lead 

to an over-emphasis on technological and university training, to the detriment of trades training and 

secondary vocational education. In this regard our Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) has made further 

representations to the Federal Government. And some time this afternoon the Minister of Education (Mr. 

Trapp) will speak and try to give the House some of the details of the agreement as far as education is 

concerned, though I must emphasize again that some of the offers are still ambiguous and are still not 

quite clear as to the exact financial implications, nor is the Federal Government for that matter. 

 

If the definition is not broadened, Saskatchewan people, in one way or another, would have to finance 

100 per cent of the operating costs of all trades training at technical institutes, with a few exceptions. In 

addition, the province and local governments will have to finance 100 per cent of the operating costs of 

secondary vocational training and after the phase-out of capital assistance, 100 per cent of construction 

and equipment costs. 

 

Now, a number of definitions remain to be clarified. For example, the Federal Government has not yet 

clearly indicated precisely what it means by “operating costs” or what it means by “training costs of 

adults”. Nevertheless, it appears that while we gained some assistance on the basis of university needs, 

this advantage could be off-set by the loss of federal assistance for vocational, technical and 

apprenticeship training. As far as operating costs are concerned, the federal proposal offers little gain. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

193 

In other words, when the smoke had cleared away from the conference it appeared to us that with the 

one hand the Federal Government offered us more assistance for universities, but with the other hand it 

took away much of the assistance which it is today giving technical schools. And so when you put the 

two together we think we are a little further ahead but not much. 

 

On the whole we are extremely disappointed with the new federal-provincial tax proposals. In the face 

of mounting costs of provincial programs, we had hoped for additional assistance. Instead Saskatchewan 

was the only province in all Canada to receive less assistance. As a result we will be faced with an 

extremely difficult task, to finance provincial programs and services in the five-year period ahead. 

 

We recognize at the same time that the Federal Government is faced with its own financial 

responsibilities. We must hope here in this province that industrial and mining activity will continue to 

expand. The Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) mentioned here this morning the way it was 

expanding, thus widening the province‟s tax base. We must also hope that some changes can be made in 

Saskatchewan‟s favour, when we have an opportunity to review the agreement within the next two 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd: — Before the Premier takes his seat would he answer one question? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If I can. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — How much of the loss in equalization grants do you calculate to be due to the change in 

formula? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I was going to give these details in committee. If the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) wouldn‟t‟ mind I would prefer to get down to specific figures. I will give him that information in 

committee if it‟s alright. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few comments to those of the 

Premier on this subject of The Income Tax Bill and the larger subject of federal-provincial fiscal 

relations. Like the Premier I was extremely disappointed with the results of the forays of the 

Saskatchewan representatives to Ottawa. I believe that I am able to answer in a rough way the question 

which was just posed by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). If my calculations are right the 

reason for our loss of equalization is, as to 100 per cent, by reason of a change in formula and, as to 

absolutely zero, because of any increase in prosperity in Saskatchewan. The entire reason, 100 per cent 

of the reason, is because of the change of rules. And if the rules had not been changed, we would not be 

getting no equalization payments as under the present formula but in fact we would be getting more than 

the $34,000,000 we are talking about. 

 

If the rules had not been changed by the Government at Ottawa, we would not have lost a penny; we 

would have picked up money. So the reason for our loss is not because of any change 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

194 

 

in our circumstances in Saskatchewan but of the ineffectiveness of the Premier as a bargainer. We sent 

him down to Ottawa and he came back empty-handed. The Salesman of the Year has failed. 

 

I want to dwell a little bit on the background of this. As we all know this was one of a series of 

federal-provincial conferences. They used to be held once every five years but now seem to be more 

frequent than that. These conferences are symptomatic of a fundamental constitutional problem that we 

have in Canada. As we know by our constitution the Federal Government is given certain legislative 

responsibilities and the provinces are given certain taxing powers. And so long as the province‟s ability 

to raise taxes more or less equals the responsibility is which they wish to carry out, things went along 

reasonably well. But when the increase in demand for government services occurred after the war and 

since 1945 it has continued. And when the provincial financial resources were unable to meet these 

increased demands, we had a constitutional problem. The system broke down and it broke down because 

the areas in which the increase in demands for services occurred were provincial areas; education, 

health, welfare, highways. But the areas where it was easy to raise money were federal areas; income 

tax, corporation tax, estate tax. Now these are not exclusively federal areas by the constitution but they 

were pre-empted by the Federal Government during wartime; and at any rate for purely technical 

reasons it makes sense to raise this money by federal taxes. Provincial taxes in this field produce the tax 

jungle, if I may use a cliche which well describes a system of variable income taxes, corporation taxes 

and estate taxes across Canada. 

 

Since 1945 we have been grappling with this problem. There are at least three theoretical solutions. We 

could turn over provincial legislative responsibility to the Federal Government and this we have done a 

bit of. Old age pensions have gone to the Federal Government exclusively. Unemployment insurance 

has gone to the Federal Government exclusively. These used to be provincial concerns. But this 

tendency which makes sense to some of us has been strongly resisted by some of the provinces, notably 

the province of Quebec. 

 

Now, there is another theoretical solution. We could have the Federal Government raise the money and 

parcel out the money to the provincial governments on perhaps a grant system of some kind. We can do 

this by tax sharing or we can do this by shared cost programs. And we have been doing lots of this since 

1945. The tax-sharing arrangements which have continued since 1945 are an example of this. And so are 

such cost-sharing arrangements as the National Hospital Plan, the Canada Assistance Plan, the 

Trans-Canada Highways, federal university grants, national health grants, you name it. But again these 

are being resisted by a good number of provinces, this whole tendency of the Federal Government 

raising the money and paying it out for what are provincial purposes according to the Constitution. 

 

There is yet another theoretical solution and that is for the Federal Government to back off taxing 

powers, allow the provinces to tax, and tell them to go and tax and spend as they like. Now, this is what 

we are seeing in the last few years. 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

195 

This is what the tax abatement adds up to and this is what the Bill which is before us adds up to, a 

further four points of tax abatement for income tax and one per cent of corporate income tax abatement. 

 

Now, this problem is not a simple one to solve. If we could agree to be Canadians instead of being from 

Saskatchewan or from Quebec or as the case may be, then we could solve this problem by having our 

Federal Government do things for us which we now ask our provincial governments to do. But 

provincial loyalties are seemingly too strong for this. On the other hand we could continue with the 

Federal Government raising money and the provincial governments spending the money. This one is 

criticized because it is said to be undesirable for one government to raise the money and another 

government to spend it. And I think there is some force in that argument. As you will find out, if you can 

bear with me and I can forgive you if you can‟t, as you will find out I well believe that this is the most 

acceptable solution to the problem. 

 

But there is a third possible solution and that is the one of giving the provinces taxing powers now 

exercised by the Federal Government. By this device of having the Federal Government back off and the 

provincial government move in, I say that we gravely weaken the Federal Government and we may 

make it impossible for it to do the things which we as Canadians have every right to expect our Federal 

Government to do and that is to assure some measure of equal regional development in Canada, to 

provide some equality of opportunity for all Canadians and to regulate the economy to the extent 

necessary to provide prosperity and full employment. 

 

Now, the stand of Saskatchewan in my view should be stated clearly and here I think there is no real 

difference between ourselves and Members opposite. We must stand for a strong Federal Government. 

We cannot willingly see Canada fiscally dismembered. We must stand and stand firmly for the right of 

every Canadian to share the fruits of the natural resources and the human ingenuity which we have in 

our country and we must insist on a Federal Government which is strong enough to make these bold 

declarations of principle mean something. We must insist on a government which is strong enough to 

ensure prosperity for Canada as a whole, insofar as we can do this in Canada, and strong enough to 

underwrite a fair chance in life for every Canadian. 

 

Now, in today‟s context this means that in general terms we must oppose this tendency of the federal 

government backing out of tax fields and the provincial government taking them over. We must 

advocate the federal government retaining its taxing powers and distributing the tax yield from these 

taxes on an equal basis across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve done no more now than outline the background of the present problem and set out the 

views and objectives which I and my colleagues have expressed on many previous occasions and which 

by and large I think Members opposite agree with. 

 

How far do the proposals put forward by the Federal Government in the last few weeks achieve these 

objectives? Let‟s look first at the income, corporation and estate taxes. For the sake of brevity I will call 

these standard taxes. This is a sort of 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

196 

 

a shorthand for saying income, corporation and estate taxes applied nationally at national standard rates. 

Our position on these taxes is well known. We say that to a very large extent personal incomes, 

corporation profits, and large estates are accumulated in those provinces where there are large industries, 

industries like the auto industry, or the electrical industry, or the rubber goods industry. And where are 

these industries? Largely in Quebec, Ontario and to a less extent in British Columbia. And why? 

Because we as Canadians have decided that we are going to have industry in Canada. We have erected 

tariffs and the industries have located there. Without tariffs many of these industries would disappear. 

But all Canadians pay these tariffs and it is our submission that all Canadians should share in the taxes 

which are created by the personal incomes, corporate profits, and estates generated by those incomes. 

Simply put, standard taxes in our view should be equalized to the per capita level of the highest 

province. 

 

Now, over the years this principle has come to be accepted more or less. During the past few years the 

standard taxes we distributed among provinces so that no province received less per capita than the 

average of the highest two provinces. The Premier has just told us that. Canadians have every right to 

expect that full equal treatment was the next step but what does the new formula do? It does not equalize 

these standard taxes to the highest province. It does not equalize them even to the highest two provinces. 

It equalized them only to the Canadian average. 

 

Canadians in provinces where the standard tax yields more than the national average are first class 

citizens entitled to a high level of services. Canadian citizens in other provinces where the yield for these 

is less than the Canadian average are second class citizens, who should be satisfied with a lower level of 

roads or schools, so say the Government at Ottawa. 

 

Now, I said the we had every reason to believe that the next logical step was equalizing to the top 

province. But there was one thing that perhaps should have put us on our guard. There was one thing 

which should have suggested to us that we were not going to get equal treatment and that thing was this, 

that the Liberal Government promised it. Perhaps we should have known right then that we were in 

trouble. During the 1963 election campaign, it was promised verbally by the Prime Minister, it was 

printed in their election brochures, you will find it in Mr. Pickersgill‟s books. As the Federal 

Government in their election pamphlet said, “A new Liberal government will make equalization 

payments which will bring the other provinces up to the level of the richest in revenue per head from 

shared taxes”. Pretty clear. Now it may well be that the old Liberal Minister of Finance actually meant 

that. We may well have got it from Gordon but we were skewered by Sharp. We, Mr. Speaker, have 

been the victims of „Sharp‟ practice. We are the victims of another broken Liberal promise and this 

„Sharp‟ practice is going to cost the citizens of Saskatchewan and of Manitoba and of some of the other 

provinces millions of dollars over the years. The people that will benefit will be people like those who 

live in Mr. Sharp‟s constituency of Eglinton. 

 

I now turn, Mr. Speaker, to the new element that has been introduced into the sharing formula, the 

so-called prosperity index. This is an effort to list all the taxes which provincial 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

197 

governments raise and to try to calculate the national yield from these taxes and, if any province gets 

less than the national yield, to average to the Canadian average. 

 

As a general principle, I have no unalterable object to considering all sources of revenue when trying to 

estimate fiscal capacity. But I may say that there are some pretty fair arguments for not doing that. 

Income is still the fairest way to assess the ability of people to pay taxes. I don‟t really see why, as a 

matter of principle, we in Saskatchewan should be considered richer because we have to spend more 

money on gasoline to get around this vast province of ours. But there is the effect of the new index. We 

have to spend more money on gasoline, more money on cars; this produces more gas tax. The 

conclusion which is drawn from that is that Saskatchewan is somehow richer. 

 

Furthermore, another really basic argument against this index is that it has taken provincial taxes as they 

are, not as provinces would like to be, but as they are. Provinces don‟t tax what they like to tax. They tax 

what can be caught. They tax what stands still to be taxed and there is no reason necessarily to believe 

that the taxes which are presently levied by the provinces are as fair as they might be. If, as it now 

appears, we are in effect going to levy these taxes nationally then there are some better ways to do it. Let 

me illustrate. We now tax clothing in this province but not air travel. Why don‟t we tax air travel? Not 

because we don‟t think air travel is just as appropriate a thing to tax as clothing; it‟s just that it‟s difficult 

to tax it on a provincial basis. We now tax gasoline but not rail travel. Again hard to tax rail travel on a 

provincial basis. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Would the hon. Member say that it would unconstitutional on either of those? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, oh yes, I‟m sorry. I‟m not making myself thoroughly clear here. We tax paper 

but not telephone services. Now, what I would like to see — and I would like to see the provinces 

advocate this — is that the Federal Government levy on these types of things a tax at the relatively 

standard provincial rate — if it looks like four per cent is the going rate of sales taxes — pick up some 

of these taxes on a national basis and distribute them to the provinces. The province of Alberta had a 

proposal something like this. It had a sort of a turnover tax idea collected federally and distributed 

provincially. I am not saying their idea is a good one but I think that there are a good number of things 

which are not now taxed on a sales tax basis., not because we don‟t think it would be equitable to tax 

them but simply because we can‟t get them provincially. And if we are going to levy this tax nationally 

— in effect this is what this formula amounts to — then it seems to me that there is merit in asking the 

Federal Government to pick up some of these areas and put this money in the pot. I think it would have 

real merit for Saskatchewan. 

 

I want now to deal with a couple of other objections to this index as I see it. The previous equalization 

was based upon income, estate and corporation taxes. Now we have consumption taxes in the 

equalization pot, sales taxes, we have gas 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

198 

 

taxes and those are the big consumption taxes, I suppose, liquor profits. Now what does this mean? 

Consumption taxes produce a yield which is based not only upon the income of people in a given area 

but on the distribution of that income. Let me put this example. Suppose you had two provinces, 

Province A and province B. In province A there were two men living there, only two. One had an 

income of $10,000 and one had an income of $10,000. Average income $10,000. In province B one man 

had an income of $15,000 and one man hand an income of $5,000. Average income $10,000. On the 

statistics province A with the equalized income is going to have more consumer spending because when 

money is distributed more or less evenly you get more consumer spending and more consumer tax, more 

consumer tax potential. Now, you say that is a pretty fine line of argument. Well look at the 

consequences. Under this formula Saskatchewan does not collect any equalization payments yet in 1964 

and 1965 average income in Saskatchewan was below the Canadian average. Now I realize this is partly 

due to resource revenues but it is partly due to income distribution. What sort of a formula is it where we 

are below the Canadian average income comes for our citizens but we are above the Canadian average 

in provincial fiscal capacity? Well, you can look at the figures and you can see the reason. We are above 

it partly because of resource revenue but partly because we spend a lot of money on things which 

produce sales taxes and particularly gasoline taxes on motor vehicles. I figure that our excess spending, 

if I may put it that way, over the Canadian average in motor vehicles costs us $10,000,000 on this 

equalization formula. Now I am not sure if this is a really fair index and I say that it seems to me that 

this index — and I will come to the reasons for it a little later — is loaded against the provinces where 

income is distributed more or less evenly. And if this is the result, then I suggest it‟s a perverse result. 

Anyone who wants to pursue this idea simply can pick up the figures of average income for Quebec and 

Saskatchewan and they are very close. Look what the average spending per capita is and it is very much 

higher in Saskatchewan, spending on taxable goods. You can figure out your own reasons for that but 

that‟s what the figures show. 

 

Now the other area that I want to comment on is the treatment of resource revenue. I don‟t want to say 

much upon this because it may well be that one of my colleagues will have a few words to add. But it 

appears that this index is loaded against provinces which try to get the maximum amount of revenue out 

of their resources. It looks to me that it will encourage a give away of resources. Not, I may say, that the 

Government opposite needs much encouragement, but at least that is the result of it. It appears that if 

resources are disposed of, produce of minimum of royalty yield, but a maximum of some other type of 

benefits than that province is bonused. The province which goes out after high royalties suffers from this 

formula. Of course all sorts of possibilities occur to one, that we ought to say to the potash companies, 

“You don‟t have to pay any royalties provided you build a road and a school and a hospital, and there is 

just not going to be any royalties until you have built them”. This has some interesting possibilities and 

so indeed has the handling of bonus bids. It looks to me like our oil revenue is costing us, under this 

formula, at a rough guess $25,000,000 a year, and that‟s a lot of money that we lose in equalization. It 

looks to me that this could be vastly decreased, the loss could be decreased, if we went on a net royalty 

basis rather 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

199 

than a straight bonus bid basis. I confess that I haven‟t checked out the figures but it certainly looks to 

me that there is a real potential there. 

 

The other area that I want to comment on, on the index as such, is the fact that it doesn‟t take into 

account municipal revenues at all. You will know that there is no real difference between municipal 

revenues and provincial revenues. It is a pure matter of convenience or history. The land tax is a 

provincial tax in New Brunswick. The sales tax is a municipal tax in Quebec. So there is no necessary 

difference between municipal taxes and provincial taxes but municipal taxes are not included; and if 

they were included in the formula, on my figures Saskatchewan would get some equalization. It 

wouldn‟t be much but it would be three or four million dollars a year. But they have been excluded, and 

under the formula Saskatchewan gets nothing. 

 

The other major area of complaint about the index is the fact that it is purely measured income and not 

out-go. It considers only the ability of a province to raise money and not the need of a province to spend 

money. Now Saskatchewan has a good level of income, has had for some years, but we have high 

expenses. It costs us more because our people are dispersed over a wide geographical area. It costs us 

more money to provide education and health, it costs us a good deal of money to provide for highways 

and roads. And I feel that an index of fiscal capacity ought to make some attempt to measure not only 

fiscal income but needed fiscal out-go, and that the index doesn‟t do. 

 

I suggest, therefore, that there are pretty grievous short-comings in this index. I would hope that when 

our officials and our elected representatives go next to Ottawa that they would press for refinements of 

this index which will make it fairer to Saskatchewan. I think that we have been, as I said earlier, 

skewered by the Federal Government by Mr. Sharp and I feel that the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) ought to 

try his gifts of salesmanship in that department. He didn‟t do very well the first time but we could hope 

for better things the next time. Really we are only saved from a real disaster by the transitional payments 

which the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) has mentioned. 

 

I want now to say a few words about the educational formula. All I can say is that it seems to me a very, 

very difficult formula, and I think it doesn‟t get any simpler when you try to find out the definitions. I 

will, therefore, make a few comments which are more general in scope and I think that one of my 

colleagues will be adding a few more direct comments. The old formula provided — again I will use 

round figures — $5.00 per citizen of Saskatchewan for university training, 50-50 sharing for technical 

training and 75-25 sharing for technical capital costs. The new formula provided that people who are out 

into the labor force will be retrained at the federal expense exclusively, that we will pick up 50 per cent 

of the cost of operating universities and post-secondary educational institutions, and as far secondary 

education this will be entirely our responsibility. 

 

I think a look at the proceedings at that conference makes it very, very clear that we in Saskatchewan 

have been doing very, very little in the field of technical education. The amount of money . . . 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

200 

 

 Mr. Thatcher: — You had twenty years . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We had most of it with Liberal governments in Ottawa who offered nothing. We did 

more certainly in the last two years of the CCF administration than the Liberals did in the first two years 

of their administration, or in the last three years. You are trying hard to catch up. The Premier is 

advising us that the delay in the building of the technical school at North Battleford is a frantic effort to 

catch up. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Weyburn . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Weyburn, this is their approach to technical education. Taking an old building, when 

you can get 75 per cent of the cost of a new building from the Federal Government, you are using an old 

building which will be technically much less efficient and will offer the young people of Saskatchewan a 

much lesser opportunity to share in the fruits of technical training. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Sour grapes. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Sour grapes, boy that is one area in which we have no regret on the sour grapes score 

and that is the technical education. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, I think the nature of the interruptions from the opposite side was well described 

by my Leader this morning, (Mr. Lloyd) and so I will make no comment on those. I will simply return, 

although I don‟t wonder that they would want to heckle and hector in the field of technical education 

because let‟s say in the two years from 192 to 1964 we got from the Federal Government $3,500,00, and 

in the two years from 1964 to 1966 the Government opposite got a good deal less than half of that 

figure, I think about one-third. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Nonsense. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Oh yes, and at a time when the need was getting more critical their failure is obvious, 

painful and dismal. 

 

With respect to university education I am very, very pleased to note that there will be more money for 

the universities. I urge the Government to see that this additional aid is not cut off by the bandits at 

Treasury Gulch but surely finds its way to the universities. Surely we certainly deplore what has been 

happening. Entrance standards have been raised and see what this does, Mr. Speaker. People who 

previously were able to get university education in Saskatchewan if they had a 60 per cent average can 

no longer get that education in Saskatchewan, they have to go to another province. This is called 

keeping our youth at home. And you, Mr. Speaker, and I know that one of the main reasons why the 

United States is a wealthier society than we are is the fact that they have trained their people of good 

average intelligence. It is not because their universities are any better than ours; it is that they take 

people not only of the highest academic bracket but people of good average intelligence and give them a 

proper training the university field. The 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

201 

result is that perhaps 40 per cent of people in the university age group go to university in the United 

States. In Canada it may be 15 or 20 per cent. I would have thought that there would be real efforts to 

increase that figure of 15 or 20 per cent. It can be done. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You had 20 years. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It was done remarkably, and at no time were entrance standards raised to keep people 

out of the universities. Mr. Speaker, in two short years of alleged prosperity the Government opposite 

has seen fit to raise entrance standards because they simply cannot or will not provide the physical 

facilities for our universities to operate. They have similarly raised fees at a time when across Canada 

we would have thought the tendency was the other way. The Premier (Mr. Thatcher) has said in his 

public speeches time and time again that he approves this idea of rationing enrolment by the purse. He is 

going to raise them more; they have got to stand 20 per cent of the cost, yes, sir. Now this is what he 

says. Now I would hope that when this additional federal money comes into the provincial coffers he 

will see that some of it gets to the university so that these young people who are now being barred the 

benefits of university education and are having to go elsewhere to get it will share the fruits of this 

prosperity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I think my real criticism of the performance of the Premier at Ottawa is 

the fact that he went there out-manned and out-gunned. In days past we had the best negotiating team of 

federal-provincial relations in Canada. We had Mr. Al Johnson and Mr. Jim Lynn, and Mr. Tom 

Shoyama, Mr. Don Tansley, and Mr. Bob McLarty and Mr. Art Wakabayashi, and Mr. Roy Lloyd. We 

had the horses. Now these fellows are the backbone of three of the negotiating teams. 

 

Hon. Mr. Steuart: — Who do you . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I don‟t know. If you fellows can‟t negotiate you shouldn‟t be in there; you 

should allow someone in there who can negotiate. We never went to Ottawa and came back that 

empty-handed. We went there because we had the horses and we kept the horses. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You were so poor . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — These men were the backbone of three of the negotiating teams. Now I think the 

Premier (Mr. Thatcher) knows, we all know what was going on at Ottawa. The Federal Government had 

to find a formula which was going to put some more money into the hands of the province of Quebec. 

We know that, for reasons which I don‟t think we need to speculate on, they felt that they had to get 

some money over to Quebec. And what happened? Mr. Sharp is the person who put forward the 

proposal, and this is the proposal. The Federal Government offered $115,000,000 more . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yes, Mr. Mitchell Sharp, a Socialist, yes, yes. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

202 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Quebec got $95,000,000, Newfoundland $20,000,000, Nova Scotia, $20,000,000. 

New Brunswick $12,000,000, Saskatchewan minus $34,000,000. That‟s the negotiating performance of 

Members opposite. Now what was the problem? Quebec is a province which is characterized by fair 

average incomes but a big spread between rich and poor. They had to come up with a formula which 

was going to bonus that kind of income distribution and to do this Saskatchewan would get it in the 

neck. And what we had to do was to come up with a formula which would give Quebec a piece of 

money and not hit Saskatchewan so hard. And that we failed to do. We weren‟t able to pull it off 

because we were out-manned and out-gunned. We just didn‟t have the horses. Now this is no reflection 

on Mr. Wakabayashi or Mr. Lloyd. What we needed was more stars on our team and fewer stars on 

theirs. If we don‟t win a ball game it doesn‟t say that our quarterback is no good, it doesn‟t say that our 

centre is no good, it may be that we don‟t have five or six people who are good. That is what happened 

to us. 

 

Mr. Nollet (Cutknife): — Fire the coach. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — HEAR, HEAR!! This little exodus of public servants which the Premier bragged 

about just cost Saskatchewan people a good number of millions of dollars and that gets pretty expensive 

spite, even by Mr. Thatcher‟s standards. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what can we say about this whole matter? I think that we can say that it is a dismal 

performance by Canadian governments. The brave concept of co-operative federalism is still just a 

slogan. There has been no progress towards developing a national fiscal policy which recognizes that 

growth can come best only when all levels of government work in concert. The new equalization or 

averagization formula is a dangerous retreat from the concept of Canadianism which was painfully 

developing. Once again a national average has been set as the norm, necessarily creating second class 

citizens. Regional disparity continues and with them will regional discontent continue and that is the 

Achilles heel of Canada. Indeed the federal approach of go and raise your own taxes is an abdication of 

national leadership. Now this completely characterizes the Pearson regime. They have no concept of 

Canada, they have bargained and bartered away federal power with nothing in view except to get by 

another crisis. They operate on the premise that to keep Canada together in any form for a day, or a 

week, or a month, is some kind of a victory, and when you come to think of it I suppose they are right. 

With the present Government in Ottawa keeping Canada together for a week is not only a victory it is a 

miracle. The Federal Government has talked about retaining federal powers so that it can perform the 

proper responsibilities, the responsibilities which I mentioned earlier, guaranteeing national prosperity 

and full employment, and guaranteeing to every Canadian a fair share of that prosperity, but even while 

it talked every move it made reduced its power to do these things. It would not take a stand, seemingly it 

could not take a stand and I am convinced the only reason the Pearson government ever takes a stand on 

anything is because it can‟t make up its mind where to fall. We have seen a retreat from the concepts of 

Canadianism, a retreat deplored by the Government opposite — I know that — but about which it was 

able to do nothing. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

203 

Mr. Nollet: — You agree to that, Ross? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It has largely disarmed itself before it started. It relied heavily on the weapon of press 

release and that was not enough and so Saskatchewan lost out. It was dealing with a government at 

Ottawa which regards everything as negotiable and in order to get by, that government surrendered yet 

another piece of the fabric of a strong Canada. It surrendered to narrow regional interests and Canada 

lost out. A dismal story. All we can do at this time is surrender to the inevitable for the term of this 

agreement and trust that an opportunity in the future will occur so that we can stand for Canada, and that 

day will come. It will come when Liberal governments at Ottawa and at Regina are removed from the 

trust which they have betrayed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — For the sake of Canada I hope and believe that that day will not be long delayed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members I would like to correct a 

statement or an impression left by the hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). The decision to 

raise university entrance requirements was made by the university and it was made and decided — and 

he knows it — during his term of office as a part of the Government. Let‟s not try to shelve it on 

somebody else. I know because I was around at that time in education; this decision was made during 

your term of office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in his statement the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) has given in broad outline the changes 

proposed by the Government of Canada in regard to federal support for higher educational and adult 

training. As he has indicated, the fiscal implications of these changes cannot yet be fully evaluated. 

However, in general it does not appear that this province will gain materially in an over-all financial 

sense from the new proposals. This will ultimately depend on final decisions on points which are still 

under discussion with federal authorities. 

 

In order to view the new situation in its proper perspective, I wish to draw the attention of Members to 

certain relevant factors which are in our present program and plans for the future. I consider it important 

as well to examine the basis on which the Federal Government views its role in educational 

development. 

 

In common with other provinces, Saskatchewan has experienced since World War II a very sharp 

increase in school population. This is particularly evident at the secondary school level, where enrolment 

has almost doubled since 1946. High school graduates have more than doubled in this period. At the 

same time, and more especially in very recent years, economic growth has accelerated in the fields of 

natural resources development, industrialization, and in our basic industry of agriculture. However, 

modern technological developments in these fields have placed 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

204 

 

an increasing strain on the supply of well-educated and well-trained personnel. There is virtually full 

employment for all who have the skills required for modern conditions. But there remain what we 

consider serious problems among those of our people whose education and training are insufficient to 

equip them for the opportunities now open to them in the world of work and business. We must be 

concerned with those in the adult population whose skills must be upgraded or even developed in new 

directions; and we must make proper provisions for all young people in terms of their abilities and 

interests in the world of work and in terms of their capacities to function effectively in an economic and 

social sense, both for themselves and for the common good of the community and the province. 

 

Recognizing the need for expanded education and training programs, we have seen rapid growth in 

university facilities and in the technical institutes. At the university the enrolment of full-time students 

has almost doubled in the past five years. In the past four years enrolments at the technical institutes 

were raised from 2,175 to 4,310. Just doubled. Upgrading of the unemployed persons has risen from 669 

in 1965 to 1,000 in 1966, and is expected to reach 1,200 in the present academic year. Last year some 

300 persons received training in programs carried out in co-operation with industry. This figure will rise 

to 500 in the current year. The most recent development to increase training facilities was the opening of 

the Weyburn Vocational Centre where courses and facilities in various trades (13 or 14 at the present 

time) are available to at least 250 trainees. 

 

Quite apart from the specialized training already referred to, we have undertaken to revamp the 

secondary school program to provide basic preparation at the high school level, leading to matriculation, 

to technical institute admission and to trades and other pre-employment courses. The new 

comprehensive high schools came into operation this year, and some eight or ten others are in various 

states of planning. 

 

The basic objective of our over-all plan is: (a) to provide secondary programs and facilities accessible to 

all students, and of such a type as to meet the needs of all students; (b) to develop post-secondary 

programs which will serve the needs of all young people in preparing them for useful an profitable 

careers; and (c) to design training programs for upgrading adults, both unemployed and 

under-employed. 

 

The foregoing involves a massive and complicated process of planning and very large expenditures of 

funds both for operational and capital purposes. 

 

Without going into details of these expenditures, it is however of importance to note that these programs 

are paid for from local, provincial and federal funds. Under the old agreements, support was based on 

the principle of cost-sharing. The effect of this was, to a large extent, that the province and the school 

boards were strongly influenced by the incentives provided by the agreements. In the new proposals, the 

principal of cost-sharing as such is replaced by a more flexible arrangement under which funds are 

available to the province for application to education as it sees fit in regard to program. The Federal 

Government has made it clear that its essential concern is with post-secondary and adult training 

programs, leaving 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

205 

primary and secondary education clearly in the control of the province, to be developed by the province 

without the pressures inherent in incentive grants, such as those which were built-in features of the old 

agreement. 

 

I wish to turn now to some specific areas of the new federal proposals, capital construction grants. 

Under the present agreement, which expires on March 31st, 1967, the province has a quota of 

$35,000,00 of federal funds available on a 75-25 per cent sharing basis for the construction of provincial 

technical institutes, trade schools, and the technical-vocational components of comprehensive high 

schools. This provision will not be renewed in the new agreement, although the present quota will 

remain available to the province until it has been used. In addition, $23,000,000 of additional moneys 

will be allocated to the province on a 50-50 sharing basis for the same purposes. We estimate that, 

taking account of capital expenditures made to date together with projects which will be under way in 

the next fiscal year, the original quota of $35,000,000 will be fully approved or spent by March 31st, 

1968. The additional allotment of $23,000,000 to be shared on a 50-50 basis may take care of building 

requirements for a period of four or five years after 1968, following which the province and local 

authorities will be responsible for 100 per cent of the cost of capital construction. We feel considerable 

concern over this prospect, for it is unlikely that all major building requirements will be met by 1973. 

 

Turning to post-secondary education, the new federal plan will provide 50 per cent reimbursement of 

operating costs incurred in post-secondary education. This will certainly apply to technology programs 

in the institutes, to the university and junior colleges and other post-secondary programs which may be 

developed. The impact of this proposal is dependent on the precise definition given to post-secondary 

education. We have taken the position that, for purposes of definition, post-secondary should include all 

programs in any educational institution for which junior matriculation or its equivalent is the normal 

admission requirement. If our representations on this point are successful, federal support well in excess 

of $1,000,000 would be available to provide additional support for post-secondary education. The 50 per 

cent support formula provides a built-in means of meeting escalation of costs at the post-secondary 

level. The province may, however, elect to accept a simple flat grant of $15 per capita of the population. 

The per capita grant will increase as costs of post-secondary education rise in Canada as a whole. 

 

On the basis of present costs estimates and present definitions, both formulas appear to yield the 

province approximately the same net return of federal support, namely some $14,475,000. However, the 

decision on the option to be selected will depend on the nature and extent of future plans and on a 

definitive statement of what is post-secondary education, what will be included in operating costs, and 

what is an „adult‟ under the proposed federal manpower training program. At the moment it would 

appear that, if our plans were to exceed the national average in terms of development, the greater 

advantage would lie in the 50 per cent sharing formula. 

 

Turning to adult training, the third feature of the new federal proposals and the one which is to us least 

satisfactory 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

206 

 

is that related to adult training. Heretofore, the province has been able to recover 50 per cent of training 

costs of programs for persons in trade or other pre-employment courses which did not require 

matriculation standing. This is no longer to be the case. The Manpower Department defines an adult, for 

the payment of 100 per cent of training costs by the Federal Government, as a person who is in the labor 

force and/or who is at least one year beyond the legal school leaving age (in Saskatchewan that would be 

17 years) and has been out of schools for at least twelve months. The implications of this are that 

students leaving the regular school system before completing junior matriculation are not eligible for 

training allowances and the training programs do not qualify for federal support. Hence, in effect, the 

province must assume full responsibility for a very large part of the training costs of trainees who enter 

the trades courses which require only Grade X standing. This involves a group of young people who 

bulk rather large in the training programs, and we take a very serious view of this provision. Again we 

have made strong representations, urging the need for recognition of trade training for federal support. 

 

It should be noted that, for those eligible for support under the Manpower Department program, the 

Federal Department will assume 100 per cent of the cost of training and allowances. The training will be 

provided by the province on the basis of 100 per cent recovery of cost. To be eligible for training 

allowances, which are generous, an individual must have the economic status of an adult or must have 

been in the labor force for at least three years. This three year condition may be waived for persons with 

dependants. We feel this is too restrictive and that it will tend to discourage young people from entering 

the very large and important field of the trades. For this reason we are pressing for modification of this 

provision. 

 

On balance, and on the basis of such definitive statements of policy which have been made concerning 

federal support, it is our view that the new federal proposals for education provide a combination of 

pluses and minuses which place us in approximately the same net position on operating costs as we are 

under the present cost-sharing agreements. 

 

Support for post-secondary education will be increased in respect to operating costs, more particularly 

because universities and colleges will come within the formula. Also, the Federal Government will 

assume full responsibility for training of persons who qualify as adults under its own definition. 

 

On the other hand, the Federal Government is withdrawing from the field of secondary education, 

leaving full fiscal responsibilities to local and provincial authorities. Likewise students entering 

pre-employment courses in the technical institutes directly from high school will no longer be covered in 

any way by federal support. Our calculations of operating costs on the basis of data presently variable 

and on proposed definitions of post-secondary education, operating costs, and adult, lead us clearly to 

the conclusion that we will be little, if any, better off than under the former agreement. However, we 

have made the strongest possible representations to federal authorities in the hope of more variable 

applications of the definitions to which I have referred. These are now under consideration and there 

will be further consultations between federal officials and my department in the very near future. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

207 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened with a good deal of interest this 

afternoon to explanations and criticisms that have been voiced in this House of the so-called 

federal-provincial formula as it applies in the Bill that is before this House. I have also been amused by 

the occasional trip to the vineyard looking for sour grapes. I hope that throughout the entire debate there 

will be some thought given to the future when these matters are discussed and when the governments 

must engage in negotiations once again for the future revenue sources for our province. 

 

Now, it‟s fairly obvious that the technical reason for the special session is merely a simple amendment 

to The Income Tax Act, but I feel that the real question before this House and the question which will 

undoubtedly continue to be before this House for some considerable time is the raising of revenue in 

Saskatchewan under the new federal-provincial proposals. It is, indeed, as other hon. Members have 

said, a very vital subject. It was mentioned by the member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) that 

Canada faces many crises. Our national experiment, like many another, is beset by hazards and many 

problematical difficulties. And surely among these must be prominently noted the question of Canadian 

federalism, the delicate and critical relationships between the Federal Government and the Provinces. 

And this matter involved not only the allocation of revenues and the coordination of fiscal efforts, it 

provides an examination of the theoretical bases of these relationships. Indeed, in my opinion, Mr. 

Speaker, it is difficult to suitably evaluate the merit of these financial proposals without entertaining 

some basic notions as to the fundamental nature of what has been described as our confederation. 

Couple that problem, the problem of defining in your own mind what confederation means, with the 

problem of the complexity of the proposals that were made earlier in the year by the Government in 

Ottawa. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier and just a moment ago, the hon. Minister of Education 

(Mr. Trapp) have done a very laudable job in explaining as best they can the situation resulting from the 

new federal proposals made at the October federal-provincial conference. While we are not here being 

asked to approve or disapprove specifically acceptance or rejections of such proposals, their very 

existence, in fact, necessitates a good deal of long-range thinking on the part of all of us. And any such 

long-range thinking is difficult enough at best considering the complexity of the subject matter with 

which we deal. It is far more difficult to do any real long-range intelligent thinking without any facts at 

all other than what one might get in the odd newspaper article. I am accordingly indebted to the Premier, 

Mr. Speaker, for in response to a letter from me he was good enough to make available to me as much 

general information as he could concerning the new federal-provincial proposals. I don‟t mind readily 

admitting that without such information I would have been even more concerned about the vacuum in 

which this debate is being conducted. This is a real concern to me because I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

many Members in this House are taking part, by their presence, in this debate without any real concept 

of what is involved and what is going on simply because of the tremendous lack of information that has 

been made available to individual Members. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

208 

 

To begin with, we can and we should all take some degree of pride in the economic strides taken by our 

province that have brought us into a „have‟ position and I say that in all sincerity. The progress of our 

province has, by the figures at any rate, placed us in this „have‟ position. It‟s perfectly obvious that in 

spite of that, if we are forced to accept a literal application of being a „have‟ province at this time, we 

would lose, as it were at one stroke of the pen, something like $33,000,000 of revenue in the coming 

year. The whole tax and revenue-producing structure in this province would be placed in great jeopardy 

if that were to be allowed to take place. I think that in this particular regard we must all agree that the 

Premier and the provincial delegation as a whole that attended the conference last fall are to be 

commended for working out the arrangements that they did, namely a gradual reduction of the 

$33,000,000 at approximately, as I understand it, $7,000,000 per year over the next five years. 

 

Now, it would be nice indeed, in fact, it would perhaps give us quite a glow of pride if we could say that 

being a „have‟ province we don‟t need any further revenue-adjustment payments from the federal 

treasuries and that these revenues could then be used in provinces that are less well off than ourselves. 

And admirable though this may be under the circumstances at the present time, of course, it is 

completely impractical. I don‟t think that even having the Grey Cup in Saskatchewan could entirely 

offset the difficulties that would be encountered with an immediate $33,000,000 slice out of our 

provincial revenues. 

 

Now, having said these things, Mr. Speaker, having given some considerable thought to the proposals 

that were outlined at the federal conference and the implications of them for Saskatchewan, and having 

also considered the implication of what we are being asked to do here in ratifying or agreeing to pass 

this Bill, I have jotted down seven different questions and thoughts that I would like to place on the 

record at this time dealing with this matter. I have very little information, as I said, available on the 

forecast for the future of what these arrangements are going to be and therefore I believe that some of 

the questions that I would like to ask and which could be answered perhaps later on in committee or by 

subsequent speakers, would be germane to be debate at the moment. 

 

The first point that I want to make is that we are all aware of the heavy tax burden already imposed on 

the residents of this province. Now that savings could be made in areas of government programs I have 

no doubt, the Premier himself has championed this idea since taking office some two or two and a half 

years ago., It‟s too early yet for any of us to really know how successful or otherwise he has been, but a 

saving in money alone on existing programs is, in my opinion, no answer to both a reduction in revenue 

and the fact that much more has to be done in the province than is now being done in many areas. Relief 

from the property taxes for the financing of education is but one area to which greater and greater 

attention must be paid. I can only guess that, even if the economy in Saskatchewan should remain 

buoyant and continue to produce ever-increasing revenues at the same rate as in now being experienced, 

there will not be sufficient funds realized from existing taxes at the existing rate to make up for the loss 

of revenue from federal equalization payments. The great question then that I would like to hear 

answered, Mr. Speaker, and that must be in the minds of all of 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

209 

us is: What does the Government intend to do by way of replacing from provincial sources revenue lost 

from the cutting back of equalization payments? 

 

A second point. A serious question that remains wide open in my mind is the possibility at any time of a 

crop failure in this province. The Premier himself, I noted, in speaking to the conference last fall made it 

clear that Saskatchewan‟s economy was precariously poised on a series of good farm crops. I hesitate, as 

I am sure all Members do, to try and think of what just one crop failure would do. I noted when the 

Premier was speaking a short while ago that he mentioned something about the Federal Government 

providing a type of guarantee, a type of stabilization payment based on a guarantee that provincial 

revenues would not drop below a certain percentage point. I could be confused on that. I am not sure if 

that was precisely what he implied. But the inference I had was that the level would be guaranteed as a 

floor. Now, this may be but I would like to know what safeguards there are beyond this in the current 

federal-provincial proposals against such an economic catastrophe occurring in this province. It seems to 

me that there must be a tremendous degree of flexibility in any formula that would pick up the very 

difficult situation that we would face, not in a matter of one year but in the matter of a month or two, 

should there be an obvious crop failure apparent in a given year. 

 

The third point. It has been explained that the Federal Government has agreed to re-examine the 

federal-provincial revenue relationship at the end of two years rather than wait for the full five years 

projected for the new arrangement. Just what is encompassed in re-examination? Something I don‟t 

know and I would however like assurances from this Government that such proposed re-examination 

could take place at any time, whether two years from now or otherwise, in the event of a change in status 

of Saskatchewan with respect to the other provinces of Canada. The change in status might come about 

through crop failures or many other factors. The real question is: What if it does come about? What if 

suddenly we are again a have-not province instead of a have province? What machinery or mechanics 

are available to take into account any such change in status? 

 

The fourth point was one that was discussed at some length by the hon. Minister (Mr. Trapp) a few 

moments ago, and that is the Federal Government and its assistance grants for vocational training 

schools. We are told that the Federal Government intends to get out of the business of capital grants. It‟s 

true that they are not getting out as quickly as they had intended to but still they are getting out of this 

field. This means that Saskatchewan cannot take as much long-range advantage of this program, as it 

might have, had this program not been disturbed. The Premier has stated that Saskatchewan has taken 

full advantage of this program in the last year or two. I was quite interested in the debate and the 

cross-fire in the House a few moments ago dealing with who had build the most and the best. All I say, 

Mr. Speaker, is that neither the previous Government nor the present one has taken complete advantage 

of the offer that was made by a federal conservative government some years back in making available a 

matching grant for the building or the capital costs of building vocational training schools. I have taken a 

look at the figures and there doesn‟t seem to be any question but that Saskatchewan did not take full 

advantage of this program in the last several years since it was instituted. 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

210 

 

In other words, because the governments, or the previous government, the CCF administration and, to a 

certain extend, the present administration have not taken greater advantage of the shared-cost program in 

the vocational training schools, school boards have lost the opportunity to save considerable amounts of 

money in capital construction costs. I believe that because of this failure Saskatchewan, in my opinion, 

lags behind in the provision of technical training institutes. What I want to know is: Are we going to be 

permanently at a disadvantage because of this failure on the part of the previous Government and to a 

certain extent, as I say, on the part of the present Government? Or is this Government taking such steps 

as may be necessary to ensure that full advantage will be taken of such as remains of the vocational 

training school capital grants program and technical assistance programs? I noted the Minister was 

outlining the amounts that were still available. I would like to have some assurance that it is the intent of 

this Government to forge ahead full speed and take full advantage of these grants before they lapse in a 

certain period of time. 

 

Another point that I would like to make in connection with this debate in general and that is that just 

within the past few days the Economic Council of Canada has recommended cooperation between the 

Federal Government and the provinces in their annual budgeting and taxing. This type of proposal 

would seem not only desirable but almost essential, particularly from the point of view of Saskatchewan. 

There was some mention made here about the number of horses we have on our team. I don‟t know 

about things like that but I do know, Mr. Speaker, that we need as much cooperation between the 

provinces, particularly in western Canada, as we can possibly get in our fiscal policy. Such cooperation, 

in my opinion, could take into account the very great fluctuations to which Saskatchewan may be 

subjected by reason of circumstances such as crop failures that I mentioned earlier. And I would hope 

that this Government would start immediately to encourage such cooperation between the other 

provinces and the Federal Government by approaching not only the Federal Government but other 

provinces as well. In other words, I would hope Saskatchewan would initiate something in this direction. 

 

The sixth point that I would like to raise is a point that is not perhaps directly related to the Bill or the 

fiscal arrangements but is more of a technical nature. Because of the complexity of the subject matter of 

this Bill and because of my being a lone Member representing my party in this House, it has been very 

difficult, and the difficulty has been increasing, to properly assess matters of finance, budgeting and 

taxes. As a member of this House — and I assume that in any other provincial House in Canada the 

same would pertain, or indeed in the House of Commons — this difficulty is compounded by the lack of 

any type of staff of economists, or computing machines for statistical data, etc, and I strongly urge this 

Government to take a step that is more forward-looking than any yet taken in Canada with respect to the 

budgeting of these types of things that come before the House. I have in mind the possibility of a very 

modified form of the system that is used in congress in the United States. I would urge this Government 

to fully investigate the possibilities of conducting committee and other hearings on their fiscal proposals 

in each year prior to final adoption, in other words, to make the average Member more aware of what is 

in the future insofar as the financial fiscal proposals for our province are concerned. No other way really 

can we properly get 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

211 

the views of the various segments of our economy. I don‟t think I do any disservice to the various 

individual Members of this House when I say that as individual Members it is just not possible for them 

to acquire the necessary knowledge and information on their own. This House in addition should have 

its own separate staff of experts whose services would be available to all Members, government and 

opposition alike, in the research etc, that would be required to properly assess the proposals that is 

before us this afternoon. 

 

The final point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is in connection with the natural resources of our 

province and of the nation as a whole. The natural resource revenues of our province as those of other 

provinces are taken into account in the calculations of the equalization grants that are made available to 

us in our arrangements with the Federal Government. These natural resources are jealously guarded 

properties of the individual provinces and this is as it should be. I have, however, been very disturbed by 

a relatively new aspect of provincial jurisdiction over natural resources that has been highlighted in the 

last few days by announcement of an Order In Council passed by the Government of British Columbia. I 

am referring of course to the claim insofar as resources are concerned made by the Government of 

British Columbia to the continental shelf off the coast of that province. Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec 

are presently engaged in negotiations to divide the equally lucrative floor of the Hudson Bay. I have 

always maintained the position that natural resource wealth recovered from coastal waters are rightfully 

the property of Canadians as a whole. My concern stems from the fact, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 

having no access, as is the case of Alberta, to coastal waters, we could be deprived of our share of what I 

believe to be revenue belonging to Canadians as a whole. I would urge most strongly the Government to 

make the strongest representation possible to the Federal Government to provide within fiscal formulas 

some method of balancing the inequalities that will arise should the Federal Government accept the 

proposal that natural resource wealth from the continental shelf do indeed belong to the bordering 

province. 

 

I have mentioned, two or three times, in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, the difficulties that are faced by 

individual Members in assessing what is being proposed here today. I would hope that the few points 

that I have made could be borne in mind so that Members would have a greater comprehension of what 

they are being asked to do so that arrangements, that in effect are going to affect the life of this province, 

the people of this province for several years to come, are not being asked to be passed on in a matter of a 

few hours in a one-day sitting. This I believe is one of the weaknesses of our system and one of the great 

criticisms that I make that are perhaps not necessarily germane to the debate this afternoon. However, 

Mr. Speaker, I realize the necessity for having this Bill passed and with those few comments I propose 

to go along with Government on this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, one fact which has emerged with great clarity as a result of recent 

events is, I suggest, this that, if we could settle our problems with Ottawa, not at the field of 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

212 

 

provincial conferences but on the football field, Saskatchewan would be a lot better off. Unfortunately 

that is an avenue that isn‟t open to us and so we have to have federal-provincial conferences an 

decisions. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We have a better team in football. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — When the Premier was introducing the topic this afternoon he remarked quite correctly 

that in fact there is little area of discretion at this point so far as either the Government is concerned or 

so far as the Legislature is concerned. While that is correct, it is still worthwhile for us to spend some 

time, I think in discussing the results of the decisions which we have to take, in which we have to agree, 

in order that perhaps we may be warned and strengthened in respect to future discussions to some extent. 

 

I want this afternoon to turn most of my remarks to the problems with regard to the proposals on 

education. I do so not just from the point of view that these create, as has been mentioned by the Premier 

and the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) some difficulties for Saskatchewan but also because, and 

more important I think they indicate that the Federal Government has not realized the full potential of 

education as an instrument for Canadian development. Before I do that I want to say a word of „Thank 

You‟ to my colleague the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) for having answered the question 

which I put to the Premier and which he said he would answer later. That question, the House will recall, 

Mr. Speaker, was to what extent the loss in our equalization grants was due to the change in the formula. 

The member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) showed I think correctly, that all of the difference is due 

to the change in the formula. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if the present formula had 

been continued into next year‟s calculations, then our equalization grants next year would have been 

some $40,000,000, in other words, $6,000,000 or $7,000,000 more than they will be this year. The same 

province, the same Canada, but the equalization formula now in effect would have yielded us some 

$6,000,000 or $7,000,000 had it been allowed to operate next year. Instead of that we get less so that the 

total change is due not, as is suggested by some people, and as my colleague, the leader of the 

Conservative party (Mr. Pederson) suggested a minute ago, to some miraculously great improvements in 

Saskatchewan as compared to the rest of Canada; it is due to the fact that the Federal Government has 

changed the rules and to that alone. This suggests to me, Mr. Speaker, that if the Premier and those who 

argued with him had spent more time, more thought, more effort, in developing and justifying a better 

formula and had spent less time and less energy in boasting about alleged achievements in the province 

of Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan probably would have been better off. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — At I indicated, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a little bit of time to consider some of the 

problems which I think this arrangement means for Canada because of the treatment of financing 

education in Canada. I share fully the Government‟s 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

213 

apprehension and its concern regarding these proposals for federal sharing of education expenditures. In 

my opinion they lack appreciation of the essential contribution of education to increase productivity, to 

reducing regional disparity and in promoting true national unity. I won‟t labor with a great number of 

statistics which are available to us to show the effect which increased education for more people, more 

skills for more people, if you will, can have on production. But this has been well documented by a 

number of studies, many of them in the United States. One of these studies suggest that over the period 

from 1929-1952 some 23 per cent of the aggregate increased output in that country was due to better 

education. The same study suggested that 42 per cent of the increase in output per employed person was 

due to the fact that more people had better skills. Another study in the United States puts the figure not 

at 23 but at 20 per cent. In President Kennedy‟s message to Congress in 1963 he attributed that in fact 

40 per cent of the rising productivity in that country had been due to education. Since the Canadian 

economy is in a sense less mature than that of the United States then it seems to me that Canada could 

expect to experience even higher returns with the application of a comparable investment in the 

education of Canadian people. These are references to studies and comments made in the United States. 

 

We are not lacking in such studies in the Dominion of Canada. The Gordon Commission, for example, if 

the Premier will pardon the expression, Mr. Speaker, came forth with the same kind of comment. So did 

Dr. Deutsch, the present chairman of the Economic Council, before he became chairman of that Council. 

He indicated that our skills were years behind the United States, that the answer to this was better 

education, better technological training and more extensive research. Let me quote one other example 

before I leave this aspect of it. It is from the Economic Council of Canada‟s first annual review in June, 

1964, when they said this: 

 

During the post war period it has become increasingly apparent that the future prosperity of a nation 

will depend in large measure on its success in creating and maintaining an adequate supply of 

professional, technical, managerial and other highly skilled manpower . . . A growing body of 

economic analysis indicates that education, research and the advance of knowledge relevant to 

production contributed at least as much as increases in the physical supply of labor and capital to the 

spectacular growth which occurred in leading industrial countries in this century. 

 

I am sure that no more argument is necessary on that point. My regret is not that this kind of just 

argument but his kind of fact resulting from good research seems to have been ignored by the Federal 

Government in making this particular proposal. I would not like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that all of the 

productivity gains which result from education are simply commercial productivity because there are 

other fields to which education does contribute and which are important to the goals which Canadians 

hope to achieve that will be interfered with if these institutions are not adequately financed. I was 

pleased to hear either the Premier or the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) — I have forgotten which — 

indicate that one of the dangers of the pattern proposed was that there might be some distortion in 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

214 

 

education effort, that we might be inspired and persuaded because of money available to put into 

technical education and professional education a disproportionate amount as compared with what we 

could put into other fields. These are important, I think, very important considerations. 

 

Now, poised as we are at the beginning of our second one hundred years of Canadian history, this seems 

to me to be regrettable. To increase in aggregate and on a per capita basis Canadian productivity, to 

improve our competitive position among the trading nations of the word, to circumvent threats of future 

inflation, to improve living standards and living satisfaction for Canadians, to advance Canadian unity, I 

suggest that all of this requires and justifies a more substantial and comprehensive Canadian investment 

in education than the present proposal provides. 

 

I want to look a little more closely at these Federal proposals as they have been explained to us, Mr. 

Speaker. They have a series of defects as I see them. They lack appreciation, as I have just been arguing, 

of the productivity-improving potential of more education for more people. They lack appreciation of 

the probable impact and the undoubted pressure of these proposals to increase the more regressive kinds 

of taxation which are available to the provinces and to the local governments, particularly property 

taxes. They put a pressure not only on distorting education, but they put a pressure also on distorting or 

influencing away from the most progressive form of taxation to be used in the three levels of 

government. These proposals fail to see the value of expenditures on education as a preventative for 

long-run inflation. These proposals lack appreciation of some of the important factors which promote 

real national unity. I suggest that one of the goals which Canadians do unanimously hope to achieve is 

this matter of national unity. I think the Federal Government missed an opportunity in not doing better 

than it did. This unity has to do with comparable regional opportunities for education. Unity in Canada 

has to do with the removal of differences between regions. Unity has to do with comparable standards in 

regions and these proposals do not add to those kinds of developments. 

 

Moreover, I think these proposals lack consistency. For some programs, for example at the university 

level, they provide a share of operating costs and no mention of capital. For some programs at the 

technical and the post-secondary level they provide a share of capital and nothing for operating. For 

some programs, some of the adult programs they provide total federal responsibility. The proposal has 

the earmarks of being shapeless to begin with and aimless when it‟s finished. The rationale for it is 

impossible to discover. This is particularly so in view of that vital relationship between education an 

national productivity, between education and growth in that productivity, between education and other 

essential worthy non-commercial national goals. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, those of us in this group share with our Provincial Government the hope that the 

definitions which have been spoken of by both the Premier and the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) as 

to the area of federal participation will be as comprehensive as possible. Will we share the hope too that 

the Federal Government will entertain the idea of reviewing this role which it set for itself in education, 

that it will entertain 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

215 

the idea of developing a more comprehensive role which will better assure that some of our essential, 

nationwide goals are achievable? It has become more and more true, Mr. Speaker, that the output of 

education is less and less confined to the province in which the input to education occurs. This is 

particularly true of higher education and it is on this point, by recognizing that the present proposals do 

provide something more for university than we are now getting that I hope the other government will be 

able to make a compelling argument in the future. 

 

Members will be aware that starting a number of years ago the universities of Canada established their 

own royal commission in a sense, the Bladen Commission. When the deans of graduate studies were 

making a submission to the Bladen Commission they had this to say: 

 

That graduate studies and research fall more directly into the realm of a federal responsibility than do 

the less costly lower levels of education. 

 

Since that is true, I submit this ought to be impressed on the Federal Government that a consideration 

might well be given to the Federal Government‟s assuming not 50 but 100 per cent of the cost of this 

kind of educational effort. The effects of post-graduate work after all do flow more than for any other 

kind of education to all parts of Canada. They are not confined nor should they be confined in the 

province in which the student takes his post-graduate work. The work of our people who have taken 

graduate training generates added income for individuals and added profits for corporations in every part 

of Canada. Such a move as this might also even make it possible for the universities and the regions of 

Canada to plan and cooperate more fully in the very highly specialized, very expensive, extremely 

necessary post-graduate opportunities. The case for other professional specialities may be less solid but 

it is there in part as well. I hope that the Federal Government will admit some future discussion of such 

aspects of the distribution of Canadian effort and of the returns from the Canadian effort. 

 

Here are some other aspects which I hope governments will be able to turn their attention to. For 

example, not directly related to the income tax law as it is under discussion in this Bill but certainly 

related in other ways, are the aspects of income tax law as they apply to persons who have dependents 

attending university. As I understand it at the moment a parent who has a dependent in university may 

deduct $550 for each dependent provided a student doesn‟t have an income in excess of $900 plus the 

amount of fees. This is of course some assistance but in fact it means this among other things, that the 

higher the income of the parent, the greater the tax relief that is provided. This I think all of us would 

agree is wrong. Using 1965 figures as I understand their application, a parent with a taxable income of 

$2,000 has relief to the extent of $110. But a parent with an income of $25,000 has relief to the extent of 

$275. In other words, two and a half times as much relief as the parent who had only one-tenth as much 

income. I wouldn‟t suggest that we can change income laws to make up for the loss of scholarships 

which has resulted from the Federal Government‟s decision to indefinitely postpone the granting of 

10,000 national scholarships but I do suggest that some attention to this kind of law might be a partial 

answer but certainly not in any 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

216 

 

sense a whole answer. 

 

I want to comment also on some of the specific effects with regard to technical education. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is tragic that there should have been decreed and that there should be a discontinuance of 

the operating share paid by the Federal Government for technical education. 

 

The capital grant, I know, continues but we must regret and we must protest as it is possible to protest 

the removal of the operating grant. I don‟t know what the exact figures are but it seems to me that in a 

large institution we will pay out in about two or three years for operation as much as the whole building 

probably cost to begin with. We need this kind of guarantee of continuing support. 

 

I note that this proposal for technical education is tacked on, as I understand it, to the agreement 

regarding technical vocation education which was signed in 1962 and would have expired ordinarily in 

1967. As I understand the situation, while the program is to be phased out so far as the capital grants are 

concerned, so additional money has been added which Saskatchewan can qualify for over a period up to, 

I think the Minister said, 1973. It may be useful to attempt to clear up what appeared as if it might have 

been an argument as to expenditures for technical education over recent years. This program, this 

agreement, began in 1962 and from 1962 until 1964 Saskatchewan collected $4,500,000 of capital 

grants. That‟s at the rate of $2,500,000 a year. In the 1964-65 program Saskatchewan collected $330,000 

and in the next year, $770,000. That‟s as far as the known figures go. In other words, the average 

collections under this agreement for capital since the present Government has been in office has been 

$500,000 a year. The average for the two years before that was $2,500,000 per year. While I‟m inclined 

to agree with the member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) that neither government paid enough attention 

to this, surely those figures answer very completely the extent of the effort. Two and a half million 

dollars a year was the rate during the last two years in which we were in government; one half million 

dollars a year was the rate at which we qualified for federal grants during the next two years when my 

friends across the way were in the government. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, based on that rate of 

expenditure then it will take the Government 106 years before their program has earned the rest of the 

capital grants that are available. Now, I appreciate the fact that there has been some apparent speed up in 

this current year. I say, „apparent‟. It is apparent as yet only in words that have been spoken over there. 

It is not apparent as yet in terms of buildings either begun or completed across the province. They 

estimated, and I recall the budget that we could earn something like $6,000,000 on the 1966-67 program 

but much of this has not as yet even been started an much of it has only just been started. After months 

of delay, longer than the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) indicated would be the case, a bit of 

work began to happen at the provincial Technical Institute in Saskatoon. There has been some continued 

work at Yorkton and the Miller High School in Regina though I doubt if either one of them has technical 

facilities in operation as yet. But North Battleford is postponed and the extension to Balfour Technical 

Institute was postponed when the Local Government board decreed that there wasn‟t adequate money. 

So while the paper plans and the words of the Government indicate an earning this year of 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

217 

$6,000,000, I don‟t think the Minister himself would deny the statement that they are not going to earn 

$6,000,000 on the construction this year. I doubt myself if they will earn half that amount on the amount 

of construction done in the fiscal year 1966-67. 

 

Now they have announced some other programs as well on which there has been no start but I gather 

which have been approved as between the two Governments. These will bring us in grants something 

like I believe $5,000,000 as I get the list. Anyway it seems that after we finish all that has been 

announced, even though it isn‟t started in the current year, after we finish all the has been announced for 

sometime beyond that and which is further away from being started there will still be some $28,000,000 

left to spend. The minister stands in his place this afternoon and suggests that this program will be 

completed by 1968 and I submit there isn‟t any evidence whatsoever that this is possible at all, that it‟s 

less possible when we consider the rate that has been achieved in technical education. It might be 

possible if, as my colleague from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) suggested, we happened to get rid of that 

particular government and get on with the job but not except for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, in spite of those kinds of remarks, I regret that that‟s the note on which I 

close and go back to the point at which I began, that we do share the concern of the Government with 

respect to the inadequacies of these agreements, whether we are talking of a tax-sharing agreement of 

the education agreement. We hope that the Government might say clearly and firmly that his change in 

revenue so far as sharing of taxation is concerned results from a change in the rules, because that has 

been demonstrated to be the case. He might even have better luck in his argument at Ottawa if he would 

stick to that as the facts of the case, rather than trying to camouflage the issue with some of the other 

kinds of statements which came out. Our great regret I think is this that the Canadian Government has 

again lost the opportunity of doing something which is going to further those national goals to which all 

Canadians really subscribe. As Canadians we seek to achieve the desirable triple goals of necessary 

national economic growth, the removal of disparity between regions of Canada and strengthened 

Canadian unity. If we are to be successful in the second century of Canadian history then the approach 

of the Federal Government, in particularly to investment in human resources for education, must be 

much more comprehensive than it is. I want to assure the Government that insofar as it tries to achieve 

those kinds, further those kinds of goals in negotiating with the Federal Government, then this party will 

be solidly behind it in that step. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw the attention of the Members to the fact that the mover of the motion is 

about to close the debate. If anybody else wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier I propose to answer 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

218 

 

most of the questions, which have been asked, in Committee. There are a few comments I would like to 

make. 

 

The hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) said early in his remarks that we were suffering from 

“Sharp practice”, I think, to paraphrase it. Well, Mr. Sharp certainly had a lot to do with these 

agreements but I would say that there was no one in Ottawa who had more to do with drawing up the 

new formula than the former Deputy Minister of this Government when my honorable friends were up. 

We had to negotiate with Al Johnson and he was the man who drew the formula up, make no mistake. 

And I may say, Mr. Chairman that we didn‟t like this formula any more than my hon. friends opposite 

but we didn‟t have much choice in taking it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has seen great development in the last two and one-half years. Huge 

new potash mines pouring into the province, dozens of oil wells beginning to produce, new timber 

resources, new mills . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Don‟t forget the new fertilizer. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . we even have the new peanut mine at Anglo Rouyn where there are 300 men 

working, new mines. We have today a major labor shortage instead of unemployment as we used to 

have under the Socialists. Why, Mr. Speaker, let‟s never forget that when my hon. friends opposite were 

the Government we just had two exports, wheat and people. Now we have got prosperity in this 

province; now we have got people wanting to come in and live here; now we have widened taxes, and 

this is pretty nice for most people because everyone today has got a good jot at good wages, something 

altogether different then when the Socialists were in office. Now one of the penalties unfortunately that 

we are paying for this prosperity is that we are beginning to lose some of our equalization payments. Mr. 

Speaker, we would be in real trouble again I guess if the Socialists ever got back in office because we 

would immediately be a „have-not‟ province again. They kept us a „have-not‟ province for 20 years and 

they would do it again in a short period of time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was a little, not surprised but interested in some of the things the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) said about education. How different from what our hon. friends say when they 

are not the government compared to what they did when they were the government. I want to tell you, 

Sir, that this Government considers education to be the absolute top priority that we have, but we back it 

up with hard cash, not just talk, like my Socialist friends opposite. We just opened a new technical 

school down in Weyburn. My hon. friends say, “Oh, it was an old building”. Well when they opened 

one in Moose Jaw they opened one in a new building, they have made some additions since just as we 

will make some additions in Weyburn. We saved the taxpayers I suppose $4,000,000 because we were 

able to utilize that building in Weyburn. My friend, the hon. Member, was at the opening of the school 

and I think he was pretty pleased with it. I would like to know if he agrees with what some of this 

leaders have said here today about the Weyburn Technical Institute. There will be 400 students in that 

Institute within a month to two months. At least 400 can be handled if there are that many who want to 

go into the technical school. 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

219 

The Liberals talk about education but they also put the dollars up. That‟s the difference between my hon. 

friends opposite. He talks about the money we spend on our universities, big crocodile tears about the 

need to give greater help to our universities. Mr. Speaker, let‟s never forget in the 20 years they were in 

office their average expenditure on the university was $3,100,000, capital and operating. This year alone 

we are spending more than $22,500,000 on our universities, and the coming year it will probably 

approach $30,000,000. We act as far as education is concerned, we don‟t just talk bout it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to deny today that the loss of equalization payments is not going to 

deal a cruel blow to the future plans of this Government as far as tax reduction is concerned, because we 

took over the highest per capita taxes probably in this nation after 20 years of Socialism and we have 

been trying to get them down. We are going to continue to do that in the future but we will have 

problems because of these equalization payments, make no mistake, But what this Government is going 

to do is to go out and use private enterprise methods to get new mines in, new industry. We are going to 

widen the tax base so the middle man won‟t have to pay so heavy taxes. 

 

Mr. Whelan (Regina North): — Heavy water. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — My hon. friends are always talking about us giving away resources. Well I would like 

to know what good all these potash mines would be as long as the potash is underground for a mile or 

so. Or what good is the oil if you‟re not going to use it? Are we supposed to let the timber rot in our 

north the way the Socialists did for 20 years? I don‟t think so. Were going to develop those resources 

and use the tax revenues. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . stagnation. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — My hon. friends, you know the stagnation that we had in this province for 20 years 

under my hon. friends is still a disgrace to this continent. They talk about prices going up today. We‟re 

watching the mess their labor friends in England are handling at the present time, we‟re watching what 

labor is doing in England and boy it‟s a mess. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll answer some questions when we get into Committee, but we have made a lot of 

progress, in two and one-half years, amazing progress and we are having to pay a little bit of a price for 

it today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — HEAR, HEAR!! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the hon. the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) that Bill No. 2, An Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act will be now read the second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

220 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher: (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 4, An Act respecting allowances to 

Members of the Legislative Assembly, and to Certain other Persons, for the Second Session, 1966. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg leave of this Assembly to move second reading of Bill No. 4. This has to do with 

remuneration paid to Members for the two days of the earlier session and today. It provides in essence 

for a Legislative allowance at a salary of $150 plus $75 as an allowance for expenses, plus mileage for 

two trips into the city. I think it also provides an allowance for the Speaker and the Sergeant-at-Arms. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the hon. the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) that Bill No. 4, An Act 

respecting Allowances to Members of the Legislative Assembly, and to Certain other Persons, for the 

Second Session, 1966, be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher: (Premier) moved third reading of Bill No. 3, An Act to amend The Income Tax 

Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before it is passed on third reading I would like to make one comment. The Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), asked me a question on first reading and I didn‟t see him in his place while 

Committee was on so perhaps I could just take a minute to answer his question. If I remember correctly, 

he asked me what is the net effect of all these agreements when you add them up. Now this is difficult to 

answer but we think our officials believe that they will lose $10,600,000 on equalization payments the 

first year. On the other hand we think that in the educational agreements when you add what we get for 

the university and take off what we lose for technical schools we will likely be somewhere between 

$4,000,000 and $5,000,000, likely closer to the $4,000,000 than to the $5,000,000. So it would seem that 

when this is all through we will lose a little better than $6,000,000 the first year. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I appreciate the information but my question was something different, it was, “How 

much of this is due to the change in the rules?”, and that was answered by the member from Regina 

West (Mr. Blakeney). 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been moved by the hon. the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) that Bill No. 3, An Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act, be now read the third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the third time. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 
 

At 15:15 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor having entered the chamber, took his seat on the 

throne and gave royal assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 



 

Thursday, December 8, 1966 

 

 

221 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you for, and congratulate you upon, the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence 

that the legislation approved by you will continue to provide sound development to our province. 

 

The legislation you have passed in this Third Session of the Fifteenth Legislature was designed to 

accomplish two objectives: 

 

the continuation of certain essential services in the course of labour disputes; and 

 

the ratification of a new tax agreement between this province and the Government of Canada. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the session and wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Heald, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases his Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


