



















































Hansard: February 18, 1966


 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session Fifteenth Legislature 

9th day 

 

Friday, February 18, 1966 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

on the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

direct your attention and the attention of all hon. members to the fact that in the Speaker‟s gallery this 

afternoon, we are being visited by 15 grade 9 students from the Bethune School in my constituency, 

accompanied by Mrs. J. Struthers, their principal, by Mr. and Mrs. Hickey, who part of the year live in 

the constituency of Arm River. I am very glad to have them here with me today. They are also 

accompanied by Mr. John Bull, the trustee, and Mr. Walter Swidrowich. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, you would want me to extend the best wishes of this assembly to these students 

and to these visitors, and to wish them a pleasant and instructive afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome a group of 95 grade 8 

students from the Imperial School in the city of Regina. They are seated in the east gallery and are 

accompanied by the school vice-principal, Mr. Bartel, and the teachers, Mr. Ebert and Mr. Dubrescue. I 

do hope, Mr. Speaker, that their stay here will be pleasant and educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, not to 

be outdone in this house, I want to introduce two fine groups of students from the very best part of the 

province, the first group in the Speaker‟s gallery from my own school district, Peebles, Saskatchewan, 

the biggest city in the province, and the second group, a grade 12 group, from the Grenfell High School, 

under the direction of their teachers, Mrs. Kent and Mrs. Mitchaluk. I am sure their stay here this 

afternoon will be most enjoyable, most educational, and I am sure they are going to come back on very 

many more occasions to watch the Liberal government in action over the next twenty years. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion of Mr. MacDonald for an Address in Reply. 

 

Mr. A. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, when you called it 10 o‟clock last evening, I had 

spoken on some of the previous remarks in this debate by the Minister of Welfare (Mr. Boldt), and by 

the Minister of 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

322 

Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron). The Minister of Welfare (Mr. Boldt) in speaking of the Government 

Insurance Office, said among other things, two things, first, that he was going to make the Government 

Insurance Office more efficient, and second, that normal insurance practices would be followed. 

 

These announcements had an ominous sound, but just how ominous is now becoming a little more 

evident, because the facts are that he has directed the Insurance Office to make more money, he has 

directed the Insurance Office to be less effective in competing with private insurers, he has directed a 

wholesale increase in rates. Right now, agents are being advised of sharp increases in rates. In Regina, 

agents now, this day, are being advised that dwelling rates will go up from $3 a thousand to $3.50 a 

thousand, up 16 per cent. In towns like Birch Hills, the increase is even higher. In towns like Mortlach, 

Mr. Premier, or Regina Beach, Mr. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) or Qu‟Appelle, Mr. Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) the increase is up from $4.50 a thousand to $6.50 a thousand. Over 40 per 

cent. Now this will assuredly increase profits, and it will assuredly assist private insurers, but it is 

assuredly not efficiency. The purpose of the Government Insurance Office was to provide Saskatchewan 

people with insurance at the lowest possible rates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, rate increases of 16 per cent, 30 per cent, 45 per cent, are not efficiency. It is a 

confession of failure, it is a confession that the present government is abandoning the purposes of the 

Government Insurance Office, abandoning the goal of low cost insurance, either because they cannot 

carry out that objective, or because they will not. 

 

Turning now to the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) — and I am sorry that he is not in his 

seat — I was struck last night with his rather remarkable defense. The only name that could leap to mind 

in describing him was a “second-story” man, because in his first story, in this 1965 story, he represented 

to this house that the government had entered into a contract to sell Saskair in accordance with the terms 

which he outlined in this house on March 22nd. In his second story, the 1966 story, he says that this isn‟t 

so. He tells us that the contract he announced on March 22nd in a prepared statement, which he read on 

the Orders of the Day, in his capacity as minister of the crown — and that is the only capacity in which 

he could read it on the Orders of the Day — was not a contract at all; that the government wasn‟t bound, 

Saskair wasn‟t bound, and that even he, himself, wasn‟t bound in any legal sense. 

 

Now if this is true, and we must accept his statement for it, what can we make of the announcement 

which he read in this house last year. He said a contract for the sale of the corporation has been entered 

into. This was not true. He said the government obtained a price of $947,000. This was not true. He said 

there was a written agreement. This was not true. He said there was a finished and signed contract for 

the sale of Saskair. This was not true. He declined to table the contract and almost one year later, laid a 

contract on the table of this house, dated April 15. However, Mr. Speaker, it isn‟t the minister‟s cavalier 

treatment of this house that I want to deal with, but rather the minister‟s cavalier treatment of the 

taxpayers‟ money. He poured scorn on the proposal that the old Saskair Board would 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

323 

sell this corporation for $700,000, and he was preening himself and saying, “I got $858,000” or 

thereabouts. But to obtain this price the government gave much more than the assets of Saskair. They 

gave an undertaking not to go into the commercial flying business. They gave an undertaking to give the 

new company NorCanAir 75 per cent of the air operations — as defined in the contract — of the 

government for the next five years. They gave an undertaking that over the next 10 years they will pay 

to this new company, as a minimum, Mr. Speaker, as a minimum, $2,750,000. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What a deal, what a deal. Give away — give away. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And, Mr. Speaker, this contract contains absolutely no guarantee as to the prices 

which they can be charged. No guarantee for the prices which they can be charged! The government is 

not able to do the flying itself, the government cannot go into the free market and get another carrier, the 

government is bound to use NorCanAir to pay $2,750,000, without any price being fixed or negotiated 

for the services they must buy. Two million, seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars, without any 

adequate safeguards or, indeed, without any safeguards. Now, this is what the contract says, this is what 

the minister signed. He prides himself on getting an extra $100,000, or even $150,000, when all he has 

given for it is a blank cheque for $2,750,000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) or the 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald) can find any saving clause in that contract, which protects the government 

on the price they must pay for the services for air operations, I haven‟t been able to find it. I leave it to 

you, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of Saskatchewan, whether they received a full price or even a fair 

price for this crown corporation which was put on the auction block. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it will be evident from my remarks, I will oppose the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks today will necessarily be 

about the most beautiful city in Saskatchewan. I might even say the most beautiful city on the prairies, 

the city of Saskatoon. Saskatoon was incorporated in the year 1906. That makes 1966 the sixtieth 

anniversary of the city of Saskatoon. Over the years I have come to like and appreciate the city of 

Saskatoon, and in all humility, I think that they have returned the favour to me a little bit. I am sure that 

all members of this chamber will join me in wishing the city of Saskatoon a happy sixtieth birthday. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — While I am giving out the congratulations, I think I would be 

remiss if I didn‟t remark on the establishment, the virtual establishment of a pulp plant north of the city 

of Prince Albert. I think this is a good move. However, although we may 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

324 

not be able to stop give-aways, and we may not be able to stop unsound development, we will do all in 

our power to bring it to the attention of this chamber and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to lay particular emphasis on the matter of unsound development; I am not saying the 

development is unsound because the government to this point has given us precious little information 

about the agreements. However, I might just refer to something that was said in the Financial Post of 

October 9th, 1965. They are talking about the profit and prices of pulp in the industry, and they are 

talking about over-capacity: 

 

Because of the over-capacity building up in the industry, mainly some mills now under construction 

on the west coast, many observers expect the price to drop as much as 20 per cent sometime in the 

next two years. 

 

A rather ominous news report. There is another thing that strikes me in the area of possible unsound 

development. This is a news item I came across in the Star Phoenix of February 12th, 1966 and the 

heading is: 

 

Thatcher‟s Incentives Too Juicy to Pass Up. 

 

Provincial Secretary, Maitland Steinkoff, of the Manitoba Legislature, remarked that the incentives are 

too juicy to pass up. It appears he (meaning the Premier) has declared open season on the taxpayers‟ 

pocketbook. 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker, this is from the article entitled “Growth and Responsibility” delivered by 

R.M. Fowler, the President of the Canadian Pulp and Paper Association, January 28, 1966: 

 

The decision to undertake a new investment in a pulp and paper mill is much more than a gay old-

fashioned adventure in private enterprise. It raises social responsibilities for the investor and for the 

governments involved in the undertaking. 

 

I want to assure the members in this chamber that I am completely sincere about offering 

congratulations to them on the establishment of a pulp mill in the province of Saskatchewan, just as 

sincere as I was last year. I am quoting from the Record of Debates and Proceedings last year when I 

rose in this chamber. I had this to say. 

 

I would like to express in the beginning, Mr. Speaker, satisfaction with two recent developments that 

have taken place in Saskatchewan, the establishment of a potash mine operation at Viscount, and the 

location of a heavy water plant at Estevan. The potash is private capital and will be a continuation of 

the extraction of potash begun a few years ago. The location of a heavy water plant at Estevan is 

welcome. This plant is a living vindication of the policies of the past government as they regard 

governmental assistance in the development of basic industry. 

 

While I am talking about industry and resource development I must, in all fairness, refer to the 

hometown paper, the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, they have a headline “Saskatchewan Economy Bounds 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

325 

Upwards” and they mention minerals increase, the value of oil and liquefied hydrocarbon production up, 

potash mines coming into production, factory shipments up, all-time highs in manufacturing, electrical 

energy consumption up, and during the first nine months of this particular year, retail sales up, 

considerably. 

 

It is rather interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that this paper was printed in 1962, not 1965 or 1966. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — And I sometimes fear for our democratic system when the 

Premier stands in his place in this legislature and rants and raves about the stagnation in Saskatchewan. I 

think the lie is put to his own statement, those very statements that he makes right in this one page of the 

Star Phoenix in 1962, at the top of the page, Mr. Chairman: 

 

Meeting Unanimously Backs Leader‟s Blistering Broadside. 

 

This is the leader of the Liberal party in 1962, addressing a Liberal convention in Saskatoon. Quote: 

 

We have lived under Socialism for 18 years. We know the regimentation, the industrial stagnation, and 

the lack of development with Socialism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the very same page: 

 

Personal income shows jump, Saskatchewan economy bounds upwards. Potash, helium, the whole 

show. 

 

I think as long as the people can . . . 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Minister of Health): — Is that the Edmonton paper? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — That is the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, Mr. Minister of Health. To 

get to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, I was intrigued by the statement in the Throne Speech about 

automation and job re-classification. 

 

The record shows that the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) has not performed in accordance with the 

intentions of the Throne Speech, as I read them. The stand taken across Canada by the Oil Workers 

Union has been reinformed by the Friedman Royal Commission Report, which, in effect, states: 

 

Employees have the right to bargain changing conditions affecting employment brought about by 

automation. 

 

The Friedman Report was to the labor, as the Royal Commission on Medicare was to the medicare plan 

in Saskatchewan, brought in by the CCF government. 

 

The day after the so-called B.C. formula came into existence, our Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) 

issued a “Me too” statement, summed up in the following words by the news article in the Star Phoenix 

of November 25th. The minister said: 

 

The British Columbia settlement formula for an oil 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

326 

workers‟ strike was described today by Saskatchewan Labour Minister (L.P. Coderre) as “the obvious 

solution”. 

 

Well, I agree, Mr. Speaker, it was the obvious solution to a lot of those problems that were brought 

about. However, he did precious little to effect a settlement at the Moose Jaw Refinery, as he has done 

less to clear up the situation at the Saskatoon Refinery, where an unfortunately prolonged labor dispute 

is now entering its sixth month. 

 

I had intended to submit a brief that was presented to the Saskatoon City Council by the union, and 

interested parties. I notice that the brief has been put on the desks of the hon. members, so it will not be 

necessary for me to submit that at this time. 

 

I can only assume that the Minister of Labour‟s (Mr. Coderre) hands must be numb, for he has been 

sitting on them for almost three months. He has been doing nothing, n-o-t-h-i-n-g. 

 

Mr. I. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — He can spell. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Correction. I see the hon. members are laughing over there, 

they think that is quite funny. Well, I assure you there are over 100 men in Saskatoon that aren‟t 

laughing with you, and there are close to 100 women that are not happy about this situation, and there 

are over 200 children that aren‟t prepared to start laughing at this time. 

 

I think I should make a correction. I said the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) has been doing nothing. 

Well, he has been doing something, he has been attempting to suppress the Basken Conciliation Report. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — I deny that. You are putting words in my mouth. It is not 

so. There has been no suppression whatever of that report. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — If the Minister of Labour will sit down, I will substantiate what 

I have just said. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — You can‟t do it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Hold your whist a minute. The whole Basken hatchet job was 

to be conducted under a blanket of secrecy. I will enumerate four points that apparently the planners 

thought were necessary to have complete secrecy in the hearings and investigation of the Basken case. 

 

1.Appoint a Chairman that they could count on. 

2.Have the hearings in camera. 

3.The refusal of pertinent information by the Minister of Health, who is the Chairman of the crown 

corporation involved. 

 

and finally: 

4. The reports not to be made public. 

 

This was the Minister of Labour‟s duty, to make sure that this 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

327 

didn‟t happen. However, it was drawn to the Minister of Labour‟s attention that this report had to be 

made public, it was a public document. There the weakest link in the chain broke, and the public now 

knows what went on in the conciliation hearings. This report is available to the public, and I think the 

public should be invited to write to the Minister of Labour and ask for a complete copy of the Basken 

Conciliation Report, not just working people, anyone that is interested in civil liberty. Farmers should 

have a look at the Basken Report and read it. It will be good reading. I was particularly impressed when 

the hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) rose in his seat, wrapped in a cloth of righteous indignation. He 

didn‟t like the hon. member from Hanley‟s (Mr. Walker) “unwarranted attack on the former President of 

the Law Society”. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that any man who is chosen as the chairman of a 

conciliation board and allows himself to be put in a position where there is an obvious conflict of 

interest, then he has to take the consequences of accepting that chairmanship. 

 

While I am talking about Liberal lawyers and conflict of interests, I just happen to have come across 

something else the other day about a Liberal lawyer and conflict of interest. This is Maclean‟s 

Magazine, 1962, March 10th. Now I will just read the pertinent paragraphs. 

 

This is about municipal corruption in Canada, a feature article in Maclean‟s March 10th, 1962 edition: 

 

Let us take the case of Arnprior in Eastern Ontario. Here the Arnprior Development Company, setting 

out a new subdivision, had agreed in 1957 to pay for water sewers as called for by bylaw. The next 

year, company lawyers drafted another agreement, transferring the cost of the sewers to the taxpayers. 

Then as councilmen, the two lawyers voted for it. The lawyers were J.J. Green, then candidate for the 

leadership of the Liberal party in Ontario, and Conlin Mulvihill, president of the local Conservative 

Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this article is riven through with names of prominent Liberals and Conservatives involved 

in municipal corruptions across Canada. 

 

Now, some people may not recognize J.J. Green of Arnprior, Ontario. Well for the uninformed, he is the 

Hon. J.J. Green, the Minister of Agriculture, for Canada now, and I should think that the farmers of the 

prairies should keep one eye on J.J. Green in the future for conflict of interests. 

 

Mr. Green made a tour out west and had reams of publicity, headlines from all the newspapers, but the 

thing is, Mr. Speaker, what is he going to do about some of the things that got in the headlines, those 

headlines about Canadian Pacific Railway, what is he going to do? 

 

I have always thought the Premier of Saskatchewan should be forthright with the citizens and in 

particular with the youth of Saskatchewan. I have here two clippings from the Saskatoon Star Phoenix 

that speak volumes about the Premier‟s lack of forthrightness with the people of Saskatchewan. The first 

one is dated November 5th, 1965: 

 

NDP will form Minority Government at University 

 

and right below it: 

 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

328 

Premier Says Not Enthused. 

 

Now I wouldn‟t be enthused if I was the Premier either, but one year earlier the article appeared in the 

Star Phoenix on November 12, 1964: 

 

Liberals Eke Out Narrow Campus Win. 

 

Underneath the Premier says: 

 

Campus Vote Good Index. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Incidentally, and I don‟t see the Premier in his seat, 

incidentally, Mr. Premier, where are the university students that are normally invited to this chamber to 

hear the speech of the Leader of the Opposition and the Premier in the Throne Debate? Perhaps it is the 

fact that the university elections didn‟t come off as expected. The Saskatoon Campus New Democrats 

won the campus election this year, I had the honor of being asked to the Speaker, which I accepted. I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I heartily appreciate the job that the Speaker has to do in making the snap 

decisions, especially when you have a bunch of hungry university students on each side of you. 

 

During the session in the campus forum, the governing party brought in legislation for amending the 

Criminal Code regarding abortions, birth control, and homosexuality. In the past these topics have been 

topics which seem to engender off-color jokes. I was pleasantly surprised to find that they backed up 

their bills with sound reason and convincing debate. There were numerous other bills prepared covering 

the economic planning, ombudsman, automobile safety and national health plan. These young people 

have shown a serious, mature approach to the problems of the world of today. I have been assured by the 

campus party leaders that they will be sending me a copy of the letter to the provincial government, 

asking for a suitable mace for their parliamentary forum. This assembly should not find this request too 

difficult to honor, because last year we donated a considerable sum towards the purchase of a mace for 

Prince Edward Island. I understand the Prince Edward Island mace had been stolen by some Yankee 

border jumpers in the dim distant past. 

 

I would also suggest that the Regina campus be given favourable consideration upon a request of a 

similar nature. Has the Premier been forthright with our young people? I propose to show that he hasn‟t 

and is not. In 1964, the Premier before he took power had this to say — under a heading of: 

 

Liberals Aim at Youth Drain, May 9th, 1964, Leader Post: 

 

It will be the constant concern of the new government to improve and expand various types of 

educational opportunities for our young people. We will also give constant attention to policies 

designed to enlarge employment and professional opportunities for these young people in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The apparent dragging of feet in the technical school matter has put the province of Saskatchewan a year 

and a half to 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

329 

two years behind the rate of growth that was evident before the previous government. 

 

Where is the Youth Review Committee Report? What are its findings? Why hadn‟t that report been 

presented, when it has been said twice in the past that the report was to be presented to us before this 

time. 

 

The mover of the Address in Reply made a minute reference to youth in his speech. The seconder didn‟t 

even mention the word. The youth of Saskatchewan after only two years are turning away from the 

Liberal party. In this particular newspaper that I referred to earlier, we have a picture of five clean-cut 

young Saskatchewan people. “The young Grits elect executive”. Mr. Speaker, of those five, two have 

already turned their backs on the Premier. They have seen the inner workings of the Liberal party. They 

have turned away, saddened and disillusioned at what they have seen. 

 

Some years ago, over the opposition of the Liberal party, the CCF government at the time brought in 

legislation to give the vote to 20 year olds, 19 year olds and 18 year olds. Our confidence in youth has 

been justified many times over. Saskatchewan young people are exercising democratic political 

judgment in accordance with their demonstrated ability. 

 

Saskatchewan in recent years has been faced with dislocations of urbanization and in addition our 

society is becoming increasingly mobile. Changes I have mentioned require adjustment in the approach 

and application to the programs of physical fitness, culture and recreation. I note with interest that a 

number of programs inaugurated by the previous government have been retained and in fact enlarged. 

The Continuing Education Branch of the Department of Education now encompasses the physical 

fitness and recreation function. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I emphasize that it is unfortunate that the Youth Review Committee Report has not been 

presented to the members of this legislature upon completion but instead will be presented to this 

legislature when the government finds it expedient to do it. However, if the Youth Review Committee 

supports a continuation and enlargement of past programs with appropriate innovations for the times in 

which we live, it will be assured of our support. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read one conclusion from the second annual Economic 

Council of Canada Report: 

 

We recommend that the advancement of education at all levels be given a very high place in public 

policy and the investment in education be accorded the highest rank in scale of priorities. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I did support the amendment and cannot vote for the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to take part in this debate hoping that in my few 

remarks I can add something constructive as well 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

330 

as critical to what I think has been a very vague and far from spectacular Throne Speech. I will 

endeavor, Mr. Speaker, to keep my remarks, my material, and my manner of debate from drifting to as 

low a level as that which some who hold responsible positions in our legislature seem to enjoy doing. 

 

I would like to congratulate the mover of the Speech from the Throne, the member from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) and the seconder, the member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan), on the capable 

manner in which they delivered their respective addresses. 

 

I, as a citizen of this province, am pleased to see industrial development and I certainly hope that this 

development will continue. But I do take issue with the hon. members across the floor when they stand 

up and try to take all the credit for this buoyant condition, and this development that has taken place 

within our province to date. Might I suggest to the hon. member that the buoyant conditions and the 

opening of new development could not have happened had it not been for the vision, the planning and 

the pioneering of the CCF government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper: — This has to take place in any province prior to industry coming in. 

 

I would like to just remind them that the power, highways and water resources are three of the important 

elements that any province must have before industry commences. These three elements were provided 

by the CCF government as well as the best medicare and hospitalization plan in Canada. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, many hundreds of oil wells have been drilled. The world‟s largest water flooding 

plant was established. Saskatchewan became the potash capital of the world. This all happened under the 

previous CCF government. We had hoped that the present government could, since it has taken over the 

administration, prove itself worthy of this position, but unless it changes the pattern it seems to be 

following in the last 20 months, I am afraid the people of Saskatchewan are going to voice their 

disapproval. 

 

I will deal very briefly, Mr. Speaker, with the field of taxes. Our hon. members across the floor say that 

in spite of the tax cuts in last session, the taxes are still too high and they are going to remedy this. You 

will remember how they went about bragging how they had reduced the sales tax, the use of purple gas 

in farm trucks, how they lifted the mineral tax from farmers. But did you notice they are not saying 

much about the $20 increase in medicare? The increase in school taxes last year? The new tobacco tax 

costing the smoker five to ten dollars more? The increase in car insurance rates and higher again this 

year? The increase in grazing fees? This certainly helps the farming people. So you see, Mr. Speaker, 

what reason have we to think, or the public in general, that our tax reduction will be any different from 

last year‟s? Nothing different, Mr. Speaker, perhaps another tax shift. 

 

As for Home-owner grants, I will not repeat what previous speakers have said but I certainly feel there 

could be a more equitable way of distributing a grant than in this manner and I might add a more 

honorable way. 

 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

331 

In the field of agriculture, being a farmer I have watched the government‟s provision very closely in this 

department, and being from Weyburn constituency this is a department which is very important to my 

constituents. I notice that they are going to approve legislation respecting animal diseases, setting up 

new community pastures, proposal of further sums for soil testing. This might all be well and good but I 

think first we should help our small farmers by lower interest rates and with longer term loans so that 

our young farmers might first get themselves into a position where they can make use of these former 

provisions. What use is the animal disease legislation if a small farmer hasn‟t got help to finance and 

purchase his cattle to begin with? Just last year the government took away one of the protections that the 

farmer had when it came to purchasing machinery, the Agriculture Machinery Act, where he had some 

assurance of getting the best for his money. 

 

Perhaps one of the most important challenges that face the people of Saskatchewan and Canada lies in 

the field of education. But this is something that is going to continue for some time to come. 

Consequently if a government finds itself in such a buoyant condition as the Premier advises us that it is 

in, this is a good place to spend some of its excess revenue. Not just because of the necessity of 

preparing our youth for future professions, not just because of this necessity, but what we must realize is 

that our youth of today are our citizens of tomorrow and our province is just as good as we the people or 

citizens make it. 

 

I have always been interested in the child or the young person that goes through public school and then 

finds out that in grade 9 or 10 he cannot keep abreast with the rest of the class and decides that he might 

as well quit, or we refer to it as „drop out‟. A person in some particular field whether it is mechanic, 

agriculture, whatever it might be, may far excel many of the other students. I feel that some vocational 

or technical school for such students is the answer, a place where they can attend and get further help 

and instruction in their particular choice of profession. This is why I think these young people must have 

greater consideration than they have had in the past and a larger budget given to provide technical 

education for them. 

 

I thought at the last session that there were going to be large steps and measures taken to build these 

types of schools. I think I even went so far as to suggest to the hon. member from Touchwood (Mr. 

Trapp) that we would be very pleased to have one in Weyburn. But I felt very disappointed that 

Weyburn had not been considered, but I find today that we are just as near to having one built as any of 

the other places in the province. We have no plans to my knowledge nor have they. Another year gone 

by, another promise not fulfilled. But I have heard rumors, Mr. Speaker, that we are to have a composite 

high school in Weyburn. I am in complete agreement with this but I question if it will take the place in 

educating our students, especially the drop-outs, and qualifying them to go out and take their place in 

earning an honest living that a technical or a vocational school would. 

 

I am pleased to hear of the large highway program and with tourist trade and modern day transportation 

this is very important. Consider that in 1944 when the former CCF government took office there were 

some 132 miles of dust free highways in Saskatchewan. In 1963 there was a total of 3,961 miles. A very 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

332 

good record. This was done according to our present government when the buoyancy of the province 

was not like it is today. So the people of Saskatchewan now have every right to expect much greater 

gains in this department than we ever witnessed before. 

 

The former CCF government built many miles of grid roads, with assistance to the local municipalities, 

linking up our main shopping centres all through the province. The rural people appreciated these roads 

and I think it is certainly the duty of the government to begin paying a portion of the cost of maintenance 

of these. As I happen to have been the municipal councillor for 12 consecutive years I realize what this 

program has cost and meant to the rural people. 

 

I also know, Mr. Speaker, that during the oil boom in the constituency of Weyburn back in 1956, ‟57, 

and ‟58, in a short period of one and a half years five bridges were broken down in one municipality. 

These bridges were necessary to help the oil companies drill and discover and operate their wells. These 

five bridges were replaced and repaired with heavier structures all within this short period of time, so 

that industry and oil development would not be held up. This was done by the former CCF government. 

But since that time in 1964 another bridge has been broken through in the same area. Here it is February 

in 1966 and the bridge is still waiting to be replaced. This is in the heart of an oil field where there are 

upwards of 600 wells centralized through one unitization plant. I wonder why the delay. Is it 

inefficiency or is it that our present government cannot cope with these problems? These roads and 

bridges are very important to the economy of our province. 

 

I would like to say just a word in regard to health. We would like to know just what expansions are to be 

expected in the health program. There is no mention of prescription drugs, chiropractors, optometrists 

being included in medicare. I am sure we and the public would like to know. This department is very 

important. We have made great gains in the past and we have a hospitalization and medicare plan that is 

the envy of all of Canada. Let‟s not stand still and let deteriorate what we have now achieved. Let‟s go 

forward and blaze the way for even a better coverage. This will build a better and a stronger and 

healthier nation and do far more towards achieving health, happiness and contentment than the opening 

of several more liquor outlets in our province. Mr. Speaker, there are sufficient licensed premises and 

liquor stores in operation now to handle any increased volume of liquor sales that might be necessary. 

 

I would like to just refer to health again and say a word in regard to the mental health program. This is 

something that is quite a concern at present in my constituency, and I am very pleased to learn, Mr. 

Speaker, that a committee or board has been set up to explore and look into the provisions and the 

conditions of what we refer to as half-way houses. These places throughout our province are in charge of 

considerable numbers of patients. The principle involved and the aim to rehabilitate some of these 

patients away from mental hospital surroundings are good but it must be done in a manner or at a rate of 

speed that does not exceed the preparations and the facilities arranged to look after these patients. Good 

homes and qualified personnel must be there to administer their drugs and give them nursing care. This 

mental sickness could happen to any of us and I am all out for working for a program which could help 

to readjust them to a more normal way of living. But let‟s not hurry 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

333 

it too fast and ruin something that if handled properly and timely could be good. I hope, Mr. Speaker, 

that our Department of Health is prepared to watch this very closely because it is creating great worry 

and concern to many people such as they are now doing. 

 

I have one other disappointment and this is the rail line abandonment. In the Speech from the Throne 

this was never mentioned, Mr. Speaker. I think it is very important and should have had a very 

prominent place in this Speech. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have tried as I said earlier to be constructive as 

well as critical with my remarks. One has no right to criticize if he has nothing to offer in its place. But 

from these remarks I feel sure you will have recognized that I am not supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.M. Cuelenaere (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I join with those who have 

already congratulated the hon. member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), on his election and on his first 

address in this house; with those who congratulated the mover and the seconder of the Address in Reply; 

and I associate myself with the commendations that they have received. 

 

I join in expressing a word of warm welcome to Mr. Bradshaw, the Acting Clerk of the Assembly. I also 

want to join with those who have spoken yesterday and today in congratulating Mr. Alec Mitchell on his 

election in the Bengough constituency. We on this side of the house are looking forward to having him 

with us in the house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since this is my first opportunity to speak during radio time may I once again thank the 

people of the constituency of Shellbrook for the honour and the privilege of representing them in this 

assembly. I can only express the hope that the efforts of this government will bring a greater degree of 

prosperity and development to all parts of the constituency but particularly the northern part which will 

directly be affected by forestry development. Because no. 40 and no. 3 highways are fast becoming main 

routes to the National Park and to northern Saskatchewan I expect that a good start will be made on 

highway no. 240, commonly known as the Cookson road this year, and I look to the Minister of 

Highways (Mr. Grant) to improve and oil no. 55 from Debden to Big River and then on to Green Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before going on with my address I would like to draw to your attention the annual report of 

my department. It represents a departure from the previous and other reports. The Johnson Royal 

Commission on government administration commented and made recommendations respecting annual 

reports. It pointed out on page 292 that the annual reports had become increasingly lavish and expensive. 

It stated that these reports are required to fulfil the department‟s responsibility to the legislature and at 

the same time perform a valuable public relations function. It concludes by saying: 

 

Savings can undoubtedly be affected in their production without necessarily downgrading their quality 

and appearance. 

 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

334 

Our report this year effected a saving by reducing the unit cost from $2.23 to $1.24 per copy, almost a 

dollar. At the same time I hope that we have better fulfilled our responsibility to the legislature and that 

the report will perform a valuable public function. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — In passing I want to congratulate and express my appreciation to Mr. Vandale, our 

director of Conservation Information Service, and his staff and our officials for their work in preparing 

the report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech makes two references to matters relating to the Department of Natural 

Resources, Indian and Metis and the pulp mill. This afternoon I intended to deal briefly with the Indian 

and Metis branch and at some length with the pulp agreements. 

 

With reference to the Indian and Metis the speech states: 

 

Approval of the legislature will be sought for a program to accelerate the program of employment of 

our citizens of Indian ancestry so that they may more rapidly achieve the opportunity of our increasing 

prosperity. 

 

Already academic, vocational and technical upgrading programs are underway in several areas including 

heavy equipment operations, rodmen in surveys, domestic training, academic upgrading, agricultural 

courses, carpentry, welding and other similar trades. These programs are now in operation and were 

planned in co-operation with the federal Indian branch and the Department of Education. It has been the 

responsibility of our branch to provide the major planning and coordination. Further programs are being 

organized including training in the pulp operation in the Prince Albert area. 

 

Since the branch was organized some ten months ago, much emphasis has been given to placement. In 

this period the branch has been successful in placing about 300 persons in gainful employment. While 

many secured only temporary work and others remained on the job for a relatively short time, a goodly 

number have found permanent gainful employment. I look forward to an acceleration of this program. 

 

Our placement program has been noted and favourably commented upon by a number of people 

throughout Canada. Mr. McEwen, the executive director at the Indian Eskimo Association of Canada, 

praised our efforts and described it as one of the most practical programs that has been adopted for some 

time. The Hon. Duff Roblin, Premier of Manitoba, appears to be advocating a similar program for 

Manitoba. In an address which he made recently relating to industrial development he said as is reported 

in the Winnipeg Free Press: 

 

The government means to see that the doors will be held open for Indian and Metis people. 

 

I would like the Indian and Metis people to know that in this province the door has already been open 

for them and I hope that more and more of them will avail themselves of the opportunities offered to 

them in training and in job opportunities. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

335 

So much for the Indian and Metis branch. 

 

Probably the most significant matter during the past years relating to my department and probably one of 

the most significant matters affecting the economy of the province during the past year was the 

announcement of the construction of a pulp mill at Prince Albert. With respect to the pulp mill the 

Throne Speech states: 

 

My ministers will ask you to approve legislation enabling the government to assist in the 

establishment of a pulp manufacturing plant at Prince Albert. 

 

This will take the form of two acts which will be introduced later this session, one public and one 

private. The private bill will be introduced on behalf of the city of Prince Albert to confirm tax 

arrangements made between the city and the pulp company. The public bill will be an act authorizing the 

provincial treasurer to, firstly, guarantee the bonds of the Prince Albert pulp company in the sum of 

$46,500,000 in American funds or approximately $50,000,000 in Canadian funds at the present rate of 

exchange; secondly, to purchase shares in the company to the value of $1,500,000; and thirdly, to accept 

additional shares to the value of $1,500,000 as compensation for the guarantee of the bonds. Mr. 

Speaker, this public act will afford the official opposition the opportunity to stand up and be counted on 

the subject of the pulp mill. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Table the contract too. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — It will give them, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to say whether they are in favour of 

it or opposed to it. It will give them the opportunity to either back up their public utterances and vote 

against it or to stand up and vote for what they themselves tried so hard to do but failed and failed 

dismally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge them and particularly the hon. member from Cumberland 

(Mr. Berezowsky), and I notice he is just coming into the house, to vote against the pulp mill. Mr. 

Speaker, I am not going to cast out the same challenge to the hon. member for Arm River (Mr. 

Pederson) because after all his leader in Ottawa, John Diefenbaker, is taking credit for the pulp mill and 

that, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the main roads which are going to serve the Pulp Mill, the 

LaRonge road and no. 55, were built a long time before the Roads to Resources Program was ever heard 

of, and also despite the fact that he finds it difficult now to understand why Mr. Karl Landegger said that 

he had never seen nor heard from him. However, I suppose that he will have got the message from John 

and I hope that he will go along with us. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the wailing and the crying and the opposition of the CCF-NDP to this pulp mill have 

been heard in this house repeatedly and across the country in every part of the province, but lately 

particularly in Bengough. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — . . . know about that. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: —Why, Mr. Speaker, even Tommy Douglas got into the 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

336 

act. Speaking in Vancouver a few days ago, he is reported in the Leader Post of February 14 as having 

said and I have his quotation: 

 

Mr. Thatcher‟s government has embarked on a resource-give-away program especially in lumber. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have heard the comments of the press, but I would like at this moment to just 

refer you to some of the comments that have been made by the average citizen. In order to get this a 

roving reporter interviewed eight persons on the streets of Prince Albert to see, as he puts it here, “But 

what does the average resident think of the news?” Mr. Speaker, I have the interviews here and it is 

completely unanimous. It is a most interesting one. They interviewed eight people, Mrs. Pollard, Miss 

Simchuk, Mr. Kelly, Mr. Wick, Brown, Kraft, Mardell, and Allard. I‟m just going to read a few of their 

comments. It‟s interesting. The first one, Mrs. Elizabeth Pollard of Marcelin. That is in a very good 

constituency, the constituency of Shellbrook and I enjoyed her remarks: 

 

It‟s going to take a lot of people off social aid and put them on a steady payroll which automatically 

results in better family life. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we have Miss Ruby Simchuk and she is from Wakaw. This is from the Kinistino 

constituency and I am sure that the members will enjoy her remarks: 

 

Naturally I am very happy with the announcement and so is everyone out our way. It means more jobs 

and more money in circulation. 

 

And then we have one from Prince Albert, Mr. Ernest Kelly, just listen to what he has to say: 

 

I worked in a pulp mill in British Columbia, and I am glad Prince Albert is getting one because it will 

mean good pay for many. 

 

Then we have Conrad Wick, again of Prince Albert: 

 

This is the greatest thing that ever happened to northern Saskatchewan, it will mean employment for 

many young persons and especially keep juveniles out of trouble. 

 

And then we have Mr. Brown, Mr. Jerry Brown of Prince Albert: 

 

There will be all kinds of employment for young and old alike. This is one of the best things that ever 

happened to Prince Albert and district. 

 

Then we have Mrs. Kraft: 

 

I am all excited about it, my husband says it is the best news that Prince Albert ever got. 

 

And now we have one and this is a man on the street visiting Prince Albert, Mr. Anthony Mardell from 

Kalyna, that‟s in the constituency of Cumberland and I am sure the hon. members will be interested to 

listen to his remark: 

 

I am in the mixed farming occupation and I know the 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

337 

pulp mill will give us farmers additional produce, and at the same time there is going to be a lot of jobs 

available. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, finally Miss Dianna Allard with the finishing touch. She is a hair dresser in Prince 

Albert and she says: 

 

One thing I know is there is going to be more money for housewives to spend to keep themselves 

more beautiful. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, no one is going to vote against that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, over and over again other comments are being made. Of course the 

senior member from Saskatoon (Mr. A.M. Nicholson) when he was speaking just a few moments ago 

brought another red herring across the path, the danger of over production. It is an attempt to engender 

fear in the minds of the people. I have here, Mr. Speaker, the very latest newsprint data from 1965. It 

was printed in November, and it makes very interesting reading. I am only going to read a very short 

extract of page 5 which says: 

 

Current demand remains buoyant in North America and 1965 is showing another substantial gain of 

400,000 tons or 4.6 per cent. Current indications suggest a further addition to demand in 1966. 

Achievement of this forecast would result in a total increase of 1,364,000 tons in North America 

demand during the three year period 1963-66. This represents an average of about 450,000 tons per 

year which is far above the ten year average annual increment of 140,000 tons. It illustrates both the 

size and the speed of possible increases in demand from a fully developed newspaper industry and 

kraft industries in conditions of economic expansion. 

 

This publication which is put out by the Newsprint Association of Canada looks forward to the 

utilization of Kraft and newsprint pulp with a great deal of optimism and I am glad that somebody else 

who is coming here in the province is quite prepared to share that optimism. 

 

Do you know, Mr. Speaker, during the Bengough by-election, the big pitch of the NDP-CCF was “Vote 

for us and they‟ll get the message”. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that by these comments and by the votes of 

Bengough that they across the way will get the message. All I can say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of 

Bengough is — Thank you Bengough for your vote of confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, speaking in this debate last Tuesday, the hon. member for Regina 

North (Mr. Whelan) had this to say: 

 

When those opposite deny in the most emphatic terms that they are not giving away the provincial 

natural resources I wonder why they don‟t produce the evidence. To members opposite who have 

spoken and who will speak in this debate I contend that you are giving away our natural resources. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

338 

He then went on to challenge the government to place before this legislature certain agreements and he 

referred among others specifically to the Primrose Forest Products Agreement, the Simpson Timber 

Company Agreement and the Prince Albert Pulp Agreement. He shouted a challenge to table these 

agreements. Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the hon. member was during the last session of this 

legislature. Possibly, Mr. Speaker, he should be relieved of his onerous duties of Whip and keeping the 

opposition in order because apparently he is kept too busy to know what‟s going on. The Primrose 

Agreement, and the records show this was tabled on April 15th as sessional paper no. 165, in reply to a 

motion for return presented by the hon. member from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank). Mr. Speaker, all the 

Dumont-Simpson Agreements had been tabled even before that on March 22nd, as sessional paper no. 

134. 

 

Since then, Mr. Speaker, a further agreement was executed in the early part of October between the 

government and the Simpson Timber people. A motion for return was presented only last Wednesday, 

and I can assure you, Sir, that I shall be only too pleased and even proud to table this additional 

agreement. As a result of this agreement a feasibility study is now underway in the Hudson Bay and Flin 

Flon area for the expansion of the existing mill and for a possible second mill in the province. The study 

is already underway and in the February 14th issue of the Prince Albert Herald the following appeared: 

 

Another pulp mill predicted in five years. 

 

And this was made by Mr. Broccard who is said to have arrived in Prince Albert from Seattle to take up 

new duties as Development Forester for Simpson Timber Company of Hudson Bay. His assignment is to 

develop an economic and feasibility study of the timber resources in the Hudson Bay and Flin Flon area 

for which Simpson has an agreement with the provincial government. The feasibility studies are an 

important step in Simpson‟s objective in establishing a perpetual timber operation in Saskatchewan and 

constructing a pulp mill within five years. Simpson opened a $2,500,000 sawmill last October. 

 

With respect to the Prince Albert pulp mill it is well known, Mr. Speaker, that this agreement was only 

executed on December 2, 1965, and I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that these agreements like the Primrose 

and Simpson agreements will be tabled in reply to the motion for return and I will be prepared to table 

them at any time. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Table them now. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — I have them here and I would be very pleased to table them immediately. I was 

surprised to hear the hon. member for Regina North (Mr. Whelan) complaining bitterly that we had 

failed to acquaint people of Saskatchewan with the terms of the agreement. When he spoke he said: 

 

I feel confident that not only would government members have tabled the agreements; they would 

have given the full story to every newspaper in Canada before they tabled them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we tried to give the full story to the people of Canada but possibly, Mr. 

Speaker, it was only the Premier‟s modesty that prevented him from making it as complete 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

339 

as it should have been. Mr. Speaker, I certainly have not been quite as modest. 

 

I have been prepared at all times to answer any questions with respect to pulp mills directed to me by the 

press or other publicity medias and I have with me a number of clippings from the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald, the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, and the Regina Leader Post, with such headings as, “Pulp Mill Pact 

Details Cited”, “Government Commitments for Pulp Mill Outlined”, “Nine Major Agreements Signed 

between Pulp Firms”, “Government Investment only $1,500,000”, “Prince Albert Timber Area Can 

Produce Wood for Mill in Perpetuity”, “Timber Board will Deliver 1,500,000 Cords in four Years”. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all this information has been given to the public as far as the press wanted it. In a 

number of issues of the Prince Albert Herald there has been a series of articles dealing with the effects 

which the pulp mill will have on Prince Albert and in the area. There are a number of articles, the third 

one appeared on February 8th. And then, Mr. Speaker, I have here a sheaf of letters that have appeared 

in newspapers throughout the province, many praising, some condemning the pulp mill. Those 

condemning the pulp mill are signed, and in many instances by one W.J. Berezowsky, MLA for 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Just read them. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Then, Mr. Speaker, there were a number of editorial comments entitled, “Mr. 

Kramer adds Voice to Pulp Mill Criticism”. And then another one, “Can it be a case of petty Jealousy?” 

I agree, Mr. Speaker, that because the mill involved the utilization of the forest and government 

investment, the widest publicity should be given to its terms and to its provisions. In entering these 

agreements with the Prince Albert Pulp Company, I want to assure the house that everything possible 

was done to firstly ensure that Saskatchewan would get the pulp mill and secondly, and of even greater 

importance, that the interest of the province and its people would be fully and completely protected and 

safeguarded. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have done that in the pulp mill agreements that have 

been signed. 

 

The stand taken by the opposition now that a pulp mill has been assured for Saskatchewan by a Liberal 

government is a complete reversal of the stand taken by them when they were the government. The 

Department of Industry in 1961 issued a brochure, a copy of which I have before me, entitled 

“Saskatchewan Pulp and Paper Potential”. It makes interesting reading in the light of the criticism now 

being made by the opposition. This booklet or brochure starts off on page 1 by saying: 

 

Saskatchewan‟s extensive stand of choice pulpwood, mature and accessible, presents to industry an 

unusual opportunity to conduct a successful mill operation in this province of growth. During the past 

decade industry in western Canada has developed at an ever increasing rate. 

 

And then over the page it goes on to point out that they had engaged the services of consultants, one 

from the Sandwell and Company: 

 

This firm of consulting engineers in co-operation with the Stanford Research Institute of California, 

evaluated 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

340 

the extent and quality of forest resources, market and financing. One of the most significant findings 

of this report is that which points to the successful establishment and operation of a Saskatchewan 

base pulp industry. 

 

And then on the following page under a red banner called “Highlights”, this publication goes on to say: 

 

Saskatchewan forests contain an abundance of primary softwood species sufficient to support a daily 

production of pulpwood, of 1800 tons of kraft pulp. Coupled with a rapidly growing kraft pulp market 

in the mid-western United States, this forest will provide the basis for a successful kraft industry in the 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is what they had to say about the abundance of the forest and its capacity of 

supporting not one mill of 600 tons capacity but three mills of 600 ton capacity. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is most amusing to hear the former Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Kramer), 

condemning the government for, as he alleges, having entered into a contract for the sale of pulpwood at 

$18 a cord. In the first place, as was pointed out by the Premier, he was wrong on three counts when he 

made that statement. Firstly, the price is not $18 a cord, it‟s $18.50. Secondly, the agreement contains a 

clause that the price can be increased by 10 per cent but not more than five per cent each year. This 

means that if the delivery price in the first year is too low, the price can be increased to $19.42 for the 

second year and then $20.35 per cord for the third and fourth year when the bulk of the deliveries will be 

made under the contract. Thirdly, the agreement provides that if at those prices a loss is sustained the 

loss will be shared equally by the province and the pulp mill. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that this is a 

far cry from $18 per cord. But what did the CCF-NDP publication have to say about the price of wood 

for a pulp mill in Saskatchewan? Again I quote from the brochure: 

 

Wood costs in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

very interesting 

 

.  estimated at $18 per cord are among the lowest on the American continent. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — 10 years ago. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — This was in 1961. What are you talking about, 10 years ago? Why don‟t you follow 

your own publication? 

 

Cutting rights present no problems as timber reserves are owned by the province and are available at 

attractive terms. 

 

As a matter of fact this was the kind of material that we had to go on in negotiating for a pulp mill. Mr. 

Speaker, this is as late as November 15th, 1963. Referring to the commitment of pulpwood at $17 a 

cord, you will recall that the Premier in his address filed correspondence to the effect that the previous 

government had committed itself to the sale of large quantities of wood at $17 per cord. As late as 

November 15th commenting on this commitment, Mr. Kalmakoff (and he is well known to the 

opposition) the then manager of the Timber Board, maintained that the commitment could still be 

carried out with very little 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

341 

risk of loss and with a good possibility (and he used the bad word) of a small profit. This was directed to 

my predecessor. 

 

The junior member for Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) speaking in this debate said the government is putting 

the natural resources of the province on the auction block for the benefit of their free enterprise friends. 

This is the same tune that is being sung by the hon. member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and 

others when they cry, “sell out of our natural resources”. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, from what I can see, if there was ever an auctioneer around the Department of 

Natural Resources it was the hon. member from the Battlefords (Mr. Kramer). He was prepared to sell 

the forest resources to the lowest bidder at any price. Now let‟s see what he was prepared to do. On May 

21st, 1963, the previous government, through the Minister of Natural Resources, executed an option 

agreement with the Green Bay Packaging Incorporated, described as “incorporated in the laws of 

Wisconsin, USA, with offices at Green Bay, Wisconsin. Then it goes on to grant to Green Bay 

Packaging an option. Let us look at what this option provided: Firstly, it grants a two year option from 

June 1st, 1963 to May 31st, 1965 (and when we took office we had to contend with this option) to the 

entire Prince Albert area, on the understanding that only this company would make a feasibility study 

and would, if the study proved out, construct a pulp mill with an output of 200 to 700 tons per day. For 

this valuable offer what did the province receive? Not even the usual $1 consideration, no deposit, but 

instead they agreed to pay half of the feasibility study. This cost the province $26,500. 

 

By contrast, Mr. Speaker, we gave the Simpson Company an option on the uncommitted timber only in 

the Hudson Bay-Flin Flon area. We pay no part of the feasibility study and the company deposited 

$5,000 which will be forfeited to the province if the company fails in any one of five steps to carry out 

its feasibility study, an expansion program and build a pulp mill. This, Mr. Speaker, is the way we do 

business, in a business-like way, with, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, good businessmen. Gone are the days of 

the auction sales. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to submit to this house and to the people of the 

province that the agreement entered into with the Prince Albert Pulp Mill is no less, and in many 

respects, much more favourable to the province than the one that the former government, that the former 

Minister of Natural Resources, was prepared to enter into. This one, Mr. Speaker, has the advantage of 

providing a pulp mill and not just pre-election false alarms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what do the agreements that the province entered into for the construction of the pulp mill 

provide. I will try to summarize them very briefly. The mill is to be constructed by the Prince Albert 

Pulp Company, a newly incorporated Saskatchewan private company. The company has only two 

shareholders, Parsons and Whittemore and the government of Saskatchewan. I don‟t think I need to 

point out anything about Parsons and Whittemore. It is certainly one of the very outstanding pulp 

producing companies in the world. It is commented on in Paper Week, a publication by the Paper 

Industry Management Association which goes on to point out that right now they have a combined 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

342 

capacity in their mills of 200,000 tons of bleached hardwood kraft pulp and that with the addition of the 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill they will have 450,000 of market pulp to sell. It will be one of the largest single 

sales group of bleached market kraft in the world. 

 

Now, what about the financial arrangements? The total capital requirements to construct the mill and to 

provide operation capital is $65,000,000; $50,000,000 will be borrowed and the balance of $15,000,000 

will be equity money. Parsons and Whittemore will invest $7,000,000 and for this they will receive 70 

per cent of the shares in the pulp company. The government will have a $3,000,000 investment made up 

of $1,500,000 in cash and $1,500,000 for guaranteeing the loan. For this investment and the guarantee 

the province will have a 30 per cent increase in the company. The additional $5,000,000 will consist of a 

grant made by the federal government under the Incentive Program. Therefore, for a cash investment of 

$1,500,000 the province will receive a 30 per cent interest in this large, and, what I am sure will prove, 

prosperous and profitable enterprise. I believe that the construction of this mill under this arrangement 

will present one of the finest examples of joint effort between the public and the private sector. 

Arrangements for the loan money at 5.2 per cent interest have been completed and the money is 

committed. The total contract price for the construction of the mill itself is just a little over $52,000,000. 

This will leave a balance of $12,800,000 to provide engineering services. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Have you? 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — If you read the newspaper instead of writing to them you would find out that they 

are advertising and that tenders have been closed very recently for the persons who are going to 

construct the mill. Now just read the paper. Now this money will provide engineering services, financial 

costs, contingencies and provide a large working capital which will be necessary to ensure wood supply. 

Much, Mr. Speaker, is being said to the effect that while the government is investing $1,500,000 and 

guaranteeing $50,000,000, the entire control of the mill will rest with Parsons and Whittemore because 

of their 70 per cent interest in the mill. In other words, it is suggested that Parsons and Whittemore can 

always outvote the government. I want to point out that the agreement contains several built in 

protections for the government. In the first place the shareholders‟ agreement fixes the number of 

directors. It provides that the Prince Albert Pulp Company shall have six directors, two of whom shall be 

nominated by the Provincial Treasurer and Parsons and Whittemore are bound by contract to vote their 

shares so that two persons nominated by the Provincial Treasurer shall be elected as directors, so that 

with a 30 per cent interest in the company the province is guaranteed a third of the directors. In the 

second place there are special provisions governing the directors. In eight important instances any two 

directors are given virtual veto powers. 

 

Both the shareholders‟ agreement and the articles of association of the company provide that the 

affirmative vote of five out of six directors shall be required in respect of any of a number of matters. 

For example, none of the agreements entered into between the pulp company and Parsons and 

Whittemore can be cancelled, renewed or amended without a five out of six vote. The issue and 

redemption of shares will require a vote of five directors. The company cannot enter into any venture not 

related to 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

343 

forest, pulp and paper; the company cannot establish, form or invest in any subsidiary company, except 

one wholly owned by the company and provided it relates or is required in respect to pulpwood 

operations; the company cannot merge or amalgamate with any other company; the company cannot 

enter into any other venture, without the consent of five out of six. The company cannot pay to its 

executives or anyone else any amount in excess of $35,000 per year, and finally it cannot enter into a 

share profit vote of the directors. On top of that, the meeting of shareholders is governed by a 75 per 

cent vote in certain instances; the shareholders cannot amend the articles of association without a 75 per 

cent vote and since the government has a 30 per cent vote this gives the government a virtual veto 

power. 

 

Finally, what is very important, there can be no change in the capital structure of the company including 

the creation, incurring, or guaranteeing of new funded debts except on the vote of 75 per cent of the 

shareholders, so that although the government may be in a minority position it is given a fair share of the 

control of the company. 

 

People may ask why it is necessary for the province to guarantee $50,000,000 loan, why ask the 

province to guarantee the bonds of the company at all? Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some good and 

valid reasons. Other provinces, other countries are giving these kinds and other kinds of incentives — in 

Canada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Newfoundland. The government‟s guarantee reduced the rate 

of interest by at least one per cent annually and in the initial stages, one per cent on $50,000,000 loan 

means $500,000 per year. And $500,000 may well make the difference between success and failure. 

 

In the final analysis, Mr. Speaker, if we have no confidence in the success of this mill, would we be 

reasonable to ask someone else to have the confidence? We undertake the risks but we will also share in 

the profit. If the company makes default in payment of the loan, the mill will revert to the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to occupy too much time but there are a number of matters of 

importance. These can be obtained from the agreements which will be filed. There is the question of 

wood supply. In order to ensure wood supply the Department of Natural Resources has entered into a 

management license agreement with the Prince Albert Pulp Company. It makes certain provisions that 

so long as Prince Albert Pulp Company continues to operate a pulp mill it will be given the exclusive 

rights for thirty years, renewable for an additional 20 years, to cut and remove pulp wood from crown 

land. The area is approximately 18,000 square miles, but Mr. Speaker, this area includes within its 

boundary many large bodies of water — Candle Lake, Montreal Lake, La Ronge and a dozen other 

lakes. It contains two provincial parks, 14 Indian reserves, two other forest management licenses, and 

sufficient saw timber, posts and a few other products to protect existing operators in the area. The 

management license agreement makes strict provision for reforestation of cut-over areas. The aim is to 

provide wood for the mill from the area in perpetuity. 

 

The company is required to produce 75 per cent of the wood requirements from the area. The balance of 

25 per cent can be obtained from operators in other areas. The agreement also provides for the payment 

of stumpage. These, Mr. Speaker, are the main provisions of the license agreement. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

344 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what will be the involvement of the Timber Board with the pulp mill company? A 

logging agreement was entered into whereby the Timber Board would supply to Prince Albert Pulp 

Company 1,500,000 cords of wood between September 1, 1967 and terminating on August 30, 1971. I 

have already indicated the price for the first year and before start-up, the Timber Board is required to 

deliver to Prince Albert Pulp Mill 100,000 cords to be stacked at the mill site by start up date. The 

balance is to be delivered from month to month when the mill is in operation. On September 1, 1971, the 

pulp company has agreed to purchase all the assets of the pulpwood division of the Timber Board and 

from then on will carry on its own wood operation. The Timber Board will be paid the value of the 

assets less an agreed depreciation schedule. 

 

Now, the province has undertaken certain obligations. It has agreed to sell land for the site at $20,000, a 

reasonable price for the class of land. It has agreed to build a gas pipe line to the site, something which 

the Power Corporation does for any consumer which will consume large quantities of gas at industrial 

rates. The province has agreed to build a road from no. 2 highway to the mill site and finally the 

province has agreed to take all necessary steps to prevent pollution of the river. In return the company 

has agreed to install a chemical recovery system, lagoon and sewage system to process its waste 

material. 

 

Now, in coming to a close, what are the benefits that will accrue as a result of the construction of the 

mill? The indirect benefits are incalculable. The increase in employment which this mill will give, the 

reduction in social aid payment, the probabilities of several additional industries, the manifold increases 

in service industries are only a few of the indirect benefits which will accrue to the province. In addition 

to that the province will get some direct benefits including 30 per cent of any of the profits which the 

mill will make and then it will obtain stumpage annually. I‟m not going to give all the rates but for the 

main product — for the spruce — it‟s going to be 70¢ per cord to December 31, 1979, which will bring 

to the province an annual amount of over $300,000. For the next eight years it will be 90¢ for spruce and 

a little less for jackpine and a little less for poplar, which will bring to the province approximately 

$400,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while these are fairly substantial concessions, it must be borne in mind that these 

concessions are granted for a period of only 19 years. The agreement provides that from and after 

January 1st, 1988, the determination of fees for the remainder of the license shall be mutually agreed 

upon by the parties with the intention of maintaining the competitive position at that time of the licensee 

in relation to other similar mills. 

 

In other words any concessions by way of stumpage, ground rental and fire protection, taxes by the 

cities, are only for a limited period. The comparatively short period of 20 years. After 20 years when it is 

expected that the loan is repaid all concessions in dues and taxes will have come to an end, and the mill 

will be required to pay whatever dues and taxes the governments and the mill will negotiate. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, any statement to the effect that Saskatchewan has sold out its resources is 

untenable and that the benefits to the province far outweighs the concessions that have been made. 

Every safeguard has been put into the agreement to protect the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

At the 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

345 

same time it has given the people of Saskatchewan an industry of which it can, I believe, be truly proud. 

I believe the province is fortunate to have attracted a company of the calibre and with the reputation of 

Parsons and Whittemore. Their experience in the field of pulp mill construction and operation is well 

known and I firmly believe that under the direction of a company such as Parsons and Whittemore the 

success of a pulp mill in Saskatchewan is assured as can be, as it is possible for it to be. They have the 

know-how and they have the market potential. Because of the quality of our pulp wood, the fibre of our 

spruce and pine, this mill will produce the finest quality of kraft pulp in the world; and there is a strong 

possibility that in the very near future the mill will be able to use our poplar, a wood that we have so 

much of. Parsons and Whittemore are already using some poplar in their Belgian mill on an 

experimental basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the provisions for our Indian and Metis and for the pulp mill alone, and because 

of the other fine measures proposed in the Throne Speech, the motion to which I have just spoken 

deserves the fullest support; the government our fullest consideration, and Mr. Speaker, I shall certainly 

vote for the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the minister takes his seat, would he permit a 

question? One question? I thought I heard the minister, I may have heard him incorrectly, say that the 

company had agreed by 1971 to purchase all the assets of the Timber Board. I wasn‟t quite certain about 

it. 

 

Mr. Cuelenaere: — I said of the pulp wood division of the Timber Board. As the hon. Leader of the 

Opposition knows there is provision in the Order in Council setting up Saskatchewan Forest Product to 

establish divisions. A division, a completely separate division known as the pulp wood division will be 

established and only that portion will be purchased. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate for a few 

minutes this afternoon I would first of all like to join with those who have passed along to the new 

member for Moosomin their hearty congratulations upon his election to this chamber. I join with those 

who have congratulated the hon. member for Moosomin. I did everything that I could to ensure that he is 

here. I don‟t know whether I helped him or hindered him, but I am glad he is here. After listening to his 

maiden effort the other day I am sure all members of the legislature will agree that the people of the 

constituency of Moosomin have indeed elected a most able representative. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to confine my remarks this afternoon to a few observations of previous 

speakers in the Speech from the Throne debate. Before I start I will have to deal briefly with some of the 

remarks which the hon. member from Regina West made on the radio this afternoon when he talked 

about Saskair. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I was in the Bengough constituency by-election for a few days along with some 

of my friends across the way and my friend from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault). I always 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

346 

knew where he was because he left his calling cards at every hotel that he stayed at. The first thing that I 

had to do when I went to register was to either sweep off the desk or put in my pocket one of his calling 

cards. One of these days I will send them back, a number of the calling cards he left in the Bengough 

constituency. But you know, Mr. Speaker, in the Bengough constituency, those of us who have the 

responsibility on this side of the house for the administration of the government of this province were 

doing what John Kennedy used to say was “fielding pop flies”. We had a lot of this to do in Bengough 

because there were many pop flies drifting around the Bengough constituency liberated by our hon. 

friends opposite and their supporters. This afternoon we have had another pop fly tossed into the air by 

the hon. member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). He was very critical of the remarks which were made 

last evening by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) with respect to the Saskair agreement. 

I would like to deal briefly with some of the statements which the hon. member from Regina West made 

about the Saskair agreement. 

 

He said first of all that in this agreement the government gave an undertaking, and I think I have it down 

correctly, “not to go into the flying business”. Well, now this isn‟t right. If he has read the agreement he 

will know that it is not right. On page 11, paragraph 15A — you go down about halfway in the page, and 

it states what the crown can do. It says: 

 

The crown will not conduct aircraft operations under the name of Saskair or its assigns, nor grant to 

any other the right to use that name, but so that nothing shall prevent the said crown, departments, 

corporations and agencies from acquiring, maintaining and operating aircraft of any kind related 

equipment for the purpose of conducting the work of the crown, departments, corporations and 

agencies other than air operations. 

 

Does that indicate that the crown can‟t carry on the flying business? I say it doesn‟t. Now, that is not 

correct. So, I can‟t agree with that statement. The paragraph is there in the agreement. 

 

I think he also said that the contract contains absolutely no guarantees as to the prices this company can 

charge for air operations. He says the government cannot go into the free market and engage another 

carrier, the government is bound to use NorCanAir. Now, I would suggest to the hon. gentleman 

member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) that he look at page 13 of the agreement. Starting at the 

bottom of page 12 and there are certain items which are exempted or excepted from the agreement and 

this is what the government can do: 

 

1. Work of a type now carried on by Saskatchewan Air Ambulance, that is exempted. 
2. The transportation of ministers of the crown, deputy ministers, legislative secretaries and heads 

of crown corporations with or without accompanying personnel. 

3. Work which the purchaser from time to time may be unqualified to do, or unable to carry out 
all (and listen to this) or at rates and conditions as favourable to the said crown, its 

departments, agencies and corporations as can be outlined from another operator at that time 

for the same work. 

 

Mr. A. Blakeney (Regina West): —Mr. Speaker, will the minister permit a question? 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

347 

Mr. Heald: — You made your speech, I am making mine. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That does not exclude it, it only excludes it from air operations . . . 

 

Mr. Heald: — Well, now, Mr. Speaker, my learned friend, the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) 

wants to get into a legal argument. Perhaps he and I can get a client and have a court case and we will 

argue it out in court. What I am saying is that this is what the agreement says. This gives, Mr. Speaker 

. . . Now they will be popping up like mushrooms, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Heald: — I am making the speech and I am reading from the agreement. Why didn‟t he read this in 

the agreement? It was there, half an hour ago. This means, Mr. Speaker, in my respectful submission, 

that if the prices submitted to the government, or any branches of the government, by NorCanAir are not 

competitive, the government has every right under this agreement to go elsewhere. 

 

An Hon. Member: — At $20,000 a year . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They pay $275,000 . . . 

 

Mr. Heald: — We will get to the $275,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read the agreement, read the agreement. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Now, Mr. Speaker, my friend from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) said that a contract for 

the sale of the corporation was not entered into, and he said the government obtained a price; he said it 

wasn‟t true that the government had obtained a price of $947,000. 

 

Paragraph 4 says that the price was $947,000, subject to certain adjustments contained in paragraph 17 

on page 16 of the agreement. As a director of Saskair I am advised that the net price amounts to 

$845,025. This is the base price of $947,000 less an amount of $101,000 by which the recorded surplus 

of the corporation was reduced, so the minister was correct. The amount shown in paragraph 4 is 

$947,000. It was reduced by the adjustment provisions contained in paragraph 17. He said nothing 

wrong at all, he is absolutely correct and accurate in what he says. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, may I correct the hon. member from Lumsden (Mr. Heald)? I made no 

reference to whether . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Now if the hon. member wants to submit an interjection or question, he 

will take his seat. If he doesn‟t take his seat, then the member can‟t make the interjection or ask the 

question. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Well, I think we have heard quite enough about Saskair. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

348 

Mr. Speaker, I know my hon. friends are very sensitive about this because this niggling and whining 

goes on from day to day. They accused me of filing a false return, a suggestion by my pepper-pot friend 

from Regina north (Mr. Whelan), who is a very good friend of mine, incidentally, and said the other day 

that this was a ridiculous return that I filed, it is no return. Well, let‟s look at the facts. The facts are that 

on the 20th of March, 1965, a meeting of representatives of the government, and NorCanAir was held in 

the Executive Council Chambers. A number of amendments were agreed upon and inserted in a 

previously prepared draft agreement. The amended draft agreement was signed, pending its approval by 

the board of Saskair, and by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Now, my friends, the member for 

Hanley (Mr. Walker) and the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) should really know that it is 

necessary to have the approval of the board, is necessary to have the approval of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, so on the 20th day of March, 1965, 1965, there was not, in fact, a legally binding 

agreement. 

 

Mr. R.A. Walker (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, is the minister saying that the member was fibbing? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Heald: — I‟m saying the minister was absolutely correct. The minister said that he had signed the 

agreement and this is true. He had signed the agreement but there wasn‟t any legal effect to the 

agreement because it hadn‟t been approved by the board and it hadn‟t had an Order in Council. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, after my friend from Hanley (Mr. Walker) has practised law a few more years, he 

will realize that before an agreement signed by a department of government is binding it has to be 

ratified by the board of the company and by an Order in Council. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Tell the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) that so he can tell the truth after 

this. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I‟m telling you, Mr. Speaker, I am telling the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker). Don‟t 

worry about the Minister for Mineral Resources, he can look after himself. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of pop flies that we were called upon to field in the Bengough 

constituency. Now what were some of the pop flies that were floating around the Bengough 

constituency. Well, there was one terribly heart-rending story about the Weyburn Mental Hospital, about 

people wandering around the streets of Weyburn, not in very good shape, and so on and so forth. The 

Minister of Public Health, I think, nailed that down the other day and indicated to the legislature that our 

friend the member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) when he was the Minister of Public Health, started 

this program of having people going into these homes, so this was nailed down. Then there was the big 

story about the sale of SGIO. This was going to happen. The Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. Boldt) and 

the minister responsible stated in his place the other day that there was not going to be any sale of SGIO. 

Then there was this magnificent story, aided and abetted by television broadcasts, by my friend from 

Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), about the famous Kern County Land Company. They were going 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

349 

to buy thousands of acres of land in the southern part of Saskatchewan. Dreadful company. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I propose now to lay on the table a copy of the certificate of registration of this American 

company in the province of Saskatchewan, and I would direct your attention to paragraph 3 of the 

statement of application for registration in this province. 

 

The statement says, and I quote: 

 

The business for which the company will carry on in the province is oil exploration. 

 

Nothing about buying land. Then the company filed its return on December 31st, 1964, giving 

particulars of the business carried on in the province and in this return, which I will also file, the nature 

of the business or businesses carried on during the year ending December 31st, last, oil exploration. 

Another pop fly up, another pop fly down. 

 

Then there was another one, raise the licenses on farm trucks, this was. We ran into this very early in the 

campaign. You are going to raise the licenses on farm trucks another $10. That is not true, it is not going 

to happen and this was another story. Another fear story to try and plant in the minds of electors of 

Bengough, a fear that something which they like at the present time was going to be changed. 

 

Now, what about the stud mill at Hudson Bay? This was a good one. I had a chap driving me around in 

the Ogema-Bengough area and we called on a farmer there. He said: “One of my Socialist friends tells 

me that there isn‟t any stud mill at Hudson Bay, none at all, nothing there.” It is like my friend from 

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) talking about the $200 company last year. Well, you know — this was 

quite fortunate in a way, Mr. Speaker, that the chap who was driving me around was a moose hunter. He 

had been up at Hudson Bay last fall hunting moose, so he was able to tell this farmer that he had seen 

the stud mill, it was in operation. The people of Hudson Bay like it. The only people that don‟t like it are 

people like our friend from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) who talks about a $200 company. 

 

Mr. Walker: — How about the pulp mill? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Don‟t worry about that. Then there was a lot of criticism about the activities of the 

government last year in connection with institutional advertising of liquor. There are many people, of 

course, who don‟t agree with institutional advertising of liquor, but I have here a couple of ads. I thought 

maybe the lady member for Regina West (Mrs. Cooper) might like to see this ad. It is Drewry‟s; it is a 

Red Cross ad, inserted by Drewry‟s Manitoba Division, Western Canadian Breweries Limited. “Their 

work is never finished, Red Cross needs preventive blood donors and so on”. I don‟t know whether the 

lady from Regina West (Mrs. Cooper) likes that ad or disagrees with it. 

 

Here is another one “Peace on Earth”, the spirit of Christmas, Shea‟s Winnipeg Brewry Limited, I 

suppose they don‟t like these ads. I don‟t like them either, because you know where they come from, 

Mr. Speaker. They come from the Commonwealth, December 2
nd

, 1955. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

350 

Mr. Heald: — The Commonwealth is in the avant-garde. Ten years before the government legalizes it, 

the Commonwealth is having liquor ads, in its newspapers. The Shea‟s ad, December 21st, 1955, page 8, 

the Drewry‟s ad. They weren‟t satisfied with one, they had two in the Christmas edition of that great 

little family journal, the Commonwealth. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while I am talking about Bengough, I would like to thank the hon. members opposite 

for sending the Commonwealth to everybody in the Bengough constituency. I think it was a wonderful 

thing, I hope when you get another by-election you do it again. I also wouldn‟t want to forget my good 

friend from Arm River (Mr. Pederson). I want to join with the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Steuart) in 

thanking him, and I hope he will pass this on the members of parliament in Ottawa, who represent his 

party in the House of Commons, for sending that delightful little letter out that they did, particularly the 

one that Mr. Nasserden (the member for Rosthern) sent to all of our friends in the Bengough 

constituency. We appreciated these letters very much. 

 

You see what happened in Bengough, Mr. Speaker, was that the people in Bengough didn‟t believe all 

these stories. They didn‟t believe them because they have seen in the last 18 or 19 months concrete 

examples of the program of this government, doing the things that they said they were going to do, 

keeping promises. You know, it is pretty hard to go to a fellow that has been driving on gravelled roads 

for twenty years, and then when the government changes, he gets an oiled road, it is pretty hard to tell 

that fellow, “Don‟t trust the Liberals, you can‟t believe a thing they say”. I had that experience. I went to 

a chap who I was told had been a great supporter of the NDP. He was a very fine chap, he was a 

municipal councillor and he said, “You know, (he told me some of these things) are you going to sell 

Government Insurance Office and so on down the line?” We discussed this for about half an hour, and I 

said “Don‟t believe these things, we are not going to o.k. them”. He said, “No, I‟m not believing them. 

You know when the other government was in, I go to Weyburn quite a lot, seventy miles over there, and 

I was good for about one broken windshield a week on that road. Now I go out a mile on the grid road to 

the highway and I go from Bengough up to 13. Then I go into Weyburn and it is all oil”. So they didn‟t 

believe you because they have concrete examples, concrete indications of what this government is going 

to do. This government does keep its promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would want, in two or three minutes at my disposal, to give my 

friends opposite, some friendly advice, and I hope that they take it, and receive it in the spirit in which it 

is given. 

 

I would say to you in all sincerity and in all honesty, don‟t be so negative. Don‟t be against everything 

that we try to do. Criticize us, sure, criticize us on policy, and on platform, but don‟t criticize persons, 

don‟t criticize individuals. Criticize ideas; don‟t get up like the member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) the 

other day and launch a bitter attack on one of the leading lawyers in this province. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Mr. Speaker, on a question of privilege. The hon. member knows that I made no 

criticism of the leading lawyer he refers to except to quote words out of his own mouth. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

351 

Some Hon. Members: — Oh, oh! 

 

Mr. Heald: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the record will show what my hon. friend said, and I am not going to 

get into that, but he seemed to be very annoyed over the fact that this lawyer had campaigned at one 

time in the constituency of Hanley. Well, perhaps not, he called him an aspiring Liberal politician; he 

talked about the conspicuous integrity of Mr. G.J. Taylor, Q.C., a member of the board, and I would 

agree with this but by omission he didn‟t talk anything about the integrity of the Chairman, Mr. A.M. 

Nicol, Q.C., or the integrity of Mr. McKercher, the other member of the board. Now, I would remind 

hon. members while we are talking about Mr. Nicol, and I didn‟t intend to talk about him, because he 

can look after himself, I am not worried about him. This former government saw fit to give Mr. Nicol a 

Q.C. a number of years ago. They must have had a pretty good opinion as to his legal ability and his 

integrity. But . . . 

 

Mr. Walker: — Don‟t like his political opinions . . . 

 

Mr. Heald: — Well, you didn‟t confine it to that the other day. 

 

Mr. Walker: — Oh yes, I did. 

 

Mr. Heald: — This negative attitude, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t just have to take my opinion the fact that 

you are sort of negative in your approach to the deliberations in this chamber. I would like to refer you 

to something which Mr. Tim Buck said about the NDP on February 2nd, 1966 in the Saskatoon Star 

Phoenix. Mr. Buck said: 

 

The CCF-NDP could return to power provincially in Saskatchewan if they had adopted a positive 

attitude in the political field. This positive attitude as against the policy of criticism, could put the 

party back into the government once more. 

 

So you don‟t want to take what Tim Buck says. Well, how about this little gem from the Leader Post, 

November 19th, 1965, reporting about the CCF convention in Saskatoon. The headline said: 

 

Delegates Chastise Own Newspaper 

 

The editors of the Commonwealth should use more constructive information based on truth, some 

delegates to the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan CCF said Thursday. 

 

Delegates in one of five workshops approved the resolution which said many people reading the 

weekly newspaper for the first time resent the sometimes biased and unconstructive criticism of other 

political organizations. 

 

Then there was another solution, Mr. Speaker. This resolution commended the Commonwealth for its 

splendid presentation of factual information, and the wonderful inspiration and encouragement it had 

provided. But you know, Mr. Speaker, that resolution was defeated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

352 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, one more word and I will have to sit down. I would like to make one more 

observation of the results of the Bengough by-election. You didn‟t win because they didn‟t believe you 

and you didn‟t win because the people of this province have had enough of planners and I want to quote 

one more item, a report from you convention, when Mr. Lane, who used to work for this government, 

Mr. J.R. Lane, who is one of the great intellectuals of the CCF movement, this is what he said: 

 

Government planning at all levels became badly diffused towards the end of the CCF‟s 20 year reign 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Badly diffused, whatever that means. Here is what he says you need: 

 

A restructuring of planning by the CCF party in Saskatchewan must be undertaken with the 

establishment on the party‟s re-election . . . 

 

And listen to this: 

 

. . . of a senior minister under the Premier, and a planning board similar in size to that of the Provincial 

Treasury Department. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I called the Deputy Provincial Treasurer and I said, “How many people have you got 

working for you in the Provincial Treasurer‟s Office?” He said 308 and I asked “What is your annual 

budget for administration?” He replied $3,000,000. 

 

So, if a CCF government is re-elected in this province, the first thing that will happen is that we will 

have another building full of planners, a department as big as the Provincial Treasurer‟s Department, 

308 bodies costing $3,000,000. 

 

Mr. Walker: — They believe you, do they? They believe that kind of rubbish. 

 

Mr. Heald: — He said, the large question is not whether planning is possible, but whether a political 

party is prepared to make a meaningful commitment to planning and stay with it when the going gets 

tough. So he said you were “chicken” fellows, I hope you aren‟t chicken next time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that you can detect from the tenor of my remarks that I would 

hope my friends opposite would come with us, join with us and support this Throne Speech, and support 

this imaginative program, this program for the progress of all of the people of Saskatchewan. I think you 

should, I think you have agreed with most of the things in the Throne Speech. You said we should spend 

more on education, but you can talk about that in the budget. So far as the Throne Speech is concerned, 

you have agreed with many of the things that we want to do in this session. I suggest to you in all 

sincerity and all humility that you join with us and support this Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

353 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina City): — Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) 

my good friend has been doing a little playacting this afternoon. If you look at the gallery you will find 

that a goodly number of his friends and my good friends are here from the Lumsden constituency, and I, 

at least, want to extend a warm welcome to them. I think he has forgotten about you, at least, I would 

like to recognize your visit here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — This is no reflection on the Attorney General because I do recognize him as one of my 

better friends from across the way. I remind him that among the visitors in the gallery are many of my 

good wife‟s relations. Perhaps I will have to do a little more campaigning to get them my way, but we 

are very pleased to have them here and I am sure they will enjoy the proceedings this afternoon. 

 

I want to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, the new member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) on his election to 

this house. I am sure that after he is here awhile he will begin to realize that he probably ran for the 

wrong party. We do welcome you, Mr. Gardner, and I am sure your stay will be enjoyable. How long it 

will be I cannot say. The Bengough results might have given the government side some confidence. 

However, I don‟t think they need to rejoice too much. Had we gone out there and taken a couple of votes 

more in each poll the story would have been different. 

 

I wish to congratulate the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) on his elevation to that cabinet 

post, I believe he will do a good job if some of the members around will leave him alone. To our 

Sergeant at Arms I want to congratulate him on his appointment. I say that most sincerely as I was a 

civil servant for 14 years and recall seeing him every day in the hallways when we came to work. I want 

the legislature to know that he and his good wife are fine community leaders in the city of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — I think the one that will rejoice the most at the results of the Bengough by-election is the 

Premier himself because it was common knowledge in this city before that election, that is in the 

hierarchy of the party that the government represents, if they lost he would be replaced. I can tell you, 

that looking across the way and seeing whom he has at his left, I‟m surprised that he hasn‟t felt the 

needle being shoved into him to get him out of there. There is a little rivalry between the deputy leader 

(Mr. Steuart) and the member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner). He has one hurdle to get by the Attorney 

General and is not quite close enough yet to get at the Premier. Heaven forbid if we ever get that 

Gardiner machine back in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — I will still take the Premier over those two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I always like to greet the members from Saskatoon on this side and the other side of the 

house. The member seated 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

354 

behind me has just said that they are celebrating their 60th anniversary. I want to congratulate them and 

wish them well in their celebration. They have written a new song, they tell me in Saskatoon, “The only 

good thing about Saskatoon is the road that leads to Regina”. We are pleased to welcome the lady across 

the way as I usually do. I don‟t know whether my eyesight is failing me or not, but her charm and beauty 

aren‟t quite the same this year as they were last year. I would advise the Premier of this province that he 

replace her seat mate as soon as possible. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He‟s getting blind. 

 

Mr. Baker: — Mr. Speaker, there are many things that I could touch on today but the lawyers‟ feud on 

both sides of the house has taken a lot of my time. I would like to get in a little time once in a while too. 

I think a similar situation happened last year when I also lost about 20 minutes of my time. However, 

there are some things that I would like to touch on in the few moments at my disposal. One of the things 

that has caused irreparable damage in this province since the new government has taken office is the 

chaos created in the civil service. During the two years that the government has been in power, I must 

say that the security of the civil servants in regard to their collective bargaining rights have become a 

shambles. The CCF government in 20 years developed a public service system that was considered one 

of the best ever constituted in this country. It was held in high esteem by visitors from many parts of the 

world. I know, I had the privilege of working for the civil service after the war. In the plan every person 

in this province or across the country was given the same right to apply for any position they desired 

regardless of what ever political affiliation, race, color or creed. I remember when many came from 

other parts of Canada and the States, students from across the border, many on scholarships as well as 

other government representatives that were sent to our province to do research on our personnel and 

public service system. After their study of our system they went back and installed similar plans. I must 

say that it appears that this plan is falling apart at the present time. In fact, many of our civil servants 

have been replaced or have been forced to leave through lay-offs which in other words can be construed 

as dismissals. 

 

The government at Ottawa though has a high regard for our civil servants. It looks for the most part to 

Saskatchewan to secure the high quality men to fill its needs. I would suggest to my good friend the 

Premier that when he negotiates with the Ottawa government that he sees that we get unconditional 

grants to replace the value of the transferred civil service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — Yes, the civil service is facing a crisis. They are being reduced and not being replaced 

thus causing a work load for those who are here which appears impossible for them to carry out. It‟s 

important that employees have good working conditions and most important of all, security in the 

positions they occupy, which as a result will give the efficiency desired. Secondly, it appears that there 

is an elimination of research staff on the part of the government. No senior government in today‟s world 

can effectively govern without determining the facts. Those of us in local government cannot afford to 

hire staff from research departments and so we rely on senior governments to keep us up to date on the 

salient facts. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

355 

The civil servants have not been treated fairly, there appears to be much pressure within the service that 

is causing much concern and anxiety. We have a province of great wealth, not only in resources but in 

people, people who can serve the province and serve it well. I want to make a personal statement of 

policy in regard to our civil servants . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Party policy . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — . . . when we again have the opportunity of being the government I will do all in my 

power to see that all those who have been laid off or dismissed will be reinstated in their former 

positions, or placed in related ones with full rights of seniority and fringe benefits. This would apply to 

those who came under the Public Service Act and the collective bargaining agreements. 

 

No one denies the right of the government to appoint people in key positions particularly dealing with 

matters of policy. However, when you resort to putting people out of work in the lower paid positions 

under the guise of layoff by putting many of these employees into poverty and driving them into mental 

despair, I think it‟s a cry to Heaven to find that men across the way in this day and age would do this to 

innocent people who only want to seek a livelihood for their families. I don‟t wish this on anybody 

across the way but perhaps they might be in that same position in time to come. 

 

The progress made by the CCF in the past 20 years speaks for itself. I‟m sure everyone will agree we 

have built an orderly economy, and one that gave security to the workers, the farmers and the business 

people. It was built on many firsts for the people of this province. Industrial development was such that 

the economic base for our province was widely diversified, and these benefits the citizens of this 

province wish to retain and magnify. This province cannot go back in history which some of the policies 

of the present government are doing to us today. We must strengthen the security and economic base of 

our municipalities of this country. 

 

We have heard a lot of talk from the other side of this house about building a wider base for tax 

purposes. There are three absolutely necessary ingredients to building a good economic tax base. These 

are the extension and distribution of natural gas to the communities, the provision of sufficient water 

supplies and the provision of sufficient electrical energy. These were the three ingredients we had to 

have in the city of Regina to attract industry. The province of Saskatchewan, thanks to the CCF 

government over the past 20 years, distributed natural gas to the various communities on main lines. 

 

The Saskatchewan Power Corporation was the key to industrial growth in other centres. We in the city 

had the privilege of owning our own public utility which is now in the hands and under the direction of 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I noticed the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart), the minister in 

charge of this department, stated that they were going to have around $10,000,000 in profits for the 

fiscal year. I can tell you, Sir, that $1,000,000 of that, no doubt, comes out of our city plant acquired last 

year. I hope that when the budget comes down a good portion of that will be given back to Regina as an 

unconditional grant. 

 

Over the past eight to ten years we have had rapid growth in our city since some of these utilities 

became available. It is not necessary, Mr. Speaker, as the present government has stated, to 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

356 

widen the economic base. That economic base was established for the purpose of developing all 

industries before they were in power and it is up to this government now to continue to build upon that 

established base. Mr. Speaker, I laid before this assembly one year ago what is come to be known as 

“Baker‟s Blueprint for Progress”. That 14 point blueprint is as valid today as it was one year ago, except 

for those points that have now been taken up in part by the present government. I do appreciate that you 

are instituting my program for me. 

 

There are many things that changing conditions will make others of my points necessary. I must 

congratulate the Premier in this respect on the acceptance of one of my points, namely the principle of 

Home-owner grants. This was proposed in my blueprint for progress. However, I see it has only been 

provided in part. This government has been expounding in its repetitive trips beyond the borders of this 

province the prosperity apparent in Saskatchewan and yet they only propose a grant of up to $50 

annually to each rural and urban homeowner. Yes, only $50 to senior citizens who are finding it more 

and more difficult to exist on fixed incomes with our ever increasing cost of living. 

 

Let‟s be somewhat more realistic about this and on June 1st each year provide for each homeowner over 

the age of 65 the sum of $150, and for all renters over the age of 65 on the same date $120 annually. 

These are the people who are in dire need. These are the people whose incomes drop upon retirement. 

These are the people who developed our province, who in the twilight period of their life deserve to 

share in the prosperity and economy of our country. I ask this government again to be realistic as our 

citizens are in need of aid. It is the duty of the government of today to provide that need. 

 

What about old age pensioners? In the Speech from the Throne we didn‟t hear anything about them. The 

government of Saskatchewan as well as the government at Ottawa does not accept the fact of the 

seriousness of the plight of our pensioners. The present old age pension of $75 per month is just not 

adequate for these people. Many did not have a chance to save during the ‟30s and the early ‟40s. If this 

government is sincere in its claim that Saskatchewan is abundant with prosperity let‟s see the province 

of Saskatchewan plan on its own the additional $25 to raise the old age pension to at least $100 a month. 

This would be progress of the highest order. This government has time to bring this about at this session 

and I am sure they would have the support of this side of the house for such legislation. I would also 

hope that the budget would contain related and similar increases for mothers‟ allowances and social aid 

recipients. 

 

I wish to dwell for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, on the matter of our CPR railway system. The 

government of the province of Saskatchewan during the past year has made only a token fight against 

the CPR. I heard the government‟s presentation in connection with the discontinuance of the Dominion 

passenger service. It was presented by the Hon. Mr. Grant, ably presented by him but I must admit it had 

no substance. Surely the government is interested in the passenger services that come to the western 

cities, not only of this province but of the two other provinces too. The feeble efforts that were made by 

the government of these three provinces were something not to cry home about. The mayors of the west 

took hold of this and have done their best to try to get some adequate service reinstated. We met in 

Moose Jaw and everyone was present to protest to Ottawa that something be done about this. I want to 

say that the CPR owes this to the people of this province and the west. The CPR received, when these 

lines were 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

357 

completed, 25,000,000 acres of land and $26,000,000 in payment for building the western link together 

with all the mineral rights from which they receive large sums of royalties, that the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron) spoke of yesterday. And yet we in Saskatchewan are doing nothing about it 

and it is being left to those in local government to keep prodding the federal government to do 

something about it. 

 

In the city of Regina for example the CPR has some 66 acres in the centre of our community on which 

they do not pay taxes. The assessment would produce $250,000 taxes a year but under the Railway Act 

they are protected in not having to pay that. If this land could be developed, the city of Regina would 

realize probably close to $1,000,000 a year in tax returns. Let me tell you a little more about the Union 

Station and sheds that exist in the centre of our city. I was informed of this not long ago. We had tried on 

occasion to get the Union Station to move out of the centre of the city. The reason, I have found out 

now, why they won‟t do it and yet the CNR have moved their freight sheds out, they still get $100,000 a 

year in perpetuity as rent from the CNR, yet they don‟t even use the place. It pays the CPR to leave it 

there as they don‟t pay taxes. Yet annually they get that $100,000 a year in perpetuity from the C.N.R. 

You will also find before the House of Commons Bill C-120 in which the CPR are asking for 

$65,000,000 to cover the losses on passenger service whether we get service or not. 

 

I was very pleased when we, as mayors, met with the Prime Minister of Canada and the cabinet. We 

went to Ottawa some three weeks ago to meet the cabinet. I give the Prime Minister credit for the 

courage he had and the stand he took which those across the way haven‟t got. When we asked him about 

the deputation to meet them, the Minister of Transport, Mr. Pickersgill, chimed in and said, “No, we 

cannot have you here because it is being appealed”. I had thought that they had appealed to the courts 

but found out they had appealed to the cabinet which still gave us every right to meet with the cabinet. 

The Prime Minister of Canada stood up for us and instructed the Minister of Transport “that they would 

meet a deputation”. I admired the Prime Minister‟s courage. The door is open for us if we only want to 

act and do something about it. In recent weeks you will have noticed they set up a parliamentary 

committee to investigate railway matters. This is an opportunity for us to present our case and to stop 

rail abandonment and work toward reduced freight rates for the farmer. To get adequate passenger 

service for our urban centres and the people of this province and other western provinces. 

 

Now, I could go and say much more with regard to the railway. However, I‟ll leave some of that for a 

later debate in Canada. I do want to say, however, that some of the profits they realize — the CPR are 

not interested in passenger service anymore, it appears they are only interested in real estate from which 

they make millions each year. The CPR subsidiaries in 1964 earned over $19,000,000 and their sale of 

shares was something like $20,000,000. Out of this they had retained $5,000,000 in their coffers and the 

dividends they paid out amounted to $14,000,000. The CPR‟s own earnings were $43,000,000 making a 

total of $64,000,000. In 1963 and 1964 proceeds to the CPR from the sale of land amounted to over 

$90,000,000. Yet when we ask for a measly little Dominion passenger service for the west, which in 

some areas was paying its way, we are turned down. A large number of passengers rode between here, 

Brandon and Winnipeg, probably the Moose Jaw run to Brandon was one of the best. The money out of 

our royalties and mineral rights were paid out as dividends to their shareholders. Most 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

358 

shareholders are still holding original bonds which go on in perpetuity. 

 

We, as mayors of Canada, took action and asked the federal government and the cabinet that we want 

the Railway Act amended to provide the services that we need in this part of the country. The farmers of 

this country are contributing much towards the coffers of the CPR through their grain shipments to the 

west and to the east. Having the parliamentary committee we now have the door open to us. I thought 

the Speech from the Throne would mention this and that something would be done to stop the unfair 

treatment the west is getting from the CPR. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that it appears to me that the 

only answer to the whole question is the nationalization of the CPR under the CNR of this country. And 

I want to support that policy and you will find that mayors in other parts of the country feel the same 

even though they may have different political affiliations. 

 

Now, I had said quite a bit about the farm problem in Saskatchewan last year and I want to touch on it a 

bit this afternoon. I think it is important that those of us in urban centres realize the importance of 

farming, the primary industry in this country. As you recall, I had stated that we needed a two-price 

system. The method that I had suggested last year bears repeating again and this is part of the blueprint 

for progress that I outlined in 1965 and it still holds true. For the first 2,000 bushels a fixed price of 

$2.75 per bushel would be paid for no. 1 northern wheat over and above freight charges. Wheat over and 

above the 2,000 mark would be sold at prevailing rates. This is the answer to maintaining the family 

farm and to producing a diversified agricultural economy. 

 

Furthermore, the government has made no mention with regard to aiding agriculture in some of the 

following ways, which I mentioned earlier, by making a recommendation to Ottawa for the 

nationalization of the CPR. We must help the farmer to provide storage of surplus wheat to feed the 

hungry of the world. We must promote the building of large terminal elevators, not only at seaports and 

make efforts to reduce the storage charges and transportation charges on transferring Canada‟s wheat to 

the world markets. The profits obtained by the storage companies are according to all reports extremely 

excessive. We must take necessary action to stop once and for all the abandonment of the railways. 

 

I haven‟t seen the government do much with regard to making representations to the federal government 

to put all farm laborers under the Unemployment Insurance Plan. This would enable the farmer to cope 

with his labor needs. He must secure his share of the labor in order to carry on. This share cannot be 

attained if they are not able to bid on an equal basis with other industries. These are items of security 

that we must promote for the farmer which I will enlarge upon when the budget is brought down. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe another member is to follow me. I am sorry that some of my time had been 

taken up by others. I hope that this will not happen again. I don‟t like it and I think the Whips on both 

sides should see that we are allotted time and given that time. It is only fair to everyone of us here if we 

are allotted so many minutes we should be entitled to them. Last year I lost out on 20 minutes of my 

speaking time and part of it on the air. I would hope that this does not happen again. If problems or 

items are going to come up they should be dealt 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

359 

with following the scheduled speeches of that day. Many of us work hard on our talks to bring our facts 

before the people, and I think we have a right to express our views here. I am somewhat annoyed with 

what went on this afternoon for about twenty minutes and part of the blame is on this side too. It is 

important that those of us who sit here as private members, some of us new members, have a right to 

express our views and bring what we have prepared before this legislature and before the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the Throne Speech not having too much for the municipalities or the urban 

centres, it is obvious that I have to vote against it. There are many things I will bring up when the budget 

comes down with regard to unconditional grants, grants to help the main arterial roads in this 

community for which the former government gave us 50 per cent. I would hope that the Minister of 

Highways will see fit that we get 100 per cent to do this type of construction and grants for the 

maintenance of arterial streets. There are many more things that I should ask for, because of forfeiting 

our rights to the gas tax. I believe 20 or 30 per cent comes from urban centres and yet we get a meagre 

percentage in return. Municipalities need help otherwise you will find that taxes will increase, thus 

putting a greater load on the property owner. I am very pleased to have had the opportunity of 

supporting the amendment yesterday and I will certainly vote against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, in beginning this afternoon, I would like to join 

with others who have congratulated the new member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) on his election. I 

liked his predecessor very much indeed and I am sure that all members of the house look forward to 

association with the successor to Senator McDonald. 

 

As the last speaker in this division, Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat cramped in point of time. I would like 

to deal very quickly with some of the remarks made in the debate yesterday. May I make reference first 

of all to the speech of the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre). As I recall he took about ten minutes 

speaking on the subject of labor, mainly an explanation of how conciliation boards work, and this with 

regard to the Basken case. 

 

Now, I don‟t dispute for one moment what the minister had to say about the constitution of conciliation 

boards in general, and I certainly agree that in conciliation boards the actual decision is left up to the 

chairman himself. However, the main issue here so far as the Basken case is concerned is “why did the 

minister appoint Mr. Nicol.” This wasn‟t a matter of wage determination; it wasn‟t an issue in which a 

chairman could be of almost any political persuasion. This was an issue, Mr. Speaker, where the logical 

choice indicated had to be in all reason someone who was unconscious or unconscious sympathies 

would sway his judgment in the determination of the case. 

 

There are many eminent jurists and lawyers who could have assumed the chairmanship of this board. 

This was not done and we were left to the spectacle that has been so well described by the member for 

Hanley (Mr. Walker) a few days ago. I say, Mr. Speaker, that by the choice in this case it is not the 

chairman of the board who stands condemned, it is the government who in its decision put the chairman 

in the unenviable position in which he was placed. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

360 

The Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) as well added to what the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) had to 

say in this regard. He said categorically that the reason for Mr. Basken‟s dismissal was that he had 

refused to obey an order. Mr. Speaker, I say that that statement was a convenient fiction and I challenge 

the government, the Minister of Labour and the minister in charge of the Power Corporation to 

immediately appoint an impartial tribunal, a tribunal headed by, say, Mr. Carl Goldenberg, Q.C., the 

dean of conciliation forces in Canada. Let the parties have their own representatives if they will but 

appoint Mr. Goldenberg and put this matter to that impartial tribunal. If Mr. Goldenberg is not 

obtainable, let Mr. Goldenberg himself choose that impartial chairman. I challenge the government to 

make the determination of this very grave issue and make it immediately on this basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies: — May I refer as well while I am dealing with the remarks of the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Steuart) to the statements he made in the debate yesterday on the Power Corporation. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, I have sat in the Crown Corporation Committee for many years. I have heard almost without 

exception the reiteration of the Liberal theme that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation electrical utility 

was charging too high rates and yet it wasn‟t making enough profits and as well that there was a 

millstone of debt around the neck of the people of this province. 

 

That was the story then. Now that the government is in power it is telling us that they are going to 

maintain a higher level of profits. I think this whole story is an attempt to simply frighten the people of 

Saskatchewan from demanding the kind of power rate reductions that they had under a CCF 

administration. There were five reductions during the CCF periods of office. It is very evident that there 

are no power reductions in the offing from what we were told the other day. You know the story, the 

whole story, is built around the fact that we now apparently have only an eight per cent public equity in 

the SPC. We are told that it will be necessary to borrow in the next five years another $250,000,000 to 

be offset by $10,000,000 in increased profits. This, Mr. Speaker, I suggest, is going to further reduce the 

equity if we adopt the argument of the Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart), so that by the end of five years 

there will be a public equity of only five per cent because of this $240,000,000 extra that he says it will 

be necessary to borrow. I‟d say this kind of approach to a publicly owned utility is simple nonsense. If 

you want to apply this sort of logic then do it with every kind of utility, private or public. 

 

I‟ll just pass on to some of the remarks of the member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). I think a decent veil 

might be drawn over many of them; I am only going to refer to one or two this afternoon. He got on the 

subject of the Steel company, IPSCO, and he made remarks to the effect that it had only become a 

success under a Liberal administration. He referred to feelings of “envy and jealousy” that existed on 

this side of the house. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is, I say, a sensational whopper. This is another example 

of Liberal revisionism of recent history, because I contend that the whole existence of IPSCO was 

threatened in the early days of its development by the constant criticism and irresponsible statements of 

the Liberal party representatives of this legislature. I say that IPSCO succeeded in spite of, not because 

of, the Liberal party. 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

361 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the hon. members would want to know that we took it out of 

the mess . . . 

 

Mr. Davies: — The mess of that day was reflected in the criticism that came from your side of the 

house, Mr. Premier. 

 

I would like, too, in the short time I have remaining this afternoon, to touch on a matter that the senior 

member from Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) referred to in his address; that is the subject of education 

leaning particularly to the question of trades and technical education. As the senior member from 

Saskatoon told us, our educational standing in Canada vis-à-vis the United States is not very good. As a 

matter of fact I observe in reading the second report of the Economic Council of Canada that while 57 

per cent of the United States male labor force, 25 to 34 years of age, in 1960, had four years of high 

school training, there was only 26 per cent, about half of the United States figure, that had equivalent 

standing in Canada. The same kind of comparison holds for university training. 

 

We have reached the time, Mr. Speaker, when any concept that treats educational expenditures as costs 

purely appears now to have been cast aside by all informed opinion. It is a true investment. We are told 

by one manpower committee that investments in education produce $5 for every $1 of outlay. I think a 

five-fold return establishes its own case and establishes the need for the “higher platform of education” 

referred to by the Economic Council of Canada as “a prime necessity”. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at the session in 1965, the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) told us that plans for 

regional technical institutes would be discussed with local educational authorities in the summer of 

1965. This was, as you will remember, advanced after a great deal of criticism had come from this side 

of the house. I suggest that the situation has not improved at all and that none of the promises that were 

made to us at that time have really come to fruition. One would have thought too that in the Premier‟s 

European labor recruiting campaign that he might have asked the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) to 

effect the most rapid expansion of present programs to train and upgrade our labor force to secure all the 

skilled people that we need. But never in any announcements that I heard did he indicate this was being 

done. After all, Mr. Speaker, we have in Saskatchewan thousands of able people, both employed and 

unemployed, that are prepared to take part in programs that will put them in a better position to cope 

with the future. I say, for the government to place its main emphasis in its search for labor on the 

continent was surely setting the cart before the horse, because this was, remember, in a year when 

skilled labor in Europe and the British Isles was never in higher demand and, therefore, never in more 

scarce supply. 

 

I ask again: Where are the facilities to look after not only the people who are taking high school, and 

post-high school education, but also the unemployed trainees that will enroll as a result of the new 

federal-provincial agreement on allowances. I pause here to say that I have not yet seen an 

announcement by the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) that the province has accepted the offer of the 

federal government which I understand will become effective on June 1st. 

 

But where are the facilities, where are the facilities for training these unemployed people? There have 

already been 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

362 

suggestions in Regina that some of the older buildings should be set aside for this purpose; but this is yet 

another example of the complete lack of planning of the present administration to take care of an A-1 

priority. 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to make a number of recommendations that would advance in a concrete way 

the situation so far as upgrading and training in this province are concerned. 

 

1. Increase allowances for unemployed training at least to the extent of the offer of the federal 

government and extend the number and kind of courses for which the allowances are available. 

2. I would like to propose an additional program of allowances for employed people on the principle of 

income maintenance while they take training. I think we need legislation for leave of absence for 

workers so there will be no loss of seniority. There should be better ways of coordinating learning in 

schools with that of industry. 

3. I would like to propose that special attention be given to academic grades in upgrading, without which 

many citizens can‟t hope to fill occupations today or in the years just ahead. Some 46 per cent of the 

labor force in Canada has elementary training, grade 8 or less. The member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) 

was rather surprised that I mentioned in a news report that there were 120,000 adult people in this 

province that were in that category. I can assure him that this percentage is in nowise different from 

other provinces and that the CCF party while it was the government did more than any other party in this 

province has ever done to overcome deficiencies. 

4. I would like to suggest the organization of a provincial Manpower-Education Branch for the 

production of effective information. Information research on which to base policies is inadequate now. 

This body would work closely with the federal and with other provincial authorities. 

5. Mr. Speaker, I believe we need a stepped-up program to produce more effective guidance and 

counselling, especially in public and high schools, using the services of full-time, experienced, guidance 

personnel. 

6. The creation of new consultative machinery that would bring citizens, school boards, teachers, 

students and educational authorities together in effecting a genuine and continuing exchange of opinion, 

in addition to helping offset complaints that parents and others don‟t have a meaningful part in vital 

matters of education, and serving, perhaps, to build more mutual confidence and understanding among 

the participants. This is something that should be followed. 

7. We should resume a program for construction of regional vocational technical schools to overcome 

the harm that has been done in the failure of the present government to proceed with the provision of 

regional facilities. 

8. We should introduce into the appropriate school courses more content on consumer information, 

problems of all kinds, having particular regard to the teenager and to family income management for the 

young married couple. 

9. In general, we should search for more effective ways and means to solve the education, training and 

placement problems of physically, emotionally and vocationally handicapped people. 

 

I am not suggesting to the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) that all of these points are by any means 

completely original. I think, however, that he will agree with me if he is frank, that we are not following 

this program now, and that above all we need to have an information and research apparatus that will 

give us reliable facts on which, I am convinced, we need to proceed in 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

363 

education today. It is becoming obvious, Mr. Speaker, that there exists in Canada a highly fragmented 

approach to education systems and manpower policies. A national policy council and an associated 

provincial council have already been advocated as a means of overcoming what is seen increasingly as a 

matter for widespread criticism and concern. 

 

It has also been urged that we need to establish very soon, nationally and provincially, the kind of 

statistical and operations-research mechanisms that I have referred to very briefly here today. 

 

The role of the guidance counsellor in public and high schools as well as perhaps the creation of a new 

professional class, the academic and vocational counsellor is extremely important. This has been 

suggested by Dr. A. Porter, head of the Industrial Engineering Department of the University of Toronto. 

 

It is a step long overdue, because if we need anything in our schools today it is better and more 

dependable counselling for our young people. I would hope the general and the specific grounds that I 

have referred to should be of pressing concern to educational authorities and the government of the 

province. Overall, Mr. Speaker, there must be a readiness to review and to consider, and to discard and 

to add, as seems necessary for both today and tomorrow‟s requirements in education, particularly so far 

as technical and trades education is concerned. We have a ration of technologists to university personnel 

in this country of about 1 to 11. That spread, I think all members will agree, is far too great. It must be 

overcome. It is not a question of can we afford it; it is a question of „we can‟t afford not to!” 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I go on another subject very briefly, because it is not my intention today to keep the 

members of the house longer than the prescribed time. A few days ago when the Premier took part in 

this debate, he was very critical. He chastised the Leader of the Opposition for venturing some remarks 

about the neglect by the CPR of the interests of Saskatchewan‟s communities and their citizens. The 

Premier said, as I recall it, that this was another example of Socialist criticism of a powerful and a 

successful monopoly. I am sure that many of the people in this province are going to take cold comfort 

from the remarks of the Premier on that occasion. When he spoke we had a right to expect an active 

defence from the Premier of the interests of hundreds of thousands of Saskatchewan people and dozens 

of communities that are involved in negative CPR policies. Instead of that they got a defence of a 

railway whose activities in recent years have certainly not contributed to the well-being and security of 

the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

I come from a community where there have been many railway workers and we still have a substantial 

number. I know that they will not take kindly to the observations that were made about the railway 

system the other day by the Premier. They have seen first-hand the effects of the policy and the 

operations of a policy in terms of a great deal of hardship to both themselves and to local business. It is 

apparent, if I may say so quickly, that the Premier does not agree with the remarks of the new federal 

Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Greene, who I think was quite forthright in his criticism of the CPR not so 

long ago. I would recommend to the Premier that he and Mr. Greene might get together. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to go on, I have a formidable set of documents and data before me. It is, 

however, the time of rising. I, at this time, would like to say, as I am sure I have indicated already, that 

because the Speech from the Throne 



 

February 18, 1966 

 

 

364 

does not disclose a way for the greatest development of human and natural resources and places its main 

reliance on other than principal social objectives, I shall not support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 29 
 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Loken Leith 

Howes MacDougall Radloff 

McFarlane Grant Romuld 

Boldt Coderre Weatherald 

Cameron Bjarnason MacLennan 

Steuart Trapp Larochelle 

Heald Cuelenaere Hooker 

Gardiner (Melville) McIsaac Coupland 

Guy MacDonald Gardner (Moosomin) 

Merchant (Mrs.) Gallagher  

 

NAYS — 25 
 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Willis Wooff 

Cooper (Mrs.) Whelan Snyder 

Wood Nicholson Broten 

Nollet Kramer Larson 

Walker Dewhurst Robbins 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Berezowsky Pepper 

Blakeney Michayluk Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Davies Smishek  

Thibault Baker  

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the hon. Mr. Steuart, 

 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor by such 

members of the assembly as are of the executive council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:25 o‟clock p.m. 


