



















































Hansard: February 06, 1967


29 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 

 

February 6, 1967. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

AN APOLOGY BY THE CBC 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day, I have here in my hand a communication from the 

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, which I would like to read to the House. It is from the Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation, 1840 McIntyre Street, Regina, Saskatchewan and dated February 3, 1967. 

 

To the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, Regina, Saskatchewan. 

 

Dear Sir: 

 

Please accept my most sincere apologies for the annoying incident which occurred on February 2 

during the opening ceremonies when a cameraman spoke to the producer of the program loud enough 

to be heard by the Members of the Assembly and their guests. As you probably know, our cameramen 

wear head sets which make it impossible to hear anything except the voice of the producer. They had 

been given explicit instructions to be unobtrusive in carrying out their duties. Unfortunately the 

cameraman was unaware, because he could not hear his own voice, that he was talking loud enough to 

be heard throughout the Chamber. Nor was the producer aware the voice he heard in his remote 

location could also be heard in the Chamber itself. 

 

I sincerely regret the inconvenience and the unfortunate impression which this incident must have 

caused the Members of the Assembly. 

 

For your information, an apology is also being sent to His Hon. the Lieutenant Governor of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Yours truly, 

The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 

A.E. Parr, Manager, Regina. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. W. E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Before the Orders of the 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

30 

Day, I want to welcome the 33 grade seven and eight students from Saint Anne’s school. For the information 

of the Members, the school is located at 345 Broad Street North in Regina. They are seated in the west 

gallery and are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Ted Zurowski. I extend a warm welcome to the students 

and express the hope that their stay here today with us will be both informative and educational. 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all Members, I wish to welcome to the 

Legislature 52 students who are seated behind me in the west gallery. They are from Coronation Park school 

and are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Warren Haacke, teachers, Morris Dohlman, vice principal and 

Allan Fox. There are two classes of grade eight students. Also in the Speaker’s gallery, I’m sure that we 

would like to welcome 28 students, grade five students from Sherwood school in Northwest Regina. They 

are with their teacher, Myrtle Ellis. I’m sure that all Members join me in expressing the wish that their stay 

with us will be pleasant and informative. 

 

MR. J. B. HOOKER (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the Members of this Assembly a group of students in the west gallery from Glentworth high 

school. They have travelled about 150 to 160 miles to be with us this afternoon. They are accompanied by 

two of their teachers, Mrs. Fitzpatrick and Mr. Adam. I know the Assembly would like to join with me in 

hoping that they have a very pleasant day and a safe journey home. 

 

MR. J. E. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity through 

you to welcome a group of students from King George school in Saskatoon, seated in the east gallery. This is 

the first group of students this session from Saskatoon City. They are always eager to send students to the 

Assembly and I hope that the students as eagerly absorb what goes on here. I hope that that arouses their 

interest in our system of government and I hope that in the future they will take part in this particular system 

of government. 

 

MANPOWER SURVEY 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, on Friday last, the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd) asked me if we could give Members of the Legislature a copy of the Saskatchewan Manpower 

Survey. We have looked into this, and we have a few copies available. We are preparing some additional 

copies and I think we can give all Members a copy of the report if they desire one. 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

31 

SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 

 

MR. THATCHER: — While I am on my feet, I would like to say a word about the Saskatchewan Savings 

Bonds, Series No. 7. Bonds will go on sale next Monday, February 13. The bonds will earn an average 

interest yield of 5.54 per cent if held to maturity. The bonds are to be dated March 1, 1967 and will carry an 

interest rate of 5 per cent from March 1, 1967 to March 1, 1969, 5.50 per cent from March 1, 1969 to March 

1, 1974, 6 per cent from March 1, 1974 to March 1, 1976 and so on. Like previous Saskatchewan Savings 

Bonds, only residents of Saskatchewan will be eligible to purchase these bonds, including corporations with 

offices in Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan societies and organizations. The bonds will be available in 

denominations of $100, $500, $1,000 and $5,000 and the maximum purchased by any one person will be 

limited to $20,000. The bonds will be non-transferable and non-assignable except by inheritance. The sale 

will be handled by agents and their subagents appointed by the Provincial Treasurer. These agents include all 

chartered banks in Saskatchewan with all their branches in the province acting as subagents, all investment 

dealers in Saskatchewan who are members of the Investment Dealers Association and their subagents, the 

Saskatchewan Cooperative Credit Society Limited, with all Saskatchewan credit unions acting as subagents, 

and a number of trust companies who are members of the Trust Companies Association of Canada. 

 

This year Saskatchewan Savings Bonds will again provide the people of Saskatchewan with a gilt-edged 

investment for their savings while at the same time providing the Government of Saskatchewan with funds 

to finance investment in the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

QUESTION RE: BANK OF WESTERN CANADA 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Premier as Provincial Treasurer. In view of the concern expressed in statements by James E. 

Coyne on Saturday that an attempt would be made to transfer a portion of the ownership and control of the 

Bank of Western Canada to American banks, does your Government intend to make representation to the 

Federal Government? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — No. 

 

QUESTION RE: SASKATCHEWAN TRAINING SCHOOL 

 

MR. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I might direct 

a question to the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) and ask him when the casual employees of the 

Saskatchewan 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

32 

Training School might expect to receive their cheques? They haven’t been paid since December 23rd. 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I checked into this over the weekend 

and I believe that the cheques will be received either today or tomorrow. There was a little difficulty 

encountered. 

 

QUESTION RE: FOSTER CHILDREN 

 

MR. M.P. PEDERSON (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I’d like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald). Can he tell the House if directions have gone out from 

his Department to parents that have foster children in their homes that they must take measures to adopt the 

children that are placed in their homes within a specified period of time or the children will be moved? If 

this direction has been made, when did this become policy, and if it hasn’t, would the Minister assure us that 

he’ll look into the situation? 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — No. No directions have been issued to my 

knowledge. 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the question recently asked by a 

Member from Regina City of the Provincial Treasurer, I wonder if we’ve had any representation from the 

Saskatchewan directors of the Bank of Western Canada, Messrs. Buckwald and MacPherson to approach the 

Federal Government with respect to the possible American takeover of the Bank of Western Canada. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — No, we have not, Mr. Speaker. This Government feels we have enough problems in 

Regina and we were elected to worry about them. We think we have sufficient able members in Ottawa to 

look after the interest of our people down there. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE: SUPPLEMENTARY INCOME TO FARMERS 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address the following question to the 

Premier. What specific steps have been taken to provide supplementary income to those farmers in northwest 

Saskatchewan who have had three successive crop failures? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I think possibly if you direct that question to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane), he might be willing to 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

33 

answer. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Obviously the Premier doesn’t know. 

 

MR. NOLLET: — I always ask the number one man. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. NOLLET: — Great Number One. I address the same question to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

MR. D. T. McFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture): — I can probably answer the question from memory. 

In the first place, some areas didn’t have a crop failure for three successive years. Some areas last year, 1965, 

had an average yield of 20 bushels to the acre for wheat, but this past year, 1966, in view of the record yield 

of wheat and barley and coarse grains and all cereal grains throughout all of the province and because of the 

request from the people in that area, the first thing that was done was to contact the PFAA and make sure 

that any PFAA cheques that were being mailed out in Saskatchewan would have top priority to the farmers 

in that area. That being the case, over two weeks ago a sum of over $200,000 was mailed into that area by 

the PFAA. 

 

The second thing that was done was early in the year when there was a possibility of a livestock shortage, we 

indicated to all the farmers in that area, if they were going to be short of forage, that the Provincial 

Government would give them access to forage on all Crown lands free of charge. To this date, no farmer has 

availed himself of that opportunity because they had not sufficient forage before the year was over. The next 

thing that was done was to initiate the Winter Works Program for the area. At a large meeting, well attended 

by people in that area by over some 200 farmers and their families, they were quite interested in the Winter 

Works Program. There will be quite a sizeable amount of money made available to those farmers in that area 

for development of the area so there will be something tangible for the future. And it was brought to the 

attention of the people there that there was a mistaken rumor going around that some of the people in the 

area, if they wanted to receive assistance through the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, would have to sell their 

basic herds. In some areas some farmers had as many as 100 head of cattle. This isn’t necessary, all they 

have to do is apply under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan if they require assistance and they do not have to 

dispose of their basic herds. 

 

MR. NOLLET: — May I submit a supplementary 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

34 

question? Are the farmers satisfied with the assistance which is being provided? 

 

MR. McFARLANE: — I think the farmers are well satisfied because this is the first time in history that a 

program of this nature has been developed for that area of the province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — May I draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the fact that if they consider that a 

subject is sufficiently worthy and sufficiently important to be raised in the House, they may do so on a 

motion for return and everybody can take part in the debate. Motion for returns are debatable and people can 

make speeches thereon. What we are degenerating into here now is a somewhat disorderly question period. 

In view of the importance of radio time in the process of debate, I would think that is a better way to raise the 

subject if the Members are interested. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY (Cumberland): — $20,000 for apparently 200 people! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — If a Member wishes to raise these questions, he can do so in an orderly manner when 

everybody has an opportunity to say what they please in the debate. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 

 

Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch) moved, seconded by Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): 

 

That a humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE ROBERT LEITH HANDBIDGE Lieutenant Governor of 

the Province of Saskatchewan, May it Please Your Honour: 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which 

Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne, may I first 

express my personal thanks to the Government for the honor bestowed on the constituency of 

Notukeu-Willowbunch. 

 

To my knowledge this is the first time our constituency has been so honored in this Assembly. And as their 

elected 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

35 

representative, I can only say that we are very grateful for the honor. 

 

The constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch comprising some 4,000 square miles of ranch and farmland is 

situated in the southwestern portion of this province. Our constituency differs in some respect from many 

other rural constituencies. Unfortunately, we have no proven oil fields, no potash, no natural gas or known 

mineral deposits. Helium gas has been discovered in the Mankota area to the southwest, but to date it has not 

been brought into production. We pride ourselves on the high quality of the wheat we grow and our livestock 

tops the markets in the sales ring. Agriculture is our basic industry. Mr. Speaker, I would like to think that 

this Government, in allowing a farmer, representing a rural constituency to move the Address-in-Reply, is in 

effect saying to the people involved in agriculture that it recognizes the importance of agriculture to the 

province’s economy and that it is prepared to assist us with our problems. 

 

On Thursday last, we had the privilege of witnessing the traditional ceremonies officially opening the Fourth 

Session of the Fifteenth Legislature. The Speech from the Throne read by his Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, gave this Assembly a preview of the legislation we will be asked to consider. The program of 

legislation outlined in this document once more demonstrates that this Government will continue to carry out 

the promises made to the people of this province in the last provincial election. The speech once again is not 

garnished with platitudes or frivolous promises but it is a clear outline of the path this Government intends to 

follow in legislating to build a better Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan, under the able and competent leadership of our Premier, and with the help of his efficient 

Cabinet, has risen from a have-not province to warrant a position envied by the rest of Canada in less than 

three years. If one man could be more responsible than any other for putting Saskatchewan on the map, it 

would have to be our Premier, the Hon. Ross Thatcher. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — No one has worked harder or given more of his time and his many talents in convincing 

the rest of the world of Saskatchewan’s potential. This Government dedicated to the principles of free 

enterprise has restored confidence in the minds of our people. The depression complex created by the 

continual preaching of gloom and doom by the Socialists has vanished. Our people are now looking to the 

future with renewed hope and with a new vision. 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

36 

The Speech from the Throne not only pledges this Government to the continuation and expansion of the 

programs now in effect. It also introduces new programs designed to give better service in our consideration 

for the health, the welfare and the protection of the people in this province. 

 

We in the Province of Saskatchewan are encouraged and excited with the industrial development taking 

place within our boundaries. Now that we have rid ourselves of the strong arm of Socialism, industrialists 

the world-over are looking to Saskatchewan as an area of tremendous potential development. Capital is 

pouring into our province to develop its natural resources. The war on business is over. The private 

enterprise system is at work. Potash mines, both in production or under construction, are working day and 

night. Because of this Government’s new incentive program, oil drilling rigs are probing into deeper zones 

seeking new oil fields. The Pre-Cambrian Shield is alive with activity. More people than ever before are 

prospecting for mineral deposits. Mining and construction capital expenditures are up by 42 per cent. The 

vast timberlands of the north are being harvested. A pulp mill is now a reality. New industries are in 

operation; others are under construction. 

 

Employment is available in Saskatchewan. No longer are our citizens required to leave this province to seek 

employment elsewhere. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Our university students are able to find jobs during the holiday season to assist in 

furthering their education. Saskatchewan, under a Liberal free enterprise Government has a new look. 

Saskatchewan is on the move. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Briefly, Mr. Speaker, what is this industrial and resource development doing for the 

people of this province? Because of the millions of dollars being invested in our province, opportunities for 

employment have been made available. Unemployment is virtually non-existent. In fact, one of the major 

expansion problems facing our Government in the next few years will be the shortage of labor. It is 

estimated that by 1971, there will be 26,000 new jobs in mining and manufacturing plus another 20,000 in 

other segments of our non-agricultural economy. This will allow the Government to give better service at 

less cost to the individual. Our Indian and Metis people who for too long have been neglected and forgotten 

will be able to find gainful employment in the areas where they choose to reside. 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

37 

Increased revenues from natural resource royalties will be shared with the property owners by the 

continuation and expansion of the homeowner grants. We have every reason to be proud of our industrial 

development. However, while counting our blessings, we must never fail to recognize the contribution made 

to our economy by Saskatchewan’s basic industry, agriculture. 

 

Nature and improved farming methods have provided us with above average grain crops. Markets for our 

livestock have remained firm. Huge grain sales at fair prices have been negotiated by our senior government 

with the result that millions of dollars are being poured back into our economy. The final payment this year 

is the highest ever received. Increased incomes have enabled those in agriculture to improve their standard of 

living. Obsolete and worn-out equipment is being replaced enabling the operator to become more efficient. 

Because of the spiralling cost of production and the movement of farm workers to the cities, major 

investments will be required in the purchasing of large farm machinery so as to convert the farm into a 

family operation. We in Saskatchewan know that the benefits of a healthy agricultural industry are shared by 

all segments of our society. We also know that this condition may not remain at its present peak. Nature may 

not be so generous in the future. 

 

To combat the hazards of nature and to stabilize our industry against such hazards, it appears that 

diversification is necessary. This Government, Mr. Speaker, has launched a program of action designed to 

bring stability through diversification to agriculture. With the completion of the dam on the South 

Saskatchewan River, water is now available for irrigation. This Government will give generous assistance to 

farmers in this area to convert to irrigation farming. This Government realizes that financial assistance alone 

will not be sufficient. The Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture is undertaking a study of irrigation 

farming. It is also conducting short courses to acquaint farmers in irrigable areas with the latest techniques. 

 

Many of the farmers in the Broderick area are now assessing their positions with a good deal less fear and 

uncertainty than a year ago. They know a lot more about the day-to-day requirements of an irrigation farm. In 

areas where water is not available for irrigation, other methods of diversification are being urged. 

 

Loans are now available to farmers wishing to start a hog-raising enterprise. Community pastures for sheep 

have been established to assist those wishing to raise sheep for added income. Community pastures 

consisting of over a quarter of a million acres provide summer grazing for those in the livestock business. 

Co-op pastures are receiving earned assistance from this Government. The Department of Agriculture is 

providing the necessary funds for continued research in the development of 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

38 

chemicals used for the control of pests, weeds, and in the development of new varieties of grain. In 

1965-1966 a substantial grant was made to the University for the purpose of establishing a soil-testing 

laboratory. The operating deficits experienced by this laboratory until it becomes self-supporting will be met 

by the Government. This service will enable our farmers to make the best use of the fertilizers available to 

date. It will also assist in selecting the type of crop most suited to any particular soil. 

 

Agriculture today is rapidly becoming more complex, more technical and requires well trained people in 

basic production. We in agriculture will be required to become more efficient. We will need training in new 

techniques, new methods and better management. The Department of Agriculture has expanded its research 

department and is training personnel to become more efficient in specialized fields. We will be looking to 

the Department for guidance in this new approach to agriculture. New policies and new programs will be 

developed to keep ahead of our changing economy. 

 

The prairie farmer is extremely vulnerable to adverse weather and the hazards of nature. To give the farmer 

some measure of protection, the Crop Insurance Act was passed in 1962. In the past four years contracts and 

coverages have increased by 80 per cent. This Government has now entered into a co-insurance agreement 

with the Federal Government. This year a change was made whereby coverage is based on the productivity 

of the soil of the land to be insured. As soon as soil productivity ratings can be established, those portions of 

the province not covered by this insurance now will have the opportunity to take advantage of this 

protection. Crop insurance is new and it must advance on an orderly basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the first programs entered into by this Government was to set up a firm and fair policy 

with respect to the allocation of Crown lands. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — A point system was established placing special emphasis on need. Final allocations of 

these parcels under appeal are made by an independent board. Despite the protest from the Opposition, we 

think this system is working reasonably well. And I can assure this Assembly that should anyone devise a 

fairer way to allocate these lands, this Government will be prepared to study their proposal. It is interesting 

to hear Members from the Opposition accusing this Government of using patronage in the allocation of 

Crown land. In accusing this Government of their past sins, one can only assume that their conscience is 

bothering them. 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

39 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — This Government’s sale policy of small parcels of Crown land has been enthusiastically 

received. This policy not only gives security to our farmers and ranchers but assists in establishing 

economical units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those in agriculture who are primarily interested in the production of livestock have done a 

good job of supplying our markets with meat. With our population expansion and better standards of living it 

does not appear as if we are in danger of over-producing. The outlook is especially bright for cattle, hogs, 

sheep and dairy products. To assist those in the livestock industry to meet these market demands and 

stabilize this industry, this Government has taken positive action. In the past, shortage of feed in the years of 

drought seriously affected the livestock industry. Programs are now being established to avoid that danger in 

the future. I have mentioned the Government’s pasture programs. Assistance is now available for the 

construction of fodder storage, small irrigation projects, and for converting sub-marginal lands into perennial 

forage crop land. A feed-testing laboratory is being established at the University as a service to the livestock 

producers. The Government will also take advantage of all cost-sharing agreements with ARDA that have 

been designed to stabilize the industry. 

 

Increased grants to Veterinary Service Districts with more than one practising veterinarian are available. A 

new policy to assist in the control of mastitis has been introduced and a new provincial Veterinary 

Diagnostic Laboratory will be constructed. Electronic processing of livestock marketing manifests will 

enable rapid search of records to detect the marketing of rustled cattle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can no longer consider farming as a way of life, it has become a very complex business 

venture. To succeed, it will be necessary to strive for efficiency in operation and for the use of sound 

business administration. To assist the farmer with his problems, the Department of Agriculture has set up 

farm management clubs. Saskatchewan farmers can now obtain the services of an electronic computer to 

analyse farm records at the end of each year. This service will enable the operator to pinpoint his production 

problems and assist him in working out methods of improving his income. He will be able to compare the 

performances of his enterprises with the provincial average which will be made available by the Department. 

To obtain this service he must use the Prairie Farm Account Book available from the Department and keep 

accurate records. The service will be supplied by the Department at cost. 

 

This Government has always given high priority to the value of the family farm. To recognize the 

importance of the family 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

40 

farm, the Master Farm Family Award was offered for the first time in 1965. This award recognizes ability as 

a farm manager and the contribution to agriculture and to community life. I am pleased to say that the 

winners of the first award offered by this Government for Southern Saskatchewan are residents of the 

constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch, Mr. and Mrs. Jake Broeder of Maxstone. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — The concern this Government has for the welfare of people living in the sparsely settled 

areas of this province was demonstrated by action during the sitting of the Legislature last year. Legislation 

was passed allowing the Department of Telephones to enter into a cost-sharing agreement to bring telephone 

service to those areas of the now unserved in the province. Previous requests by these people to the former 

Administration had fallen on deaf ears. I am also pleased to announce that the Mankota rural area in the 

constituency of Notukeu-Willowbunch as the first to obtain this service, and on their behalf I extend 

appreciation to the Department of Telephones. Four other areas in our constituency are in the planning stage, 

and we hope will soon be receiving the benefits of telephone service. This service to our agricultural areas 

will do much toward preserving the family farm in those districts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1966 our province’s total national product was the highest in Saskatchewan’s history - up 20 

per cent to $2,600,000,000. Of this amount the agricultural industry contributed $1,100,000,000 or 43 per 

cent, leaving no doubt that agriculture is still Saskatchewan’s basic industry. As such, this Government 

makes no apology when we say that agriculture must receive priorities. If agriculture is to reach its potential 

in supplying foodstuff to starving peoples of the world much work will be required in the future. The 

Department of Agriculture will be required to supply the leadership, the research, the technology and the 

training required to meet this challenge. This Government will not shirk in its responsibility to the 

agricultural industry. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — As I have previously stated, agriculture has enjoyed one of its best years during 1966. It 

can only be our hope that its present position can be maintained and expanded throughout the Centennial 

Year and on into the future. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there is grave cause for concern for all people involved in agriculture. The 

continued rise in the cost of production due to the ever-increasing price of equipment and supplies used by 

the farmer is a very tangible 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

41 

reason for concern. Management claims that the increases in prices are due to the higher unit cost of labor. 

Union spokesmen deny all blame, saying that increased labor costs are matched by increased productivity, 

but that profits are the culprit. Statistics taken from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics show that in 1965 

labor costs per unit of output to be 4.1 per cent higher and profits to be 5.4 per cent lower than ten years ago, 

and that the gap is still widening. The power struggle between labor and management goes on resulting in 

crippling strikes. Every segment of our society suffers directly or indirectly from strikes and work stoppages. 

 

However, I submit, Mr. Speaker, that no one group has been as hard hit as our western farmer. Strikes are 

called by union bosses when equipment and repairs are desperately needed by the farmer. In many instances 

unrealistic settlements are made resulting in increased prices to the purchaser. Another grave cause for 

concern are labor strikes called against our transportation system at a time when we are taxing our system to 

the limit trying to move grain to meet our commitments to foreign markets. Strikes are called in the terminal 

elevators, on the railroads, on the seaways, and on the waterfronts, at a time when they were most damaging 

to our economy. Increases of up to 30 per cent have been received by unions because of their strategic 

planning. Once again, who is hit the hardest? The western farmer, by increased handling charges in the grain 

terminals and on the waterfront; by increased transportation charges on the waterways; by demurrage charges 

on box cars tied up on the rail lines waiting to be unloaded; by demurrage charges on ocean vessels standing 

by waiting to receive their cargo. The western farmers, besides being stuck with these additional charges 

stand the risk of losing their much needed foreign markets because of the Canadian Wheat Board’s inability 

to meet specified delivery dates. Mr. Speaker, I submit that the western farmers pay these additional charges, 

caused by strikes and work stoppages, with that portion of their final grain payments that they do not receive. 

No one denies that labor should not have good working conditions and wages to provide a decent standard of 

living for them and their families. At the same time, no one should deny industry a fair margin of profit. It 

must receive a profitable return on its capital investment if it is expected to expand and remain in operation. 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, labor, regardless of its claim to being a humanitarian institution, is as ruthless a 

self-interest group as is capital. Labor bosses would not be long in their present positions if they were not 

hammering for higher wages and better working conditions. This attitude of labor is evidenced by Samuel 

Comper’s (father of the U.S. labor movement) reply to a question respecting the aims of labor. He said labor 

aims could be summed up in one word, "More". In other words, regardless of what we have today, we must 

continually fight for more. In their demands for more, labor unions are too prone to 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

42 

use that powerful weapon at their disposal, strike action. Irresponsible labor bosses will call for strike action 

by their membership - regardless of the effect it may have on any one segment of our population - regardless 

of the effect it may have on our national economy - regardless of the effect it may have on self-interest. 

Meanwhile the Canadian economy even though it has been showing signs of slowing down is caught in the 

struggle between management and labor. Management is seeking a higher margin of profit. Labor is wanting 

a larger slice of that profit. The results of this during 1966 have been more strikes and lockouts than at any 

time in our history. Over five and one half million man working-days were lost at a time when because of the 

slowing down of our economy we should be operating at peak production. Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of 

1966, 1,736,000 or 30.7 per cent of our non-agricultural, paid workers were members of labor unions. Of 

these workers 1,200,000 belonged to international unions with head offices in the Unites States, or 70.1 per 

cent. If we consider our total labor force, only 24.5 per cent belong to labor unions. It is quite conceivable 

then to say that irresponsible action on the part of labor bosses controlling only 24.5 per cent of our total 

labor force could place our Canadian economy in a very precarious position. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — It’s a frightening calculation, Mr. Speaker, but nevertheless a possibility. If we are to 

maintain a high level of employment and business activity in Canada, nothing is more important than that the 

rise in our industrial costs be reserved. If we are to remain competitive at home and abroad, we must get 

manufacturing costs down with all possible speed. Can anyone doubt what will happen if we do not? Mr. 

Speaker, if our farmers are going to survive in an economy where the fruits of their labor are sold on a 

controlled market, some control is going to have to be placed on the cost of equipment and materials that 

they are forced to purchase. How long, Mr. Speaker, are we going to sit idly by and allow disagreements 

between labor and management to jeopardize our Canadian economy? What better time than this, our 

Centennial Year, for governments to take positive action and insist, by legislation if necessary, that labor and 

management use moderation and national thinking in their collective bargaining. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Labor, along with management, must assume their share of responsibility for placing 

the farmers of this province in the financial straight-jacket they find themselves in today. When a Member on 

this side of the House mentions labor and farmers in the same breath, a hue and cry is heard from our labor 

friends 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

43 

opposite, saying that this Government is trying to draw a line between labor and the farmer. Mr. Speaker, 

management or labor needs no help from this Government to prove that the plight of the farmer is no 

consideration of theirs in their demands for more. 

 

Our Opposition say that this Government is anti-labor. This Government has done more for labor in the 32 

months we have been in office than the Socialists did in 20 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — We are providing our working force with job opportunities right here in Saskatchewan. 

And under this Government those job opportunities will continue to be available. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Available not only for themselves but for their sons and daughters as well. This 

Government realizes that the strength of Saskatchewan’s economy is based on the effectiveness of its labor 

force. Responsible labor organizations have nothing to fear from this Government. To my knowledge, Mr. 

Speaker, the only thing this Government is anti, is anti-Socialism. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — If some segments of our labor force see fit to give to the Socialists their financial and 

political support, then in effect we could be called anti-labor as far as that particular group is concerned. We 

as a Government do not promote the interests of any particular group. The interest of the citizens of the 

province as a whole dictates the type of legislation we place on the statute books of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — The CCF party was born in rural Saskatchewan. The few CCF Members opposite 

representing rural constituencies must have anxious moments trying to explain why their party today has 

deserted its founders in favor of an alliance with labor. It is little wonder that the Members opposite remain 

noticeably silent when strikes occur hitting at the very heart of our agricultural industry. The fact that the 

so-called marriage between labor and the CCF is not a happy one in Saskatchewan is evident by the 

reluctance of the CCF in Saskatchewan to change their name to correspond with that of their national party. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

44 

MR. HOOKER: — Further evidence of this strained relationship was witnessed by the fact that many rural 

delegates balked at passing a labor resolution, calling for the immediate repeal of the Essential Services 

Emergency Act, at the last CCF Convention. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — In a recent television appearance, Mr. Douglas, the NDP leader, make it quite clear that 

the alleged domination of Canada’s economy by the United States through U.S. investment in Canada would 

be a major issue of his party in the next Federal election campaign. For years the CCF-NDP have been crying 

about the domination of our economy by American capital. However, nothing is ever said about the 

domination of our trade union movement by the American labor bosses. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Nothing is ever said about the crippling of our economy by strikes spear-headed by 

irresponsible power-hungry labor bosses in the United States. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Nothing is ever said about the jurisdictional strikes called by these membership-hungry 

international unions in their effort to take over our smaller Canadian unions. What has Canadians got to gain 

by having labor union bosses in New York monopolize the supply of carpenters in Toronto? Nothing will be 

said about the individual rights and freedom of people when picket lines set up by 80 striking bricklayers can 

cause a huge corporation to close down putting 8,000 people out of work. Nothing is ever said about that 

portion of the union dues paid by the 1,200,000 members of our labor force belonging to international unions 

finding its way into the coffers of these same labor bosses, and this appears to be a sizeable amount. The 

OCAW in Saskatchewan do not deny that $2.55 per month of their membership dues goes to their Union’s 

head office in Denver, Colorado. If we consider that $2.55 per month as a national average, then over 

$30,000,000 annually of the workers’ hard-earned money goes to these large American-based unions. What 

do our Canadian workers get in return? The reason for this silence on the part of the Opposition is quite 

obvious. The CCF-NDP party receive financial and political support from this very source and they have no 

intention of biting the hand that’s feeding them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

45 

MR. HOOKER: — The control labor unions have on the Opposition in this House was very obvious during 

the debate on the Essential Services Act. The galleries in this Assembly were filled with representatives of 

the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that their presence in the galleries was not to 

hear what the Premier had to say, but rather to judge the performance of those Members whose party 

receives their financial and political support. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a member of a Government who had the courage, when 

the very health and welfare of our citizens were threatened by strike action, to pass legislation making strikes 

illegal in essential services. I am equally proud to be a member of a Government who voluntarily increased 

the salaries and wages of civil servants and employees of Crown corporations, when it became evident that 

the increases they were to receive under their union contract would not be sufficient to meet the increasing 

costs of living. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HOOKER: — We believe that the working people of this province must be treated fairly and squarely. 

No one can justly accuse this Government of unfairness in dealing with our employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have previously stated that no one is harder hit by strikes than the western farmer. In the few 

minutes that I have remaining I would like to qualify that statement by a brief reference to the recent work 

stoppage on the waterfront in Vancouver. A dispute between labor and management whether or not foremen 

in charge of the longshoremen would remain as part of management or be certified as a union had reached a 

critical stage. Management claimed that the foremen would lose their effectiveness unless they were part of 

management. The long shoremen’s union in an effort to force certification called a slow-down strike. The 

men reported for work as usual but under orders from the union they were to stop working unless the 

foreman supervised their every move. The union to protect the men from being fired said that according to 

their union contract the men were not allowed to work unless under supervision. 

 

The day before the Harbor Commission ordered the harbor closed I had the opportunity to join in a 

conducted tour of the waterfront - an opportunity I readily accepted. While visiting a terminal elevator I 

enquired as to how long it took to load the ship that was taking on cargo at their pier. The answer was 

normally two or three days but due to the effectiveness of the 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

46 

slow-down strike it had been loading for 13 days and was still not finished. On that particular day there were 

43 deep sea vessels anchored in the harbour, 16 waiting at sea, and others being diverted to other ports. Rail 

yards were congested with loaded boxcars and loaded cars in transit on the railroads were being left on the 

sidings throughout B.C. The following day the Harbor Board closed the harbor and it remained closed until a 

temporary settlement was negotiated. 

 

Besides being deprived of the opportunity to deliver his grain the western farmer will never know just how 

much in actual cash this tie-up will be costing each producer. Certainly the Harbor Commission will suffer 

large financial losses. The worker will also suffer loss from loss of pay. The shipping lines have a financial 

loss even though they do receive standing by pay from the terminal elevators commonly known as 

demurrage charges. The terminal elevators in turn bill the Canadian Wheat Board for repayment of the 

money paid to the shipowners on a complicated contractual agreement. Whose money has the Canadian 

Wheat Board used to pay the terminal elevators and the railroad for demurrage charges? None other than the 

western farmers’ and it will be a sizeable amount. An article taken from the Vancouver Province states: 

 

On January the 18th, 69 deep sea vessels - the back-log of ships whose schedules have been delayed 

by the halt in harbor loading - were in anchor in English Bay and Burrard Inlet. This back-log is the 

largest in the Port’s history and it is expected to take two more months before the harbor is back to 

normal. 

 

Western farmers will most certainly agree with the statement in the press saying that Vancouver cannot 

afford any more such performances. This back-log in shipping is still seriously affecting farmers in Northern 

Alberta. If they are unable to deliver their damp grain before spring they could suffer large financial losses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when situations as this are allowed to continue, how can one expect the farmer’s interest to be 

compatible with that of labor? Our labor friends in the Opposition who to a man tried to deny the farmers the 

use of tax-free gasoline in their farm trucks will have a lot of explaining to do to the farmers of this province 

when they are asking for their support in the next election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move, seconded by the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) that a humble 

address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

47 

MR. E.F. GARDNER (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of the Moosomin constituency 

I would like to thank the Premier for choosing me to second this motion today. The Throne Speech has given 

us a very good outline of the Government’s present and future program in all fields of provincial affairs. 

However, I would like to confine my remarks to three specific areas: 

 

 1. that of education; 

 2. consumer protection legislation; 

 3. assistance to rural municipalities. 

 

I am pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal Government is continuing to give top priority to education 

in this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — People are amazed at the hollow hypocrisy displayed by some of the Members 

opposite in their recent comments on education in Saskatchewan. An examination of the record is certainly 

in order. The Liberal party has long recognized that the property owner is paying too large a share of the cost 

of education and an effort is being made to decrease this burden on the owners of our farms and our homes 

and our businesses. During the 20 years the Socialist were in power, grants to local school boards averaged 

about 21 per cent of the total cost of primary and secondary school education. The other 79 per cent was paid 

by the property owner. In its first year the Liberal Government increased school grants to $38,400,000. This 

was 43 per cent of the total cost. In 1965-66 grants were again substantially increased to $45,800,000, about 

50 per cent of the total cost. In the current year, grants have risen to $55,000,000. This is now over 51 per 

cent of the cost and the Liberals are not yet satisfied. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — So we can see, Mr. Speaker, how our public and our high schools were short changed 

under the Socialists. They paid an average of 21 per cent, the property owners paid 79 per cent; the Liberal 

Government now pays 51 per cent, the property owner only 49 per cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

48 

MR. GARDNER: — Last year for the first time, Mr. Speaker, free text books were provided to students in 

grade nine in all high schools throughout the province. As all parents know, school books have become more 

expensive and more of them have been required. Some families have found it difficult to meet these costs. 

The Liberal Government has recognized the problem and has done something about it. Last year free text 

books were provided to grade nine; this year it’s proposed the program will be extended to include grade ten. 

We hope that in the future it may be extended even further. The cost to the Government for this program is 

about $600,000 to provide the texts for one year; about $2,500,000 will be required for the complete 

program. As an indication, Mr. Speaker, of the great advance in our high schools, I have here a feature article 

from the Toronto Globe and Mail which should bring pride to the people of Saskatchewan. It is headed "The 

Most Up To Date High School In The Country". At the top it says: 

 

Out of the fertile prairie soil sprouts a laboratory school of team teaching, individualized learning, 

TV and electronic lessons. 

 

It goes on in detail to describe Regina’s Miller Composite High School in glowing terms and to give credit 

to those responsible including the Saskatchewan Department of Education. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — It mentions, Mr. Speaker, the $500,000 worth of equipment in this school and it 

mentions the technical and vocational aspect of this school. The article indicates that this school is a model 

for all of Canada and the Toronto education officials are studying it thoroughly before going ahead with their 

$6,000,000 high school of a similar type. An article such as this can certainly make us all proud of the 

exciting, new educational developments in Saskatchewan. It is unfortunate that we have to go to a Toronto 

paper to get this sort of recognition. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if you think that the public and the high schools were neglected under the Socialists, wait 

until we examine the records in regard to the universities. They doled out paltry and parsimonious sums over 

the years and prevented the expansion that was so desperately required. During 20 years of Socialism, the 

average Provincial grant to the University was $3,100,000 and the highest it ever got was $11,600,000 in 

1963, just before the election. If they had been returned in 1964. Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the grant would 

have been reduced. When the Liberals took over, they examined the university situation, and frankly, it was a 

mess. We had a shortage of dentists; we had no Dental College. We had a desperate need for more 

veterinarians; we had no Veterinary College. We had no 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

49 

place for these people to be trained. We faced a considerable and a predictable increase in student enrolment. 

We had no space available for these students. The Liberals realized that immediate action was required to 

prevent complete chaos at our University and act they did. In 1964 and 1965 the grant jumped to 

$15,100,000. In 1965-66 another spectacular increase to $21,500,000. This year up to $23,500,000 or twice 

as much as the Socialists ever provided in one year to the University. Next year, Mr. Speaker, we will see it 

rise sharply again. I have here the annual reports of the University for the past several years and the figures 

shown therein clearly illustrate my point. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that further figures are not necessary as the dramatic change under the 

Liberals is obvious to anyone who wants to look around. Drive around the Saskatoon campus and the Regina 

campus and even the most dedicated Socialist could not help but be impressed by the activity he sees. Vast 

new buildings packed with new equipment are going up on all sides at a rate never before dreamed of. A 

crash program is under way to provide our young people with the space and with the facilities which they so 

urgently require to complete their education, facilities that were so long denied them under the Socialists. 

For example, the new Veterinary building presently under construction on the Saskatoon campus is well 

under way and will cost about $6,500,000. 

 

We should note, Mr. Speaker, that all of this is being accomplished at a time when Saskatchewan university 

student fees are being maintained at the lowest level in all Canada with the exception of Newfoundland. The 

fees paid by Saskatchewan students amount to only 18 per cent of the total cost of providing a university 

education. The other 82 per cent is out of public funds. McGill students by comparison pay about 30 per cent 

of their cost in fees. 

 

The Federal Student Loan Fund, administered by the Provincial Department of Education, has proved to be 

one of the most acceptable programs ever devised for financing a university education. It provides 

substantial interest-free loans to the students at a time in their career when the funds are badly needed and it 

allows them to pay this money back without interest after graduation when their earning capacity is high. 

This program, Mr. Speaker, has almost made all other forms of student assistance obsolete and its popularity 

is certainly indicated by the number of students participating. I have here a press notice from the Leader Post 

of January 25, 1967, indicating that 3,843 Saskatchewan students received these interest-free loans totalling 

about $3,000,000 in the first quarter of the 66-67 academic year. This means that about one-third of the 

students presently attending university in this province took advantage of this program in the one 

three-month period, and many more have made use of it since. University students 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

50 

and educators in Canada have long talked about and indeed dreamed about universal accessibility in regard 

to university education. This simply means that a university education should be available to any deserving 

student regardless of the financial situation of himself and of his family. With the financial assistance 

available today, I am very happy to say that this long awaited goal has finally been achieved. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MS. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, no amount of haranguing or hand wringing by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) on your television screen will ever convince the people of this province that the 

Liberal Government is selling the University short. The figures to prove different are too readily available. 

The results are too obvious and the evidence is apparent for all to see. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope I have not left the impression that this vast Liberal educational program is benefiting 

only those students attending public schools, high schools and universities. Increased activity is apparent also 

in the fields of technical and vocational education and you can hardly pick up a paper any day without seeing 

evidence of this. For example, I have selected these samples of this activity from the Leader Post of only the 

past two weeks. I have here an indication of this type of course. Heavy Duty Equipment Operating Training 

Courses. It states that many vacancies exist today in Saskatchewan in the earth-moving and road construction 

industry. It offers to train men for these jobs and to pay them generous allowances while they are training. I 

have another, headed Commercial Vehicle Driver Training Courses. These courses prepare men for 

employment in the trucking industry and again pay living expenses while in training. And here, Mr. Speaker, 

is an announcement from the Weyburn Vocational Training Centre. It indicates that new courses will be 

starting February 13 in such diverse fields as: small appliance repair, carpeting and tile setting, refrigeration 

and air conditioning. And again it indicates that generous training allowances will be paid by the Provincial 

Government to the student while he is taking these worthwhile courses. And here, Mr. Speaker, is another ad 

from last week’s Leader Post which could easily be overlooked and which I think has special significance. It 

simply states: "Board and room wanted immediately for twenty boys of Indian ancestry who will be 

completing a four-month surveyors course in Regina." Mr. Speaker, we didn’t see ads like this five years ago 

under the Socialists because this kind of training was simply not being provided. 

 

I feel that sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we get too involved in the statistics and in the dollars and cents of 

education and we fail to fully appreciate the human side involved. Here we have an indication that twenty 

Indian youths are being provided with training which will allow them to take a worthwhile place in 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

51 

our society and enjoy the self-respect and the benefits that this entails. Last year, for the first time, Mr. 

Speaker, we went right onto the Indian reserves and provided educational upgrading courses for the people. 

And it was a great success. The program was eagerly welcomed by the Indian people. I am happy to report 

that it is being widely expanded this year and instead of a joint operation with the Federal people the 

Department of Education has now taken over complete responsibility for this program. We realize, Mr. 

Speaker, that only a small number of our native people complete high school, few go to university and very 

few take technical and vocational training. We want to see these numbers substantially increased, but 

upgrading courses are often a necessary preliminary to further education. This is why we feel upgrading 

courses are so important, this is why they are being widely expanded by the Liberal Government. 

 

Another ad in this same paper, Mr. Speaker, gives us an indication of a new and valuable program being 

initiated by the Department of Education. It is headed: High School Driver Education Instructors Courses 

and it says that with the introduction of Driver Education as an integral part of high school curriculum in 

September, opportunities will be open to men who are qualified to provide behind-the-wheel driver 

instruction. Mr. Speaker, ever since this Government took office, it has been deeply concerned about the 

rising accident toll on the roads of this province, and especially the accident toll among our people who have 

the highest accident rate. However, recent statistics seem to indicate that the accident rate was substantially 

reduced among those young people who have had formal driver training. With these facts in mind, this 

Liberal Government has embarked on a massive expansion of the Driver Training Program in our high 

schools and the necessary money is being provided to carry it out. About 3,000 students are now getting this 

training under a limited program in some of our larger schools. About 6,000 students received this training in 

the current year, which is the first year of the program. It is expected that this program soon will be expanded 

to include some 18,000 to 20,000 students in the near future and it will mean that all eligible students will be 

trained. A supervisor of driver education has just recently been appointed to oversee this plan. Money has 

been made available to provide a grant of $25.00 per student to the school board or unit board taking part in 

this program. It appears that driver training not only provides the young person with more actual driving skill 

and more knowledge of our driving regulations and laws but in general it improves the whole general 

attitude while driving and this also leads to a lower accident rate. For these reasons, we feel that this is one 

of the most valuable programs to be put forth by the Department of Education for many years and it should 

substantially decrease the accident rate among those age groups to which it applies. 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

52 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — In the field of education, Mr. Speaker, there are several improved programs which 

should not be overlooked. One of these is our Teacher Recruitment Plan in the United Kingdom. We have 

one man over there now who can make actual placement contacts with the teachers and another is going in 

March. Improved selection methods are being used and in 1966 we recruited 247 teachers under this 

program, the largest number ever in a single year. The target for 1967 is approximately 350 teachers, perhaps 

even more. An improved seminar plan is being developed to properly orient these teachers to our way of life 

and our teaching methods when they come into the province. They are regularly brought into Regina and to 

Saskatoon for this purpose. Their passage is of course paid from the United Kingdom and other benefits are 

available so that these teachers are attracted to Saskatchewan to help ease our teacher shortage. 

 

There have been some problems over the years, Mr. Speaker, in the field of teacher salary negotiation 

procedures in this province. And to solve these problems, the Minister of Education some time ago set up the 

Moore Committee to investigate all phases of the subject. The report has just recently been made public, and 

while I do not have time to go into all the details, is one of the most useful commissions set up in the 

province for many years and secondly that the recommendations have been favorably accepted for 

consideration by teachers and by school boards alike. And I feel that acceptable changes and improvements 

will be expected as a result of their efforts. I think you can see, Mr. Speaker, by the greatly increased 

expenditures and by the greatly increased activity in all phases of education and by the bold and imaginative 

new programs that this Liberal Government is indeed giving top priority to education. 

 

This Government believes that you cannot increase the productivity of this province unless you increase the 

educational component to young people of this province. Education not only helps the individual increase his 

income, but it contributes to the economy of the whole province, and this applies especially in the technical 

and vocational field. We want to train these people in the province because their skills are desperately 

needed in the province, especially in view of our rapid industrial expansion. New technical courses will soon 

have to be provided, even in such fields as training people for careers in our new pulp industries. Mr. 

Speaker, time does not permit even a limited look at all the various new programs under way or under 

consideration by the Department of Education. 

 

I could have discussed some of the other phases of education mentioned in the Throne Speech, such as the 

changes and improvements in the Nursing Education Program: the plan for the 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

53 

establishment of the Residential School for the Arts in the Qu’Appelle Valley: the Mobile Counselling 

Service which will be of great assistance to young people in rural areas of the province. We could have 

looked at the report of the Library Inquiry Committee which was set up by this Government to investigate 

the adequacy of existing library facilities, both public and regional in Saskatchewan. As a result of their 

report, more money will be provided to bring library standards to a higher standard. These are additional 

examples of the new outlook in education since the Liberals came to power. Mr. Speaker, I noticed at home 

last week, in one of our local weekly papers, that the constituency CCF organization had had a meeting to 

discuss education. Presumably, they are having these at other places in the province. Such an exercise in 

futility, Mr. Speaker, is difficult to imagine. If they talked of CCF accomplishments in the past, it must have 

been a pretty quiet meeting. If they compared their program with that of the Liberals, it must have been 

rather embarrassing. If they made any plans for the future, it must have appeared rather hopeless. I would 

think that with their dismal record, education would be one subject that they would wish to shun completely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that we all look forward to a further expansion of the Liberal Government’s policy of 

providing more financial assistance to the rural municipalities of this province. We all know that land taxes 

have risen steadily for 20 years and have now reached a critical level. The Liberal Government is determined 

to do everything possible to cope with this problem. The equalization grant program has proved highly 

successful and has been responsible for preventing a drastic increase in land taxes throughout rural 

Saskatchewan. I believe that the benefits of this program can best be illustrated by referring to the rural 

municipalities in my own constituency of Moosomin. In 1965 these 11 rural municipalities received 

Provincial Government grants of only $9,572. One year later, in 1966 the same 11 rural municipalities 

received $119,992 in grants from this Provincial Government. An increase, Mr. Speaker, of approximately 

12½ times as much in one year. This included the new grants available for the first time under the grid road 

maintenance program and the snow removal program. 

 

To see what these large grant increases mean to the average farm taxpayer, let us take a look at some of the 

individual municipalities in my constituency. In the RM of Wawken in which I live, the increase last year 

was $8,600; on their assessment of $1,800,000 this is an equivalent tax saving of about five mills. In the RM 

of Silverwood, just north of me, their increase last year was $10,400 and on their assessment of $2,600,000 

this is a tax equivalent saving of about four mills. In the RM of Rocanville, in the northeast corner of my 

constituency, their increase last year was $14,700 and on their assessment of $1,700,000 amounted to a tax 

equivalent of approximately eight mills. In the RM of Willowdale, near Whitewood, their 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

54 

increase last year was $12,400, on assessment of $1,300,000, a saving of over nine mills. And in the RM of 

Martin, near Wapella, the increase again was $12,100 and on an assessment of $1,300,000, a save again of 

over nine mills. Mr. Speaker, if it had not been for this grant increase, in the last three examples that I 

mentioned these rural municipalities would have had to raise the farmer’s land tax by 12 to 15 per cent to get 

an equivalent amount of money to provide the services and to carry out the necessary programs in their 

municipalities. And if we refer only to the municipal tax, and do not include the school tax, some of these 

grant increases would amount to savings of around 30 per cent to the farmer. 

 

The Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker, is taking direct action to reduce the load on the property owner. 

Every farmer in my constituency has been saved many dollars by these equalization grants and I would like 

to assure the Government that it is greatly appreciated by rural municipal officials and by taxpayers alike. 

This program, along with the homeowner grant is finally doing something concrete about the problem of 

excessive land taxes, a problem that built up over 20 years with the Socialists, another problem that we 

inherited from them in 1964. Mr. Speaker, the new grants for snow removal have encouraged rural 

municipalities and farmers to engage in a more active snow removal program to the benefit of all rural 

people. The new grid road maintenance grants have provided a higher standard of maintenance on all of 

these roads throughout the province and they have prevented the deterioration of these roads which might 

have resulted if money had not been available to keep them in shape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that further legislation is proposed in the realm of consumer protection. 

When the Hon. D.V. Heald took over in this province as Attorney General, after 20 years under the 

Socialists, he found numerous complaints on file in this regard and more were pouring in every day. People 

were being taken in by fast-buck artists, many from outside the province, selling such things as hearing aids, 

stocks and bonds, used cars, cemetery plots, building materials and numerous other items. Some of these 

salesmen were legitimate but there was very little control over those who were not. In many cases the victims 

were older people or people with limited business experience, people who could ill afford to be swindled out 

of their savings. At this time the legislation in this regard was grossly inadequate. The CCF professed to be 

friends to these people but the cavalier manner in which they ignored this problem was a black mark in the 

history of Saskatchewan. Mr. Heald realized the urgency of the problem and some of the legislation prepared 

and presented during the past two years under his direction is as follows. 

 

The Direct Sellers Act. This is an act providing a cooling-off period of four days on any contract made with a 

door-to- 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

55 

door salesman. Before this legislation, if you made a contract to buy something from one of these people, 

you had to abide by it no matter how ridiculous it later appeared. Now you have four days to examine, to 

investigate or to simply think it over. If you are not satisfied, you can cancel the contract. Before this 

legislation there were many cases of people buying shoddy merchandise at exorbitant prices from 

door-to-door salesmen and signing agreements to pay for these goods, agreements which turned out to be far 

more severe than the buyer had expected. This new legislation has pretty well eliminated the problem. 

 

We now have the Cemeteries Act which makes the companies involved keep a large percentage of their 

income in trust, so that services can definitely be provided when required. Before this much of the income 

could be spent by the developer and money might not be available for the upkeep of the cemetery in later 

years. Most of the victims in these cases were older couples who spent their savings for burial plots and 

markers to find later, when one of them died, that the expected services were simply not forthcoming. This is 

the type of situation which was ignored by the CCF but was quickly remedied when the Liberals came to 

power. 

 

We now have an act requiring the bonding of all car salesmen. This legislation was asked for by the 

Saskatchewan Motor Dealers Association and was welcomed by all legitimate dealers. However, it does 

protect the general public by giving control over the fly-by-night type of operator. We now have legislation 

tightening up the regulations governing security salesmen. This should prevent some of the problems and 

scandals that occurred in this province eight or ten years ago when the CCF were in power and shady 

operators were almost given a free hand to bilk the public at will. We hope that tighter controls will now be 

exercised so that fast-buck schemes like Columbia Metals and Tyrone Hotels will not be allowed to take 

millions of dollars from the people of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDNER: — Mr. Speaker, I could mention other shady enterprises and I could mention the names 

of some of the Members opposite who were at that time in a position to control this activity but chose not to 

do so. 

 

We also have an act now requiring registration and supervision of scholarship plans. This means that if you 

contribute to some type of a scholarship plan for your children, for example some parents have arranged to 

turn in family allowance cheques for this purpose, that these plans are registered and regulated and 

controlled. Saskatchewan is the only province at the moment that has this legislation. That it is good 

legislation is attested to by the fact that a resolution was passed by 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

56 

the Association of Superintendents of Insurance this year that all provinces in Canada should adopt similar 

legislation. And in the one field left where problems arise, that of consumer credit, we would hope that the 

forthcoming legislation will protect the people of this province and allow them to be better informed when 

borrowing money. 

 

I am also pleased to note the progress being made by the Department of the Attorney General in their efforts 

to have more of our urban centres serviced by the RCMP. Many towns were finding it difficult to get trained 

personnel to do their policing and in some cases serious problems were developing. I am particularly happy 

to see three towns in my constituency, Broadview, Grenfell and Rocanville, already enjoying the benefits of 

this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Ministers of our various departments for the manner in which 

they have handled the affairs of this province for the past two and a half years. They have salvaged 

Saskatchewan from the chaos and stagnation left after 20 years of Socialism and brought it to a position of 

prosperity, renewed industrial activity and self-respect. In addition they have performed something of a 

political miracle by increasing services to the people of this province and at the same time reducing their 

taxes. In this regard, Mr. Speaker, we are the envy of people all across the country, as almost every 

provincial government in Canada has had to increase taxes sharply in the past few years. And I can assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, that the eyes of all Canada and indeed much of the western world are on Saskatchewan at 

this time. 

 

At about the same time, some 20 years ago, two classic examples of Socialism were established and many 

parallels can be drawn between them. One was created in Saskatchewan in the centre of a free enterprise 

country, the only Socialist government in North America. The other was created by drawing a line 

approximately north and south through Germany and establishing a free enterprise state on the west side of 

the line, a Socialist state on the other. People all over Europe and North America watched closely to see the 

result of these two widely separated but similar Socialist experiments and as might be expected the results of 

these two experiments were much the same. In both areas industrial expansion, production and employment 

opportunities lagged far behind nearby free enterprise states. An air of pessimism, despondency and 

disillusionment pervaded. In both cases thousands of people decided to leave to seek better opportunities in 

free enterprise areas and leave they did. Saskatchewan lost about 200,000 people during this period and I 

doubt if there is anyone listening to me today who does not know of a relative or a close friend who had to 

go to B.C. or Ontario, or the United States, or elsewhere to find employment during those Socialist years. 

 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

57 

East Germany, Mr. Speaker, also lost thousands of people for the same reason until this escape from 

Socialism became so embarrassing that they built walls and barbed wire fences to keep the people in. Many 

other comparisons could be made but I think the results are known to all. 

 

Two and a half years ago the people of Saskatchewan were able to throw off the yoke of Socialism - the 

people of East Germany have not yet been so fortunate. An interesting side effect of all this, Mr. Speaker, is 

that people coming to this country from Europe today are amazed that anyone would actually vote for such a 

system. Today in Saskatchewan we have full employment, we have bustling industrial activity, we have 

prosperity and an optimistic outlook. A vast change in only two and a half years. 

 

Because of the accomplishments I have mentioned, Mr. Speaker, and many more that will be mentioned by 

later speakers on this side of the House, and because of the record of this Government during the past two 

and a half years, and because of this Government’s plans for the future, I take great pleasure in supporting 

and seconding the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W. S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that nearly everyone nearly 

always looks forward to the opening addresses in the Throne Speech Debate. Today has been no exception. 

The two members who have moved and seconded the debate have spoken as one could be sure they would 

do and indeed as they should do of their constituencies and of their confidence of the record of the 

Government. Having listened to them, however, Mr. Speaker, I must say that when I came into the House 

this afternoon, I was somewhat doubtful as to whether I would support the Resolution. Having heard them I 

am quite confident that I won’t support the Resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD: — It seems to me that the Government should recognize that it is in a dangerous position. It’s 

in a dangerous position because it now has even its own back members believing its propaganda. That I 

submit is very bad and they should really be concerned about doing something about it. I think the Member 

from Moosomin (Mr. E.F. Gardner) explained the difficulty in one of his inferences. He said the trouble is 

that people pay too much attention to statistics and not enough to headlines in the Leader Post. This is his 

analysis of the difficulty of people in understanding what is going on. 

 

There is one thing that did surprise me in the two Members that have just spoken. That is that the Member 

from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) spoke about leases. Now I should 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

58 

have thought that the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) would have spoken about this. He is much 

more competent to do so. He has had much more personal experience. He is much more qualified to do so. 

He was reluctantly, it seemed to me, surprisingly somewhat quiet about the thing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend some time this afternoon on talking about some of the 

things which the Hon. Members have brought to our attention. The main burden, I think that that is the right 

description, the main burden of my remarks I shall leave until tomorrow. 

 

The Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) began his address by these words. He said: 

 

I would like to think that this Government recognizes the value of agriculture. 

 

So would I, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t see anything in the Throne Speech to impress me with the fact that they 

do. Not at all. 

 

They talk about, for example, the population. Both of the Members who have taken their seats talked about 

population. "No longer", said the Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker), "are citizens required 

to leave this province." Now this is what I mean. The Government is in danger because it has its own 

Members believing its own propaganda. What are the facts about population growth and about population 

leaving the province? Well the fact is that in the 12 months up until June of 1966 our population growth 

amounted to 3,000 people. You know if you study the Government’s White Paper issued in December you 

will notice that this year for the first time they left out all reference to population statistics. Why? Because 

the statistics contradicted every comment that the Premier and others had made about population in the last 

number of years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD: — That’s why they say, you know, "Rely on headlines in the Leader Post and forget about 

statistics," that’s the advice of the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). 

 

This 3,000 compares to an average growth in population of 10,000 for the years 1951 to 1961. The Member 

says, "People no longer have to leave the province". The fact is that for the year ending June 1st, 1966, over 

9,000 people left the province of Saskatchewan. They are going out at a faster rate than at almost any other 

time in our history. This Government is in danger because it’s believing its own propaganda, because it is 

learning its history and facts about the province from the headlines in the Leader Post and not from studying 

the real statistics that are available to them. 

 

Reference was made to the employment opportunities which are or which can be available in the province. 

And again I submit that the Government has in its hands some statistics 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

59 

that might discomfort its private Members if they knew the facts. I suggest that when the Premier gets 

around to tabling the manpower study in a couple of days that his private Members study this. I submit they 

may find in those reports one reason why the Government didn’t intend to make this public until we asked 

for them in this Legislature. This study will suggest that the Liberal party’s promise of some 80,000 new jobs 

in four years of office is not going to be achieved. It is not even going to come close to being achieved. They 

may achieve something like 20 per cent of it but they won’t achieve any more. This study will suggest - I 

urge the Members to read it, Mr. Speaker - that for the whole period of from 1961 to 1971 probably some 

62,000 new jobs will emerge for that period of ten years. This doesn’t take into consideration the fact that 

during that period there will be decreasing opportunities, according to the statistics, for employment in 

agriculture, so that the net position is still worse. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, whether it takes into 

consideration or not the fact of jobs that are being lost; jobs such as were lost when Hard Ply at Prince Albert 

closed its doors to some 96 people; jobs that were lost such as when NorCanAir in contravention of its 

contract with the Government shut down part of its operation and some 42 people lost their jobs; jobs such 

as were lost when Robin Hood Mills in Moose Jaw closed down not long ago and some 90 people lost their 

jobs; jobs such as were lost in the city of Regina when Intercontinental Packers closed their doors a year or 

so ago and some 50 of them lost there. I submit again the facts do not bear out the kind of grandiose 

statements about the present and the future of the province to which we have had such reference this 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) spent some time in talking about education. I 

expect to devote considerable more of my time when I speak tomorrow on this. I will just touch on a few 

facts now. Surely, Mr. Speaker, even people who disbelieve in statistics and who believe we should take our 

information from the headlines of the newspaper shouldn’t try to mislead this House, shouldn’t try to suggest 

that there is anything adequate or anything meaningful in comparing things now with something that 

happened 20 years ago. They should in the first place remember this, that 20 years ago this province was 

emerging from a sort of triple infestation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD: — There was first of all some ten years of drought right shortly behind us. There as about 

five years of war not quite all behind us. In addition to which there were ten years of Liberal Government 

immediately behind us. And this kind of triple infestation in the province took quite a lot of correcting. But it 

seems to me again that there are a couple of measuring devices mentioned by the Member from Moosomin 

(Mr. Gardiner) which tell a lot about the Liberal party. For example note his reference to loans. He said, 

"This Canadian loan plan has made other forms of student assistance obsolete". Now this is a remarkable 

way of talking about assistance to students. Loans have made other forms of student assistance obsolete. 

Well, certainly it has to be a considerable extent so far as the Saskatchewan Government is concerned. That 

is the reason I presume why when one reads the public accounts, 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

60 

which were distributed some months ago, we find that a large portion of the money voted for scholarships to 

students not spent. The Government saved a lot of money, put it into their surplus. It considers that having 

had loans made available by the Federal Government, then other forms of assistance such as scholarships are 

made obsolete. I suggest that what is obsolete is the Liberal approach to this whole problem of assistance to 

students. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Then he went on to talk about the technical education program. Here again he says, "Look 

at the announcements in the paper." Mr. Speaker, this is what is wrong with the program, it largely consists 

of announcements in the paper. There isn’t any shortage of announcements; that’s not what we’ve been 

complaining about. What we have been complaining about is the shortage of places for people who want to 

get some technical education. That is what the Liberal Government has not been providing and some more 

evidence of that I will provide tomorrow as well. 

 

I was surprised, Mr. Speaker, that neither of the men who spoke just recently had any reference to increased 

taxation. One of them, I think the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) inferred there hasn’t been any 

increases in taxation, but again this may be because he gets his information from the headlines in the paper 

rather than reading the statistics. Let me just indicate some of the increases in taxation for which this 

Government is in large part directly responsible, to some extent only partly responsible, by referring to 

increases which have occurred and have been paid since this time last year. I am not going to go back over 

the full history of the last two and a half years. First, you will remember an increase in gasoline tax of one 

cent a gallon. Secondly, you will remember an increase of the tax on soap and detergents and other cleaning 

materials of four per cent. Thirdly, you will remember the hospital revenue tax which meant a two mill 

increase on property for a large group of people in the province. Fourth, it will be remembered that local 

governments found themselves faced with the necessity of increasing their taxes and that the tax increase on 

property by local governments amounted in 1966 to some $6,000,000. Fifthly, you will remember that in 

November of 1966 all of us had to pay the medical and hospital care insurance premium. For the third time 

in a row we paid the additional $20 per family, which was the first act of the Liberal Government when it 

was elected in 1964. Sixthly, you can remember that even the price of beer and other such substances have 

been increased by the Government opposite. Let’s not kid ourselves that this isn’t a device of taxation nature. 

Seventhly, you will recall that it is a matter of only weeks ago that telephone rates went up, or it was 

announced that they were going up. I read the statement from the Star Phoenix of January 17th: 

 

The boost in rates effective with the March billing means both Saskatchewan cities, Regina and 

Saskatoon, will be paying the highest rates on the prairies. Rates in both Alberta and Manitoba are 

lower. The biggest difference is in the rates for business phones. Winnipeg pays $7.65 monthly and 

Calgary 



 

February 6, 1967 

 

 

61 

$6.25. This is $3.25 less than the new Saskatchewan rates. 

 

I suggest there are probably rates in addition and costs in addition or taxes in addition to those seven to 

which I have referred. The only hope that we can get out of this Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, is that 

in 1967 we will again see imposed by the Provincial Government higher taxes, particularly with respect to 

hospitalization. I would suggest that there is no hope in this Speech from the Throne to lead us to believe 

that property taxes won’t again go up as they did in 1966 and in 1965. 

 

Now, all in all, Mr. Speaker, I was reminded when I was reading the Speech from the Throne of that speech 

made by one of Shakespeare’s characters that started off by saying "All the world’s a stage, and all the men 

and women merely players". It ends up, if you recall, with the words describing the old gentleman, slippered 

in his pantaloons, "sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything." This seemed to me to describe fairly 

adequately this document which we have before us - without teeth, without eyes, without taste, without 

everything. Without teeth, certainly so far as the consumer problem is concerned. It does "gum" the whole 

consumer problem around some but nothing more than that. Local government capital needs - these don’t 

even get tasted. Education - it regurgitates and rechews some morsels which have previously been 

regurgitated and rechewed in other years. 

 

Sans eyes - it sees not evidently the rate of depopulation of people in the province, and it certainly doesn’t 

see the rate of depopulation of pigs in the province. It sees not the failure of the Government to keep its 

promises so that there will not be adequate development to provide the number of new jobs they said they 

would provide each year; so that there will not be the decrease in property taxes which they said was going 

to happen; so that there is nothing to provide for the distribution of prescription drugs as a benefit under 

Medicare. 

 

Without taste - certainly to propose a second round of increases in charges for hospitalization in a period of 

just over two years lacks taste. Particularly it lacks taste for a Government which assured us that all taxes 

would be, could be, should be, decreased. Without taste when they continue to shift taxes on to the backs of 

the individual as this increase will do. Without taste when they put all the blame for all of their problems on 

the Federal Government. Well, without teeth, without eyes, without taste, not quite, Mr. Speaker, without 

everything, but almost. And about that, Mr. Speaker, I hope to have some more to say tomorrow. I would 

now ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:19 o’clock p.m. 


