



















































Hansard: March 21, 1967


1404 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Tuesday, March 21, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE: TWO SASKATCHEWAN CEMETERIES 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to make an 

announcement which I think may be of some interest to the House in connection with cemeteries. The 

Provincial Secretary (Mr. Heald) has informed me that two cemetery companies, one in Moose Jaw and 

another in North Battleford, are no longer in a position to fulfil their financial obligations. This has 

given rise to a situation in which our Government feels it is absolutely imperative to act directly in order 

to avoid any injustice. Accordingly we have undertaken a complete investigation which reveals the 

following facts: 

 

The two companies in question began operating in 1953 and 1954. At that time no steps were taken to 

provide for the protection of those citizens who entrusted their funds with these companies. This was 

unfortunate since investigation of similar companies in Ontario at the time revealed the need for action. 

The Ontario findings were passed on to the Saskatchewan Government of the day. In 1959, 1960, and 

1961, accountants were retained to investigate the operation of these two cemetery companies. In 1961, 

the auditors reported that at least the one in Moose Jaw was in serious financial difficulty. No further 

action was taken, however, until this Government's first legislative session in 1965. At that time this 

Legislature approved a new Cemeteries Act which would make impossible any repetition of this tragedy 

of personal embarrassment. Today, Mr. Speaker, the only issue under consideration is action to help the 

citizens who have been misled and need help. As a result of the 1965 legislation, it is now possible for 

us to act directly, following recent meetings with the contract holders of both these cemeteries. I wish 

today, therefore, to inform the House that our Government intends at this session to introduce legislation 

which will empower the Provincial Government to take over the administration of these two companies. 

In this way the Provincial Secretary will take the necessary steps to ensure that every contract holder 

will be provided with the services and goods for which they contracted. 

 

I may say, Mr. Speaker, that there are only two cemeteries at this moment in such a position but there 

could be others as time progresses. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1405 

QUESTION RE: RESOLUTION RE PRICE OF WHEAT 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Before the Orders of the Day may I ask the Premier, since the 

Resolution was passed some time ago asking the Federal Government to negotiate for an increase of 50 

cents a bushel when the International Wheat Agreement was under consideration again, has that 

Resolution been brought to the attention of the Federal Government? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I'll ask whether it has or not. 

 

MR. NOLLET: — It should be automatically, shouldn't it, Mr. Speaker, because it is a Resolution 

passed by this Legislature. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — It probably has. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE: WEYBURN SPORTS CHAMPIONS 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention and to inform 

the Members of the Assembly of two recent sport events when Miss Margo Tincher from Weyburn was 

one of the gold medalists in the recent Dominion Figure Skating Championship held at Quebec. I'm sure 

all Members join me in congratulating her and wishing Miss Tincher continued success in this great 

field of figure skating. The other, Mr. Speaker, was the Saskatchewan Midget 'A' Hockey Championship 

that was won this past weekend by the Weyburn Midget Beavers. This Weyburn club defeated the 

Regina Midget A's in winning the Southern Saskatchewan title and this weekend defeated the Prince 

Albert club, this giving the Weyburn Championship to them. I can only say, Mr. Speaker, where in 

Weyburn we perhaps lack in quantity compared to these other two larger centres, we certainly have the 

quality. I'm sure that all Members join me in congratulating these young participants in both their recent 

championship activities in this great field of sport. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

MR. T.M. BREKER (Humboldt), moved second reading of Bill No. 85 — An Act to amend the 

Optometry Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading I would like to briefly outline the changes proposed by 

the amendment. Until 1956 an optometrist had to apprentice in Saskatchewan for one year before 

becoming entitled to write examinations under the Act. In 1956 this apprenticeship requirement was 

repealed, because most of the optometrists in Saskatchewan came from the Toronto School of 

Optometry. This school had extended its course from three years to four years and had increased the 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1406 

clinical training being given to the students. Now the reason for the proposed amendment is this. The 

Association states that in recent years almost all of the optometrists writing examinations in 

Saskatchewan immediately after graduating from the Toronto School had failed. It also states that some 

of the students have practised under supervision for a few months before taking the examinations and all 

of these had passed. It is therefore concluded that the clinical training at the Toronto School had become 

inadequate and that optometrists should be required to practise under supervision for some months 

before becoming entitled to take the examinations. There are three proposed amendments. The first one, 

before an optometrist may take the examination under the Act he will be required to practise under 

supervision for at lest six months or have equivalent qualifications. The second one, the Association 

may make by-laws governing the practice of these persons under supervision. The third amendment, the 

practice of optometry of these persons under supervision will not constitute an offence under the Act. I 

move now, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 85 be read a second time and referred to the Law Amendments 

and Delegated Powers Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon City): — I would like to introduce to the Members of the Assembly 

a fine group of students from Haultain Public School in Saskatoon. I believe there are 27 of them in the 

group who are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Morris. I am sure every Member of this Assembly 

wishes them an educational and enjoyable day in our capital city and a safe trip home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. SALLY MERCHANT (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, could I add to the remarks of the 

Member for Saskatoon that we have a second group from Saskatoon, a group from Hugh Cairns School 

who are seated immediately behind the other Members for Saskatoon, and I would want to welcome 

them as well as the group from Haultain. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce to the 

Members and welcome to this Assembly 50 students from Regent Park School in Regina North. They 

are grade six students, and are with their teacher, Miss Hallam and are in the Speaker's gallery. I'm sure 

all Members join me in expressing the wish that their stay with us this afternoon will be pleasant and 

educational. 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1407 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to the House a 

fine group of students from the Goodeve School who are visiting this afternoon in this Legislature. I 

hope that the students will have a very enjoyable afternoon and a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.W. GARDINER (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I understand the Hon. George Trapp was very 

good to my constituents and welcomed them on my behalf. I would also like to join with other Members 

in spite of my voice today. It would probably be better not to bother because of that, but I would like to 

extend to the students from the Goodeve School a welcome on my behalf as their Member of the 

Legislature; at least, some of them of course belong to Mr. Trapp's constituency. I would like to add my 

voice in welcoming them. I hope they have a very pleasant day in the city and that they enjoy their 

experience in the Legislature. I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:30 o'clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO VISITORS TO THE ASSEMBLY 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — I am sure you are all interested. We have 

of the Parsons and Whittemore Company of the Prince Albert pulp mill, Mr. Landegger, Mr. Hamilton, 

who is the president of the Prince Albert pulp mill; Mr. Joseph Condon, who is vice-president of Parsons 

and Whittemore; and Mr. Bill Parks, the Deputy Minister of Natural Resources; and Mr. George Boyhan 

who is also with Parsons and Whittemore of New York. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, is this the branch of 

which Mr. Cote was the previous director? Could the Minister indicate roughly when Mr. Cote left the 

service? 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act. 

 

MR. WHELAN: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1408 

MR. GRANT moved second reading of Bill No. 83 — An Act to amend The Hospital Revenue Act, 

1966. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments contained in this Bill can be considered to be of a housekeeping 

or administrative nature and do not involve matters of policy. At the present time this Act authorizes the 

council of a municipality to enter into an agreement with the hospital for the purpose of making an 

annual grant to that hospital. Under these provisions a grant to be made to a hospital pursuant to an 

agreement between that hospital and the council of the rural municipality would be financed by the levy 

of taxes throughout the entire municipality. There are a surprisingly large number of municipalities in 

this province having portions included within a hospital district. In these cases the hospital revenue tax 

would be levied only in that part of the rural municipality not included within a union hospital district. 

Rural municipal officials in various parts of the province have requested that an amendment be enacted 

for the purpose of authorizing an agreement to be entered into with the hospital in respect of a portion of 

the rural municipality. Provisions are therefore contained in this Bill, authorizing an agreement with a 

hospital in respect to a portion only of a rural municipality and providing that, where such an agreement 

is entered into in accordance with certain stated conditions, the portion affected will be exempt from the 

hospital revenue tax levy. The other amendment contained in this Bill is being proposed for the purpose 

of clarification as intended to clearly set out the position of a municipality if it does not pay the 

Provincial Treasurer the required amount by the end of the year. 

 

MR. E.I. WOOD (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I note the changes in the Act or the changes in the 

Act that are proposed by this Bill and agree that they are to be concurred with in the main. This one item 

I notice says that the municipality, if it doesn't pay these funds to the Provincial Treasurer by the end of 

the year, is in the debt of the Provincial Government irrespective of whether these funds are collected or 

not. Now I realize that this is the case with local government, with the Union Hospital Boards, that 

where money is not collected for them by the municipality, it has to be turned over to them irrespective 

of whether it has been collected or not by the municipality. But there, it seems to me, is a slightly 

different case where the municipalities are expected to turn this money over to the Government whether 

they have collected it or not; and the Government, it seems to me, is possibly, of the two the better able 

in many cases to carry the burden of this debt until it is collected from the ratepayer. I think it is 

something worthwhile giving consideration to in this regard. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. GRANT moved second reading of Bill No. 84 — An Act to amend The Public Health Act. 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1409 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments contained in this Bill are being proposed either for administrative 

reasons or as a consequence of other legislative provisions being made. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, 

that amendments to The Water Resources Commission Act have been introduced providing for the 

Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission to become responsible for approving water works and 

sewage systems, certain provisions of the Act are being revised. Provisions for ministerial approval is 

being removed but the Minister will continue to be authorized to require appropriate remedial action to 

be taken with respect to water works or a sewage system, in any case where he is of the opinion that the 

public health may be endangered. I have already announced, Mr. Speaker, that effective April 1, 1967 

the operation of the Provincial Geriatric Centre in Regina will be taken over from the Department of 

Welfare by the Department of Public Health and the hospital will be operated by the Department in 

conjunction with the Physical Rehabilitation Centre in Regina. This action is being taken for the purpose 

of administrative efficiency and in order to give more emphasis to the medical rehabilitation measures 

being undertaken in this geriatric hospital in the provision of care and treatment of the patients. An 

amendment will authorize the operation of this hospital by the Department. As most of you know, Mr. 

Speaker, a most important departmental employee in the field of environmental sanitation and hygiene is 

the sanitary officer. Measurers are being taken throughout the various provinces to have the name of this 

official changed from 'Sanitary Officer' to 'Public Health Inspector', and the remaining amendments 

provide for this change to be made in our province. 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I did want to raise one issue with respect to 

this Bill and with respect to Section No. 5 of the Bill being Section 83 of the Act. Some concern is being 

expressed that the taking over by the Department of Public Health of the Geriatric Centre, as it used to 

be called, and its operation as a hospital for chronic diseases will result in those patients in the Geriatric 

Centre who many have been there for some time and who may not be responding at this time very 

rapidly to rehabilitative processes, being forced to leave the hospital. Mr. Speaker, this concern is being 

expressed and I wonder whether the Minister when he is closing the debate would indicate whether or 

not this change in the Bill indicates any substantial change in the admission and discharge policies of 

that institution and whether, if it does indicate a substantial change in the discharge policies of that 

institution, there is going to be alternative accommodation for the people so discharged. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The 

Legal Profession Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to move second reading of an Act to amend The Legal Profession Act, I 

would first of all beg 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1410 

to inform the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 

matter of this Bill recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. By way of explanation, Mr. 

Speaker, I should say that two or three of these Bills were introduced before they were printed and the 

message from the Lieutenant Governor was not on my desk. I have checked with the Clerk and I am 

informed that it is quite in order to read the message on second reading. Mr. Speaker, this amendment to 

The Legal Profession Act is a companion amendment to the amendment that passed second reading 

yesterday to The Attorney General's Act and has to do with the legal aid plan which the Government 

proposes to institute. It is a very simple little amendment which gives the Law Society power to provide 

for the establishment and operation of a plan or plans, under which the legal services of any member of 

the Society in respect of civil or criminal matters should be made available to indigent persons. For the 

information and edification of the Members for Hanley (Mr. Walker) and Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), 

and so that they can become members of the legal aid battery or roster, I would refer them to Section 

15(e) of The Legislative Assembly Act, and Section 15(v). They would be protected under either of 

these sub-sections so that they could receive fees under the legal aid plan and still be Members of the 

Legislature. We wouldn't want to deprive the people of this province of the very high degree of skill of 

their services, particularly when they are going to partially subsidize the taxpayers of the province in 

defending them. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. HEALD moved second reading of Bill No. 76 — An Act to provide for the Payment of 

Compensation in respect of Persons Injured or Killed by Certain Criminal Acts or Omissions. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I also have a message from the Lieutenant Governor in respect to this Bill. I beg 

to inform the Assembly that his Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having been informed of the subject 

matter of this Bill recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure 

both as a Member of the Government and as an individual, to say a few words about the purpose and 

intent of The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act. Crimes of violence, I regret to say, are on the 

increase in Canada. Cases where innocent persons are injured or killed as a result of crimes of violence 

are becoming more frequent. Criminal methods of operation have become more sophisticated with the 

result that victims of criminal activity more than ever are unaware of the identity of the persons who are 

the cause of their injury. Even in cases where the identity of the offender is known, the remedy afforded 

by a civil action at law is often most unsatisfactory, because to pursue this remedy is initially an 

expensive and time-consuming process. And of course there is always the possibility of having a 

judgment which can't be realized upon when they do come 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1411 

to the end of the road. Now society has provided the machinery of the courts to enable injured persons a 

means of redress against persons responsible for those injuries. The remedy of an action of civil law is 

based on the principle that liability only exists where fault for the injury or death is brought to the person 

against whom the suit has been taken. It is our belief that society should assume some of the loss that is 

suffered by a person who is the victim of crimes of violence, whether or not fault can be established 

against an offender. And it is for this reason that this Bill is placed before the House for consideration. 

The scope of the program for the payment of compensation to persons or to their dependents who have 

been injured or killed as a result of the commission of crimes of violence or as a result of apprehending 

offenders or rendering assistance to law enforcement officers was set out in the Government White 

Paper which was tabled in the House some time ago. This Bill will provide for the establishment of a 

Board, the duties of which will be to consider the merits of claims for compensation submitted to it by 

persons injured or the dependents of persons killed as a result of certain crimes or as a result of attempts 

to perform a citizen's arrest or to render aid to law enforcement authorities. 

 

I am unaware of any similar program in operation on this continent. New Zealand and the United 

Kingdom are the only countries that I know of that have such a program at the present time. These 

programs in these countries provide for the payment of compensation to persons in the event of injuries 

suffered by those persons or provide for the payment of compensation to dependents of persons who 

have been killed as a result of crimes of violence. You will probably know, if you have had an 

opportunity to compare our Bill with the New Zealand bill, that this Bill extends the scope of the New 

Zealand and United Kingdom plans by providing for the payment of compensation as well in the event 

of persons being injured or killed, while arresting or attempting to arrest criminal offenders or while 

rendering aid to law enforcement officers. Those items are not included in the U.K. and the New 

Zealand bills. The Board to be established by this Bill will have wide powers of discretion in making 

awards of compensation and will be guided by the nature of the injury suffered, the financial situation of 

the victim and the degree if any to which the injured person was the author of his own injuries. Awards 

will be made by the Board to compensate for expenses incurred and for certain monetary losses suffered 

by the victim. To avoid duplication of payments in respect to the same injury or death, compensation 

under the Bill will be reduced by any amount received by the victim or his dependents in respect of the 

injury or death pursuant to any statutory authority in Canada. The Bill also contains provisions for 

providing for the recovery from an offender of any amount paid as compensation for an injury or death 

caused by the offender. The offender will also be subject to a civil action for all or any portion of 

compensation paid in respect of an injury or death where the victim could have taken such an action. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am of course aware that there will be problems arising when this program goes into 

operation. We are ploughing fairly new ground 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1412 

here. I think we all realize that it is inevitable that, when a program such as this is implemented and 

there is no practical experience to draw upon, we will have problems. I am confident, however, that 

none of the problems that arise will be insurmountable, and I believe that after a short period of time the 

program will provide a great service in relieving the economic hardships of unfortunate victims of 

criminal acts. I know therefore that the program will be well received. Mr. Speaker, I commend this Bill 

to all Members of the House. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. HEALD moved second reading of Bill No. 77 — An Act to provide for Relief from 

Unconscionable Transactions. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the Province of Ontario has had an Unconscionable Transactions Relief Act for 

many years. In 1963, the Supreme Court of Canada held the Ontario Act to be constitutional, there was a 

constitutional reference. Since that time, Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, and Nova Scotia have 

passed similar legislation. The purpose of the Bill is to give the court powers to relieve borrowers and 

persons obtaining credit from transactions which the court considers to be harsh or unconscionable, or 

where the court considers that the cost of the loan is excessive. The Bill provides that a person who is 

sued may ask the court for relief from the transaction on the ground that the cost of the loan or the cost 

of the credit is excessive or that the transaction is harsh or unconscionable. The Bill also provides for a 

borrower or a person obtaining credit to bring an action to bring relief from such a transaction. An action 

can be brought by any borrower even after he has paid in full the amount owing under the contract or 

mortgage. The only restriction is that such an action cannot be brought more than two years after the 

account has been paid. So there is a limitation period of two years. Manitoba amended its Act in 1965 to 

make the provisions of the Act apply to assignees of the original contract. Nova Scotia passed similar 

legislation in 1966. The Bill now before the House contains provisions similar to those enacted in 

Manitoba and Nova Scotia, so that our Act will apply to an assignee. A provision in earlier Acts 

providing that it did not apply to assignees for value without notice has been left out and provision made 

that, where the security given in the loan or credit transaction is transferred by the creditor to a third 

party before or within two years after the monies of the loan are disbursed or the credit granted, the 

assignee shall be deemed to have notice of every particular and of all circumstances surrounding the 

loan, unless the debtor has supplied to the assignee an acknowledgment in writing made before a 

solicitor, setting out the amount of the loan or credit granted and the amount of the loan actually 

received. This provision is made in applicable to assignments or transfers of security made prior to the 

coming into force of the Act. The provision as to assignments and assignees for value without notice 

was made as a result of a suggestion made by the Tallin Commission which sat in 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1413 

Manitoba a couple of years ago. This Commission investigated various mortgage transactions in the 

Province of Manitoba. The Tallin Commission found that in many cases a very large bonus was taken in 

a mortgage transaction, even though the interest rate apart from the bonus was high and the security 

good. I mentioned some of those, Mr. Speaker, in an earlier speech — examples of the kind of 

transactions they ran into when they got into this in Manitoba. This Act applies to such transactions and 

would enable the borrower to obtain relief from the courts in these circumstances. The experience in 

Ontario and other provinces so far is that the mere fact that such legislation is in force has a very 

salutary effect and not too many cases actually end up in the courts. It appears that, when a lender has 

taken an unfair advantage of a borrower, either by taking a large bonus or charging an excessive rate of 

interest, the threat of action under this kind of an Act in the province is in most cases sufficient to enable 

reasonable settlement to be worked out. That's the way it has worked in Ontario. 

 

It is considered that this Bill along with The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act will assist materially in 

protecting the public against the exorbitant rates which are charged by a few lenders. I think this only 

applies to a few lenders, but I commend this Bill to all Hon. Members in this Legislature because I think 

it's the kind of deterrent legislation that we need. With that short explanation I would move second 

reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. D. BOLDT (Minister of Highways) moved second reading of Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend 

The Highways Act. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Hon. Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), Bill 65 proposes 

certain amendments to the existing Highways Act, and I would like to deal briefly with several of the 

chief provisions. In reference to the first section, these sections will enlarge the original bridge activity 

work to include such custom work for municipalities as oil treatment of roads, maintenance, and other 

minor construction work, which can be carried out in the same manner as the former bridge construction 

service was. The next section, Section 21, subsection (2) deals with the warehouse advance account. 

According to the present section of the Act the $9,000,000 advance from the Provincial Treasurer is 

used as follows: to maintain and operate the equipment fleet of the Department, to operate repair depots 

and stock rooms, to carry out a public improvement or bridge construction service and administer the 

operation. Now all of these activities have expanded, Mr. Speaker, because of more dust-free mileage in 

the highway system, and additional mileage of approximately 1,000 miles in the highway system and 

more custom work for some of the municipalities. A projection of finance to meet the needs of these 

activities for the next few years indicates that the amount here should be raised from $9,000,000 to 

$12,000,000. 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1414 

The next section of the Act that could be commented on is a new section. The present Act does not 

allow the Department to expropriate land other than that required for actual construction needs. 

Problems have arisen where small uneconomic parcels that are severed are left with the owners, where 

severance prevents the legal access by the owners, and where the owners have difficulty in disposing of 

unwanted parcels. In these cases excessive damages have sometimes had to be paid or access has had to 

be provided. Acquisition of these parcels of land by the Department will eliminate some of these 

problems, effect savings, and allow better control of access. Next, is a new section (Section 41A). There 

has been cases where the Department has started expropriation proceedings for certain land, but before 

being finalized the highway locations have been changed and the land or parts of them perhaps are no 

longer required. Under the present Act such proceedings must be finalized and title taken to such land. 

This new section will allow the land or part of it to be returned to the owner and will reduce the amount 

of compensation being paid where the original land under expropriation is no longer required. It will 

also minimize the damage done to the landowner. And companion section to this, (by adding another 

new section to the Act), will allow land to be abandoned. A further section is then included to define the 

extent of compensation due to the landowner. Basically, of course, he should be entitled to all of the 

costs and damages that have been incurred by him up to that point. 

 

Now the remaining amendments, Mr. Speaker, are rather straightforward and I would now move second 

reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Cumberland): — There's one principle that I find in Section 35A that 

rather bothers me. It could be a situation where the Government may take away a home and premises of 

a person if it judges that it's going to cost the value of the land. I wish the Minister when he closes the 

debate would give us some assurance that this will never happen. 

 

MR. C.G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale): — There are some minor amendments in this Act which we 

don't object to particularly, such as changing the name from "Bridge Construction Services" to "Public 

Improvement Construction Services." This has been practised by the Department for a long time. The 

name doesn't make any difference. It could still proceed under the old name and work could be done 

exactly as before. We do take strong objection to four amendments, which in our opinion and in my 

opinion infringe on the rights of individuals or give too great a power to the Department or rather to the 

Minister. First, I find no need for the increase in the advance account from $9,000,000 to $12,000,000 

here. The present amount in the advance account now is $8,400,000. At least this is the amount which 

was advanced according to the last annual Public Account report. This is close to the statute limit of 

$9,000,000, Mr. Speaker. But the Department has control of this advance account in that rental rates on 

equipment can be advanced and thereby keep the advances below the $9,000,000 required by 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1415 

statute. The precedence here, Mr. Speaker, is that contracting costs have increased by more than 50 per 

cent since 1964. If the rental rates charged by the Department of Highways for the equipment which 

they rent out increased by 50 per cent, the advance account could easily be kept within the $9,000,000 

limit. Besides this, Mr. Speaker, if the Department were encouraged to practise economy it would help. I 

have here an answer to an Order for Return which I asked for two or three weeks ago regarding the 

purchase of equipment by the Department. One of the questions had to do with the number of crawler 

tractors purchased, the price and prices paid as well. One of the answers shows that the Department 

bought a single or twin-powered 21-24 cubic yard capacity machine from Allis-Chalmers for $78,000. 

They bought a similar machine from Kramer Tractor for $85,280 and there's no reason, Mr. Speaker, 

why they could not have bought two Allis-Chalmers machines and saved the Department, saved the 

advance account approximately $7,000 in this one item alone if these two things were done, there's no 

doubt about it that the ceiling on the advance account could be held below $9,000,000. I take exception, 

Mr. Speaker, to extending the power of the Department to expropriate land that is at a surplus to its 

requirement. The House is aware of the fact that about three years ago a Committee of the Legislature 

was set up to look into the matter of expropriation. This Committee made a unanimous report back to 

the Legislature. Two of these recommendations were very important. One was that a new Act be passed, 

an Act which would unify all the expropriating powers which at present are spread out among a number 

of departments and a number of other agencies throughout the province. The second recommendation in 

the Expropriation Committee's report was that a board be set up, a public and private rights board, to 

look into complaints regarding expropriation. All we have here in regard to expropriation are these two 

matters which minor, perhaps, but which show that the Government has no concern at all when it comes 

to expropriation in the broader sense. This Section 9 extends the power to take or to expropriate property 

surplus to the needs of the Government. There's no need of this at the present time, Mr. Speaker, the 

Department may purchase surplus property at the present time through negotiating with different people 

regarding such property for sale. If along side of that property there's another piece of property which 

the person who's selling the property to the Department wishes to sell, then the Department has in the 

past been making arrangements to buy that property. There is no reason why this couldn't continue on 

this arrangement. It is an unwarranted assumption of authority of expropriation powers to take surplus 

property, particularly when the Government gives itself the power to sell this surplus property sometime 

in the future. 

 

Then the second part which I take a great deal of exception to, Mr. Speaker, has to do with filing of 

notice of abandonment. The Department wishes to expropriate land or wishes to buy land for right-of-

way or for other use. It makes an agreement with the owner of the land and then it has put in this Act a 

section which gives to the Government a cooling-off period. The Government may take an agreement 

which has been mutually agreed upon, signed by the owner of the land and the Government, and at any 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1416 

time before the Government pays for the land, the Government may say to the person, "We'll back off 

here. We won't go ahead with this agreement to buy." This, Mr. Speaker, gives to the Government a 

method of compensating for poor planning. If the Government took into account all of the circumstances 

before the land was bought, then it wouldn't have to have this cooling-off period in this regard. 

 

Then there's another section here which the Minister who introduced the Bill, Mr. Speaker, didn't refer 

to at all and this has to do with abandoned vehicles on public highways. At the present time when a 

vehicle is abandoned on a public highway, the Department of Highway may remove that vehicle and 

store it, have a lien put against the vehicle in order to recover the cost of removing and storing that 

vehicle and make an effort to find the owner. The owner when found, if he wants the vehicle, recovers it 

by paying the lien cost. If he doesn't want it, then the Department may sell the vehicle, obtain the cost or 

otherwise dispose of it. But, Mr. Speaker, this proposal first of all divides abandoned cars into two 

categories. First, if the Minister decides that a car which is apparently abandoned on the highway has a 

value of less than $100, he then has the power to have his people remove that car from the highway and 

destroy it or otherwise dispose of it without making an effort to find out who owns the car, or without 

finding out why the car was abandoned on the highway. This is bad enough, Mr. Speaker, in this regard, 

but again it has a different rule for cars which are over $100 in value. If a car is abandoned on the 

highway, left unattended for more than 48 hours and has a value of more than $100, then the Department 

may take the car, store it and may charge a person with abandoning the car on the highway, fine him 

$25. If he doesn't pay the $25 then he is liable for a month in jail. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is an 

unwarranted assumption of power in the fact that it covers all public highways in the Province of 

Saskatchewan and we have 130,000 miles of public roadways in the province. A car abandoned on any 

one of these 130,000 miles of roads may be handled in this high-handed fashion by the Minister or by 

the Minister's servants here. There's no reason why the present section which is presently in the Bill isn't 

adequate, if enforced, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the above reasons, I find myself unable to vote for 

this Bill. 

 

MR. R.A. WALKER (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on some of the provisions of this 

Bill is respect to a matter which wasn't raised by the Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis). I would 

think that the Attorney General, who I'm glad is in the House and who professes to be concerned about 

people's rights and about civil rights in general, and who from time to time introduces innocuous 

legislation in this House which tends to support that view, would be quite concerned about some of the 

provisions in this Act. I refer to the section which allows the Government to go back on its word to 

break agreements, to renege on its commitments. I refer to Section 41, 41A, and 41B. All of these have 

to do with acquisition and expropriation of land by the Department of Highways. 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1417 

It seems to me that the Department of Highways should be in no better position than any other person 

who makes a contract to acquire land. The Department of Highways should not be able to make an 

agreement on which the other person, the owner, may have acted to his detriment and then the 

Department to simply abandon its agreement. The landowner may have contested the taking of the land 

and arbitrated the damages and may have gotten an award for damages from a judge. Then the 

Department says that at any time before the judgment is final well, we'll abandon it. The owner, who has 

been put to a great deal of expense and who recovers practically nothing in the way of costs from this 

exercise in expropriation, is suddenly having the thing tossed back at him and he is out his costs. The 

Attorney General, I'm sure, will agree with me that in expropriation proceedings, in dealing with the 

Department of Highway you don't get any costs even if you are successful. All you get is a little bit of 

witness fees for your witness, his mileage and his day in court, your expert witness. You get nothing for 

solicitor's fees or costs, you get nothing for costs of transcripts of examinations for discovery, in fact an 

owner of land may be out hundreds or even thousands of dollars of costs and recover only $40 or $30 

from the Department of Highways and then have the Department of Highways renege on the 

proceedings at the conclusion of a three-day hearing. Well, it seems to me that the Department of 

Highways, having access to the Provincial Treasury, having all the money in the world so the Premier 

tells us from time to time, ought not to take this kind of advantage of poor citizens who didn't get 

involved, they don't get involved with the Department of Highways as a matter of choice. The average 

owner of property doesn't get involved with the Department of Highways as a matter of choice. The 

engineers just simply descend on him like locusts. They start crossing his land and running back and 

forth with survey instruments, and the poor farmer has no choice in the matter. Then after he's gone to a 

lawyer and after he's gone to a lot of expenses and arbitration, the Department simply says, "Where at 

any time before compensation is paid or before the conclusion of the hearing," — the conclusion of the 

hearing is when the judge finally hands down a decision — "the Department may abandon the matter." 

Then the owner is right back where he started from. 41B says, "Where the whole of the land taken for a 

public improvement is abandoned, the person entitled to claim compensation with respect to such taking 

is entitled to compensation for all damages sustained and all costs incurred by him." But I point out that 

costs are limited to witness fees and mileage and all costs certainly don't mean all costs. It certainly 

means just the costs referred to in the Act and the costs referred to in the Act are very, very trivial 

compared with the actual costs of the expropriation. So the farmer can be out $1,000 and the Department 

simply gives him back his land and that's the end of it. 

 

I want to say further that I think that Section 35A is objectionable because the Department may cut a 

piece of land in two. The Department may incur damages by reason of severance of two parcels left 

which are no longer connected. And so what the Department is proposing to do is to take the whole 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1418 

quarter section, if it's cheaper. Well, it seems to me that the Department is in the position of being able 

to make the rules. If the Department wants to take land to make a road, then it should certainly pay the 

owner of the land for the damages and it ought not to be in the position of saying, "All right if you 

complain to me about the offer of damages for the road allowance that we are taking through your land, 

we'll take the whole damn works." And that is just what Section 35A says. The Department of Highways 

can say to this farmer who's reluctant to sell a strip diagonally through his quarter section of land for say 

$200 an acre, "You sell us this at $200 an acre of we'll just take the whole quarter section." This is at the 

option of the Department. This means that the Department can do whichever is the cheapest for them. 

The Department will have the power to do whichever is the cheapest for the Department. And what's 

cheapest for the Department isn't necessarily best for the citizens. 

 

The Department has all kinds of options open to it here which the citizen doesn't have. Let's say this, Mr. 

Speaker. If the Department wants to have the right to take the man's whole farm if he objects, then let's 

give the farmer the same right to tell the Department to go somewhere else. Let's have these things 

mutual, let's have both sides having some rights in this matter. Let's give the farmer the right to say that 

if you are going to take a strip through my land, I'll give you the whole quarter, sell you the whole 

quarter. But it's the Department that has this option, and I'd say that this is the kind of one-sided 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that demonstrates the true interest of this Government in civil rights and rights 

of people. 

 

This Government is only concerned about the rights of people when it comes to a small loan company 

infringing on their rights. I agree that's all right, but this Government is not interested in the rights of 

people, this Government is only interested in the rights of people when it can protect them against 

somebody else and not from itself. It seems to me that, if this Government is genuinely concerned with 

the rights of citizens, this Government ought to delete Section 35, 41A and 41B from this Bill. 

 

Section 41A I haven't mentioned, but 41B says that if by any chance the Department takes too much 

land or if it finds, Mr. Speaker, that it's going to cost it too much to take this land and the damages are 

based on what it has taken, then it can give back the part that it finds is costing it too much. Well, I 

suggest that this is just another option for the Government. Why not give the ratepayer, the taxpayer a 

similar option, if he doesn't like the way the courts have awarded the damages and he thinks the courts 

have awarded him too much on this piece and not enough for this piece. All right make the Government 

take the most expensive part. The Government says, "We'll have the right to take the cheapest part and 

give back the most expensive part." Well, let's have it work both ways. 

 

This side of the House has protested for years and when we were on the other side, we did something 

about it. 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1419 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — There's something very one-sided and unfair about these arbitration provisions. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Set up a Committee. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in case the Premier (and the Premier is used to sounding off 

about things of which he apparently knows very little) doesn't know about it, this Legislature in 1962 

decided to do something about this problem. This Legislature set up a Committee to work out a solution 

to this problem and several Members from the other side of the House were on that Committee. That 

Committee formulated an unanimous report and the Members on that side of the House apparently 

believed in that report. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House still believe in it. 

 

MR. GARDINER: — You never brought it in, you never brought it in. 

 

MR. WALKER: — I don't know what's the matter with the Hon. Member for Melville (Mr. Gardiner) 

because the Hon. Member for Melville does as much expropriating as anybody in the Government, his 

Department does. The Hon. Member for Melville at that time at least pretended that he was in favor of a 

new deal, a Bill of Rights for the people. Now I suggest that the Premier ought to implement the 

unanimous report of that Committee. This Government is going in the other direction. This Government 

is strengthening the hands of the departments of government, is undermining the rights of citizens. I say 

that 35A, 41A and 41B should be removed on those grounds and I appeal to the Minister to withdraw 

those sections. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.C. McISAAC (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I'd just like to say a word or 

two on two points raised by Members opposite. The Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) referred to 

the advance account. I would just point out to him that I think he is unaware that the activities of this 

Department have expanded tremendously since he left office. There's more construction, more paving, 

more oiling and over 1,000 miles of extra mileage in the highway system. therefore, it makes very good 

sense to raise this account. 

 

Now the Member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) again expressed very grave concern over the civil rights of 

the little fellow. I will not comment very much on many of the things he had to say. I am informed, 

however, by the Highways officials, in discussing this Bill this afternoon, that the expropriation 

procedures 

 



 

March 21, 1967 

 

 

1420 

outlined here in this Act follow very closely those recommended by the Legislative Committee on 

expropriation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — And I think that the other points, some of them valid and some of them very 

invalid, raised by Members opposite can be best discussed in Committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following Recorded Division: 

 

YEAS — 27 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Grant Romuld 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Cameron Bjarnason MacLennan 

Steuart Trapp Larochelle 

Heald McIsaac Hooker 

Gardiner (Melville) MacDonald Coupland 

Merchant (Mrs.) Breker Gardner (Moosomin) 

Loken Leith Mitchell 

 

 

NAYS — 19 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Whelan Broten 

Wood Nicholson Larson 

Walker Dewhurst Robbins 

Brockelbank (Kelsey) Berezowsky Pepper 

Blakeney Michayluk Brockelbank (Saskatoon City) 

Davis Wooff Willis 

Snyder   

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 o'clock p.m. 

 


