




















































Hansard: March 31, 1967


1510 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

39th Day 

 

Friday, March 31,1967 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS RE: RETURNS 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 23 

 

MR. J.H. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, and I hope it is 

for the last time, I would like to ask about the Order for Return in regard to the expense account for the 

Hon. Member for Athabasca. It is getting more difficult all the time now, even the Hon. Member (Mr. 

Guy) has disappeared. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — That Order for Return, the material has come from the 

Department to my Department. It's just a matter of getting it typed out and I will have it later today. This 

is true in respect to a number of Returns. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 18 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might ask whether the Premier 

has found in his files the contract which he has with Mr. Odishaw, being Order No. 18, being ordered 

sometime early in February. 

 

MR. HEALD: — That's in the same category as the others that I referred to. The material is being 

prepared and will be filed later this day. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 35 

 

MR. C.G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale): — I'd like to ask regarding the Order for Return No. 35 ordered 

February 23 having to do with the McLaren Advertising Agency's dealings with the Government over a 

period of years. Could I expect to have this sometime today or tomorrow? 

 

MR. HEALD: — Yes. 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — I wonder if the Minister or the Provincial 

Secretary could tell us which ones he intends to let us have? It would simplify matters if you would tell 

us which Returns you do intend to table today. 

 



 

March 31, 1967 

 

 

1511 

MR. HEALD: — Well, I intend to table all that are available but I can't give you the numbers. The ones 

that I have referred to I specifically looked into, because they were asked about yesterday. I don't know 

at the moment just which ones are available but I could indicate to you later. I would think this afternoon 

sometime I will have all that are going to be tabled today, and I could then perhaps give you a list of the 

ones that aren't ready. There is one in Highways, we've had notification from Highways that they don't 

have the information available and they won't have it for this session that's the only one that I have had a 

clear indication of. Perhaps it might be satisfactory to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) if I 

could provide you with a list later this afternoon of the ones we are not going to be able to table. Would 

that be satisfactory? 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Mr. Speaker, whether or not it is satisfactory depends on two things. How much later 

this afternoon — after all we have been promised this for several days consistently now — and how 

many he is going to table? We'll have to leave the satisfaction until those two things are known. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:14 o'clock p.m. 

 


