



















































Hansard: March 30, 1967


 

 

1503 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

38th Day 

Thursday, March 30, 1967 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

On the Order of the Day. 

 

MESSAGE FROM HIS HONOUR THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: 

 

R.L. Hanbidge, 

Lieutenant Governor 

 

"The Lieutenant Governor transmits Further Supplementary Estimates of certain sums required 

for the service of the Province of the twelve months ending March 31, 1967, and recommends 

the same to the Legislative Assembly." 

 

Regina, March 29, 1967 

 

MR. THATCHER (Premier) moved, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Resources (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That His Honour's Message and the further Supplementary Estimates be referred to the 

Committee of Supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

QUESTIONS RE RETURNS 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 22 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I'd like to ask the 

Provincial Secretary if he yet has Return No. 22. 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — I have a number here which I am signing. I'm not sure 

what. No. 22 was it? 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — Yes. 

 

MR. HEALD: — No, it's not here yet. I'll check it up. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 23 

 

MR. J.H. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with I would like to ask again about the Order for Return No. 23 which was in regard to the expense 

account of the elusive Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). It's very hard to find apparently. 

 

MR. HEALD: — I specifically asked about that one yesterday, and I'm 

 



 

March 30, 1967 

 

 

1504 

told it's being prepared today. If you'll be patient I hope to have it later on today. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 89 

 

MR. C.G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I'd like to ask the 

Minister of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Grant) whether or not his Department is having difficulty 

finding an answer to Order for Return No. 89 regarding the amount paid to MacLaren Advertising 

Agency. 

 

MR. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I've been so busy the last week, I 

haven't been in there for a few days. I don't think they're having any trouble. I hope not. 

 

MR. WILLIS: — I take it, Mr. Speaker, that the Order will be down before the end of the session. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE OIL DISCOVERY AT ESTON 

 

HON. A.C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the 

Day are proceeded with, I have an announcement to make which I think will be of interest to the 

Members of the Chamber, particularly to the Member from Elrose (Mr. Leith). I have just been informed 

of a new oil discovery 18 miles east of the town of Eston. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — The discovery is 30 miles removed from the nearest producing discovery and oil 

field at Dodsland. The oil is coming from the Viking formation. This is the first success of oil discovery 

in the Eston area and opens up a new pool in an area in which oil was not discovered previously. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Does the Minister know the gravity of the oil? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — The medium light gravity. 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — What Company made this discovery? 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Yes, it's a small independent company called Huston Oils of Calgary. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 12:30 until 2:30 p.m. 

 

VISIT BY CENTENNIAL OFFICIAL 

 

HON. J.W. GARDINER (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 

opportunity before proceeding with Estimates to introduce to the Members of the House Miss Henriette 

Bourque, who is the Assistant Regional Director of the Centennial Commission from Ottawa just 

appointed 

 



 

March 30, 1967 

 

 

1505 

recently. She is sitting in the Speaker's gallery above the clock. She is making her first tour across 

Canada meeting with the representatives of the Centennial Committees in the various provinces. I would 

like to welcome her here this afternoon on behalf of the Members of the Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO MR. BOLDT 

 

MR. J.H. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to say that 

we are glad to see the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) back in his seat. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Even though we disagree with the greatest of violence short of 

physical violence to some of the things he has to say, we still wish him health and hope that he is feeling 

better and that he will continue to feel better. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister 

of Education), that Bill No. 28 — An Act to Amend The School Grants Act, be now read a second 

time. 

 

MR. D.W. MICHAYLUK (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I notice that the proposed amendments to The 

School Grants Act are minor, due to the fact that the assessment figure of $150,000 is changed to 

$160,000. I am just wondering what effect this will have on rural and village and other districts where 

the assessment is over $150,000. I notice, for example, if a school district is assessed at $200,000 under 

the Act as it was up until now, that taking away the $150,000 would leave an assessment of $50,000, 

and taking 20 mills on the balance, taking 1/200 part of it, the grant would be $5 per day. This 

amendment which is being proposed by the Minister (Mr. Trapp) would reduce this grant by $1 per day. 

Taking as an example, a school district assessed at $200,000 if you take a difference of $160,000, which 

you are proposing to do in this amendment, that leave $40,000 at 20 mills, which, divided over 200 

days, would give a per diem grant of $4. So that the effects of this amendment where the assessment of a 

district is over the $160,000 are that the grant is being reduced in all instances. 

 

A question I wish to ask of the Minister is: what happens in districts where the assessment is below the 

$160,000? What effect would this amendment have? One other amendment is the per diem amount, the 

maximum for a continuation or a high school room is being raised from $10.80 to $12 and in every other 

room from $7.50 to $8.50. 

What and how will this affect school districts? In the estimates a year ago, the 1966 estimate was give as 

$30,814,847, that is including the newly formed school unit and that was Rosthern, but the actual 

amount received by these school districts was $29,349,892. In other words the actual expenditure for 

1966 over the previous year was seven per cent higher. 

 



 

March 30, 1967 

 

 

1506 

Now we have been given the estimates, as were given to the various school jurisdictions for 1967, and 

the grant figures for 1966 and the grants as given in the first estimates for 1967 are 8.2 per cent higher. 

Mr. Minister, if Rosthern is included the total increase in grants to the units and the school boards is 

only 5.4 per cent. This does not in my estimation cover the increase in the cost of education. If this 

amendment to The School Grants Act is to assist the local school boards by the Department of 

Education assuming a larger cost of education, then I think the move is in the right direction. But if the 

increase in the total overall grants paid to the schools and the school units will be only 5.4 per cent, this 

does not cover the increase in the cost of education for the ensuing year. Therefore, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan will have an additional burden to carry in respect to the cost of education. This is not the 

promise, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, which the Liberal Government made to the Saskatchewan 

people in the 1964 election. 

 

I would want the Minister to state what effect will this grant change have on the school districts assessed 

over $160,000. What effect it will have on school districts below the $160,000 and what effect will the 

amendment of The School Grants Act will have by this grant change for the taxpayers? 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): — Well, first I would like to say on the increase from 

$150,000 assessment to $160,000, that this only applies to those schools not under the regular grant 

formula. I don't know if you are aware of those outside the regular grant formula. What really is done 

here in this Bill is to increase every school district to the same level. If they have exactly the same 

teachers and the same assessment as they had last year, they would get a three per cent increase; they 

would also get an increase in their transportation allowance. Now mind you this does not just mean a 

three per cent increase, because the greatest increase is probably in growth and in more expenditures and 

on teachers and so on. So there is a greater increase. You will notice when you had your list given that 

some have increased nearly $100,000 in some units. But this will partly be due because their system has 

also grown. So this is what the Bill does. 

 

The Bill that is before you really increases the equalization grant which was at 33 per cent. It moves it 

up to 36 per cent at the minimum and from 85 to 88 at the maximum. That is how this is accomplished 

not by changing the formula directly but changing the percentage that is given. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. G.B. Grant that Bill 

No. 92 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to take anymore than about five 

minutes, and if I go past 5:30 p.m. I hope that you may stop the clock. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may recall that when the Minister moved 

 



 

March 30, 1967 

 

 

1507 

second reading of this Bill, he did not go into any explanation as to the contents of the Bill. In my search 

to find the answers to the amendments contained in Bill No. 82, it appears that the Health Department 

officials and the Minister are trying to make some corrections to the Act based on experience. However, 

to make an improvement or corrections, in some of the sections, problems arise in drafting since the 

areas are extremely technical. The end result of the amendments before us is that, while the Bill attempts 

to correct the old problems, the new sections create a series of brand new problems. 

 

It would appear to me that those drafting the Bill did not envisage during the period of drafting the new 

complications that do arise. I do not propose to get into any detailed discussion of the problems that do 

arise. Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity to discuss the problems somewhat with the Minister of 

Health (Mr. Grant). He informs me, based on our conversations, that regarding Section 22 which is the 

one that bothers me most of all, a House amendment is forthcoming and I do not propose to discuss the 

problem that is posed there. 

 

In respect of another section contained in the Bill, and if I may be specific with your permission, Section 

25, this section guaranteed that where an employer contributed to the cost of insured medical care 

services on behalf of the employees, prior to the introduction of the Medical Care Insurance Plan, he 

was required to pay employees an equal amount after the introduction of the Plan, but only to those 

employees employed prior to July 1962. Payments had to be paid monthly unless otherwise agreed 

upon. Where the marital or the dependency status of an employee changed, the amount paid by the 

employer prior to 1962, was guaranteed. The amendment permits an alternation to be made which on the 

surface may appear to be fair, but it does more than that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The words: "Or shall pay such other amount to the employee as may be agreed upon between the 

employer and the employee," will give employers an opportunity to use the powers of persuasion to 

reduce the amount previously paid. The result could be a financial loss to the employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I direct the Members to pages 114-117, of the Thompson Commission Report, for a more 

complete argument on this particular question, including the amounts of money that are involved. The 

problem that this section presents may be quite general, but more specifically it will be a problem to 

employees who are employed in shops that are not unionized. 

 

The removal of the monthly payment provision also creates obvious problems, but, if there are 

complaints that it involves added administrative costs by the employers, the section could then be 

amended to provide that, at least annually or on termination, payments will be made to employees, 

rather than monthly. There may be those employers who would suggest that payments under the new 

amendments would be permissible on the basis of once in five years. I would suggest to the Minister that 

he consider bringing an amendment to this section ensuring that payments to employees will be made at 

least once a year. 

 

Another section provides that a seven per cent interest payment must be made where monies are owing 

to the Commission by physicians and are not refunded in a certain period of time. I do not know, Mr. 

Speaker, what amounts of money are involved. 

 



 

March 30, 1967 

 

 

1508 

The amendment may be logical, particularly where large sums of money are involved. However, I am a 

bit concerned that it might open the door to new pressure. Will the Commission be asked in the future to 

pay interest to physicians for monies that are owing to them, if this particular section is adopted. An 

equally good case can be built that the physician should also be paid a seven per cent interest, where the 

Commission owes money. I understand that on occasion the Commission does owe money to group 

practices, to the tune of $20,000 to $30,000 for periods of two and three months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with these brief observations I have made, I would urge the Minister to give the matter 

reconsideration and consider bringing amendments with respect to Sections 25 and 45, possibly, but 

particularly Section 25. It is the one I am very much concerned with. We would then be able to deal with 

them in Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, Hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources), moved second reading of Bill No. 93 — An 

Act to Amend The Legislative Assembly Act. 

 

He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment suggested in this Bill affects 12 constituencies. Mostly they are just tidying 

up some obvious errors that were made when the Bill was brought down. I think it was two years ago, or 

it might have been last year. 

 

For example, there are some typographical errors. In some of the constituencies the boundaries between 

the constituencies went right through towns; in the constituency of Biggar, for example, between Biggar 

and Rosthern, the town of Warman is divided, cut right in half. We don’t think this is good and we are 

suggesting it be changed. In the constituency of Cutknife, part of the town of Battleford was divided and 

the same thing at Hanley. Humboldt was only a typographical error, some figures were put down wrong 

in the Act. Moose Jaw for example, Moose Jaw South, the constituency dividing line, the south 

boundary line of Moose Jaw South and Morse constituency divides the property of the Moose Jaw 

Training School. In fact I think that there were some buildings that were bisected. So there are no 

serious or no real important changes being made. It’s more tidying up the map and the Act as it now 

exists. 

 

When we go into clause by clause consideration, I have given the Members opposite the explanation that 

I have here and I will have the Returning Officer or one of the assistants to answer any questions when 

we go into Committee. But really there is no great principle involved as this is just tidying up the Bill. 

 

I would move that Bill No. 93 now be read a second time. 

 

MR. J.H. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to take much time on this, but if I 

remember right, this is the third Redistribution Bill that we have had in three years. I was wondering if 

the Minister is contemplating another one at the next session of the Legislature 



 

March 30, 1967 

 

 

1509 

and how many will it take to get it all set up right. I never saw anything like this before where there are 

really so many Redistribution Bills coming in. but as the Minister said we can consider it in Committee. 

 

Now the Minister did give me notes explaining each one and then he borrowed them back again. I 

suppose he will give them back to me again. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Yes, I'll be glad to give them back to you. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I just wonder whether you are quite sure to win the 

election on these basis now? 

 

MR. STEUART: — High hopes. 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — What about St. Benedict? I've been wanting to get these people for a long time. 

There is a good Liberal population that I would like to have. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Don't think we would like to give it to you. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:05 o'clock p.m. 

 

 


