



















































Hansard: February 08, 1967


102 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

5th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 8, 1967. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to introduce 

to you and to the Members of the House, 65 members of the Grade 12 class of Riverview High School in 

Moose Jaw. They are all in the east gallery. The class is accompanied by Mr. Morris Gardner of the History 

Department of the Riverview High, and I am sure that all Members would want to join in expressing a 

welcome to the Members of this class and to their teachers. We would wish them an interesting time while in 

Regina and that they will be able to learn something of the process of our form of government. I‟m by no 

means positive, Mr. Speaker, that they will be able to learn all of this this afternoon but hope in any case that 

they will be able to return individually or in a group so as to further improve their knowledge on another 

occasion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. SALLY MERCHANT: — Mr. Speaker, I would like very much through you to have the Members of 

this House welcome to the Assembly today members of the International Students Club and members of 

Debating Directorates and people who have taken part in the Parliamentary Forum on both campuses of the 

University of Saskatchewan, here as well as in Saskatoon. I hope that Members will join us again tonight at 

dinner downstairs. Those Members who joined us last night very much enjoyed meeting the young people 

who were with us and I hope as many Members as possible will be able to personally meet some of the 

young people who are with us today. I know you will want now to welcome them with me to the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.N. NICHOLSON (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I mentioned yesterday I had the honor of 

acting as Speaker at the Student Assembly in Saskatoon a couple of weeks ago. I might mention to the 

Members that the government when I became Speaker was defeated and the Liberal government asked me to 

continue in this capacity. This rarely happens in the parliamentary system where adults are engaged. Again I 

would like to say that Hon. Members would be well advised to drop in at the campus, either Regina or 

Saskatoon while the students are discussing the business before the Assembly. A very high standard was set 

in Saskatoon and the young people are to be commended. I am sure we are all delighted that many students 

from all over the world have come to Saskatchewan to continue their graduate work. We hope their visit to 

Regina today will give them the better knowledge of how the work of the Assembly is done and a little more 

about the problems that we have in Saskatchewan. I am 

 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

103 

sure all Members hope that this will be a happy visit for will who come from the Saskatoon or Regina 

campus. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to through you have the Members of 

this House welcome a group of students in the west gallery from Victoria School in Saskatoon. I am sue that 

every Member here hopes that they will have a pleasant stay in the capital city and that they will enjoy their 

trip home. I sincerely hope that all Members agree with me that these students are very much welcome this 

afternoon to this Assembly. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw the attention to the 

west gallery. The students that I see in the west gallery in the two front rows are from the Bateman High 

School and the Bateman Hi C group. They are accompanied here this afternoon by Mrs. Peterson, the vice 

principal of the high school and Mr. Evert Brown who is in charge of the Hi C group. They are accompanied 

here today by Mr. And Mrs. Alfred Bell, Mr. And Mrs. Oman, and Mr. and Mrs. Jake Rothiesler. I am sure 

that they will note with interest the deliberations in the Legislature this afternoon, and I am sue that they will 

find this a most interesting day, particularly today when the Premier of the province is speaking. I would like 

on behalf of the Legislature to welcome them here. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day may I ask the indulgence of the House to also draw your 

attention to four gentlemen sitting behind the Bar, four Members of the Canadian House of Commons at 

Ottawa visiting us. I am sure we would all wish to extend to them a most warm welcome to our Legislature. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE REPORT ON SASKATCHEWAN POWER CORPORATION 

 

MR. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I 

would like to ask the Premier a question. About two years ago he got a report in regard to the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation from Mr. Hal Berry and at that time the Premier considered it not to be in the public 

interest to give the Members of the Legislature a copy. I wonder now after the lapse of two years would the 

Premier consider giving to the Legislature a copy of that report submitted by Mr. Hal Berry in regard to the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — No, I would not, Mr. Speaker. The Hon. Member for Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) who 

has been in this House for many years knows very well that that was privileged and confidential 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

104 

 

information. If Mr. Berry had not had that assurance he would not have carried out the report. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to get into an argument but no report is 

confidential and privileged except the Premier makes it so. But I would like to ask a supplemental question. 

Has the Premier made this report available to the general manager of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I have discussed it with him. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — That wasn‟t an answer. I would like an answer to the question: has he 

made it available to the manager of the Power Corporation? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member may not like my answer but I gave him one 

nevertheless. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Hooker 

(Notukeu-Willowbunch) for an Address in Reply and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Lloyd (Leader 

of the Opposition). 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks this afternoon of course, must 

be to welcome the many students and university students who are with us this afternoon. We know on this 

side of the House and I am sure on the Opposition side, that young people usually give fresh ideas and new 

approaches to political parties. We hope that they will enjoy their stay today. I am also certain that we can 

benefit from some of the discussions we have with them before they leave. 

 

I would like to echo your remarks, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming four Members of Parliament from Quebec. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — These gentlemen are in the Legislature today because they are in the city with the 

Standing Committee for Agriculture from Ottawa. They are studying operations of the Wheat Board. I am 

sure they have found already that everyone in Saskatchewan likes the Wheat Board regardless of their 

politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker this year we are celebrating the 100th birthday of this nation. A great many plans are under way 

in every part of the province to mark this notable event. Dozens of projects have been designed and 

formulated to have a lasting memorial to this occasion. Surely in this Centennial year it is appropriate to give 

thanks to Providence for the blessings we have had in this past century. When we look around at the misery 

and poverty and wars which exist in so 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

105 

many parts of the world today, we realize how fortunate we are here in Saskatchewan. 

 

As we begin our second 100 years as a nation, the province is experiencing unprecedented development. It is 

almost three years since this government took office. During that period we have sought to achieve better 

living standards for the people of Saskatchewan. In the process we have encountered difficulties. We have 

met with some frustrations, and a few disappointments. However, as we begin this session of the Legislature, 

it is obvious on every hand except to the most biased that we are beginning to see tangible results. 

 

What do Liberals believe constitutes good government? We are convinced, Mr. Speaker, that a good 

government first must contribute to a healthy agricultural industry; secondly, must provide a political and 

economic climate that will permit industrial expansion, thus providing full employment at good wages; 

thirdly, must inaugurate programs that will ensure maximum living standards for the needy, for the aged and 

for the unfortunate. Finally, Mr. Speaker, we believe that in normal times a good government must balance 

its budget, and keep taxes from becoming onerous. 

 

I propose to show today that the programs of this Government are fulfilling those objectives. Liberals do not 

claim that in 32 short months we have accomplished economic miracles. At no time have we suggested that 

in solving the problems that face this province, we have any magic formula or easy answers. But we do 

contend that in this period the Liberal government has started Saskatchewan along a new road to prosperity 

and expansion. Facts speak for themselves. Today the economy of this province has never been more 

buoyant, never more prosperous. The province enjoys virtually full employment since we defeated the 

Socialists. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Farm income today is at an all-time high. For years in the rest of this nation, they 

looked upon Saskatchewan as one of the poor relations, one of the provinces that was always in Ottawa with 

its hand out. Today suddenly we become one of the have provinces. We are becoming one of the thriving 

partners of Confederation since we defeated the Socialists. Members on this side of the House contend that 

much of the economic development and expansion in Saskatchewan has taken place, at least in part, because 

of the positive and constructive approaches and policies of the new Liberal government. Some problems, of 

course, remain. Some inequities and injustices that have been with us for years still prevail. There are too 

many Saskatchewan people who continue to have too little. But, Mr. Speaker, much of the legislation 

embodied in the Speech from the Throne has been designed to remove as best we can those obstacles to 

greater progress. 

 

In passing, Mr. Speaker, I should like to say a word about the philosophy of this Government. The 

Saskatchewan Liberal party has endeavored at all times to give middle-of-the-road government. It is 

fashionable today to refer to political parties as being parties of the right or parties of the left. Liberals 

believe that neither extreme is needed 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

106 

 

in this province. The Liberal party has always been a reform party and always will continue to be a reform 

party. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — But we believe that these reforms must be related to the economic capacity of the 

taxpayer. We contend that no segment or group in our society should receive special treatment. All groups 

should receive equal, fair, and similar attention. Here we differ again from the Socialists. Down through the 

years the Liberal party has been identified with enlightened social legislation. Only a few weeks ago in 

Ottawa, the Federal Liberal Government once again raised the old age pension to those in need from $75 a 

month to $105 per month. Mr. Speaker, in season and out of season, the Liberal party has been concerned 

with the problems of the unemployed, the sick and the underprivileged. We intend to keep carrying forward 

those efforts. Liberals believe you can have social security without socialism. We believe you can have 

social welfare without regimentation. Liberals want Saskatchewan to be known as the “opportunity 

province.” This Government firmly believes in the principles of private enterprise. We do so because we 

know these principles have given people in Canada one of the highest living standards in the world, far 

higher, Mr. Speaker, I may say than living standards in most Socialist countries. We believe in private 

enterprise, because we are convinced that this system can provide a maximum of good jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Liberals believe that government can be run on a sound business basis, with a maximum of efficiency and a 

minimum of waste. No one can get something for nothing from a government. Governments secure their 

revenues from the pockets of the taxpayer, and anything promised by a government must be paid out of the 

pockets of all. Liberals do not believe that oppressive taxation is necessary. The plans and platform of this 

Government then, Mr. Speaker, are designed with these principles and objectives in mind. 

 

I turn now specifically to the Throne Speech. Initially I want to say a few words about agriculture because of 

course agriculture remains our major industry. It is now well known that the farmers in our province in 1966 

produced the largest crop in the province‟s history. At the same time foreign wheat sales were the highest on 

record, thanks to the selling policies of a Liberal Government at Ottawa. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Our farmers this past year harvested 546,000,000 bushels of wheat, most of it high 

grade. We had the largest barley crop in history. How delighted our farmers were with the participation 

certificates and cheques which they received a few weeks ago. Our receipts from livestock operations 

increased the past year, chiefly as a result of higher cattle marketing and better beef prices. For the first time, 

the receipts from livestock in Saskatchewan exceeded $200,000,000. In short Saskatchewan farm income in 

1966 will exceed all previous figures. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

107 

Notwithstanding these facts, Mr. Speaker, the Government is still concerned over the continued lack of 

major diversification in agriculture. I note with concern that, despite persistent efforts of our Government 

over the past year, marketings of hogs and sheep declined. While it is true that we have enjoyed good crops 

in recent years, nevertheless history has shown us the dangers of depending on a one crop economy. We 

continue to be cruelly vulnerable to drought, or a major drop in overseas wheat sales. For this reason, our 

Government has consistently endeavored to formulate programs which would encourage our farmers to 

diversify. We know there are difficulties. Labor is in short supply today. New investment is needed. Changes 

in techniques are taking place. But at the same time in the interest of Saskatchewan agriculture, we are 

convinced that a broader base is vital. 

 

I have already mentioned that revenue from beef marketing improved this past year. A great deal yet remains 

to be done if our Saskatchewan livestock population is to be significantly increased. Thus our Government 

has a number of programs designed to help cattle production. For example, community pastures are being 

added to and expanded, seven new ones last year, six more will be completed this year. The construction of 

hay shelters is being encouraged. Incentives are provided for the clearing of brush and the conversion of 

sub-marginal land to forage. The Department is sparing no effort to expand small irrigation projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker cattle rustling continues to cause concern in many parts of the province. To help cope with this 

problem we have had numerous requests for an extension of our brand inspection program. Therefore, as 

indicated the Throne Speech this year, we shall extend the area of the province covered by the program. It is 

our hope that within three years there will be a brand inspection program in the whole of Saskatchewan. 

 

The policy of selling cultivated and pasture lease lands back to the farmer has been continued and expanded. 

Up to a few days ago we had sold 475,000 acres of land back to the farmer — 2,203 leases. And we shall sell 

another 400,000 acres this year, we hope, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal Government believes that under most 

circumstances government should get out of the land business, so that more farmer can get into it. The 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) will go into more detail later in this debate about our programs to 

diversity agriculture. However, I emphasize again, the livestock industry has a future which is unbelievably 

bright. Price prospects are excellent. Expansion of the industry can only help the farmer and the province 

generally. 

 

In passing, Mr. Speaker I should like to say a few words about the sheep industry. For years this has been an 

ailing industry. We believe that the production of sheep in Saskatchewan holds exciting possibilities, and 

should be made an important part of our diversification program. During 1966, our importations of mutton 

and lamb were far grater than they should have been. Therefore, in a new program during 1966 we opened 

our first community sheep pasture. Because of the keen interest displayed, we propose to open four more 

community sheep pastures this spring. Already we have had more than 7,000 applications for sheep to be 

placed 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

108 

 

in those pastures. This action, together with new measures for predator control, leads us to hope that 

Saskatchewan sheep numbers will turn upwards for the coming year, for the first time in some decades. 

 

Income from hogs in Saskatchewan during 1966 increased. Sometime ago we announced a new policy, under 

which loans would be made available through the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, for 

farmers who wished to go into intensive hog operations. This action has helped. But frankly our Government 

has been disappointed in the lack of response. Demand has risen sharply in Canada recently for hogs. Price 

prospects are excellent. We urge Saskatchewan farmers in their own interests to raise more hogs. 

 

The Government continues to do everything possible to bring new land under cultivation. Hon. Members 

might be interested to know that in 1966 another 325,000 acres of new land were broken. Included in that 

figure of course are a number of major projects. In the Saskatchewan River delta area near Cumberland 

House, we are now carrying out a pilot project on several thousand acres to see if major agricultural projects 

are feasible in that area. If we proceed, huge sums will be required to dike, drain and break lands in the Delta 

area. Large portions of this land, of course, will still continue to be used for hunting and tramping and 

fishing and so on. But we believe the rapid development of some of this very rich farm land must proceed in 

the near future. The potential in this area is estimated to be 700,000 acres and upward. 

 

Now as we endeavor to bring stability to agriculture, this Government hopes, as it says in the Throne Speech, 

to gradually expand crop insurance. In 1964 more than 2,350 farmers bought crop insurance in this province. 

Last year 7,000 farmers purchased it with a coverage of a little more than $12,000,000. It is interesting to 

know that last year Alberta only had 4,500 farmers covered. Next year we hope to expand crop insurance 

even further. It is true that many farmers still like to use P.F.A.A. in this province. Under the new crop 

insurance program, premium rates are calculated to make the plan self-sustaining over a long period. The 

farmer pays 75 per cent of the premium, the Federal Government pays 25 per cent. There are few measures, 

Mr. Speaker, in the decade ahead, which should bring such benefits to the Saskatchewan farmer as the crop 

insurance. Yet since the Provincial Government would be required to absorb one quarter of losses involved 

in a major crop failure year, expansion must be carefully planned. In 1967 the Crop Insurance Branch will 

endeavor to insure 8,500 policies with a coverage of $14,700,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker as I said a moment ago, this Government gives agriculture a top priority. I assure the House and 

the province, that we intend to continue making whatever investment in agriculture that is necessary for the 

public good. A healthy agricultural industry invariably means a healthy province. We believe that 

diversification is the key to many of our problems. 

 

Now for a moment, Mr. Speaker I want to turn to a subject that I always like talking about because the 

Liberals have been 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

109 

so successful with it — Industrial Development. Just as we must have diversification in the agricultural 

industry in Saskatchewan so common sense dictates that our economy as a whole must be diversified. That is 

why the Liberal party prior to the last election promised to take every feasible step to bring new industry and 

new investment to Saskatchewan. Since taking office, we have done all in our power to establish a climate in 

which industry can prosper and grow thereby creating new jobs and higher incomes. As I said earlier we 

have used private enterprise methods because we are convinced that private enterprise will give us the most 

investment and a maximum of new industries and jobs. 

 

During 1966 the continued forward surge of industry was most encouraging. We were particularly pleased to 

note that manufacturing shipments which were $428,000,000 a year ago, increased to $462,000,000 this year 

— up 8 per cent. 

 

I am sure the House would be interested to now that official figures show that 1,313 new companies 

registered in Saskatchewan last year, compared to 915 in the last year of Socialist government. 

 

Potash continues to develop at a rapid rate since the government changed. Tight money has held back several 

new developments. However, during 1967, two more multi-million dollar plants will go into production, a 

third in early 1968. Mr. Speaker, we are not too far distant from the day when the dollar value of the potash 

being produced in Saskatchewan will be more than the dollar value of wheat being produced. Hon. Members 

will have noted that the Government has announced that royalty rates will go up after October 1, 1967. For 

this reason we expect that several more potash announcements will be made before that date. 

 

Oil development continues apace in Saskatchewan. On taking office, we found that oil exploration had 

tapered off in our province. We found that the oil industry was suspicious of Saskatchewan. So after we 

consulted with the industry we initiated a program of incentives to encourage deeper drilling. A few months 

ago the program paid its first dividend. A well in the Minton area produced commercial quantities in the 

deep Devonian formation. A number of subsequent wells have gone into production. Prospects appear to be 

excellent that this find may develop into a major new field. During 1966, 574 new oil wells and 32 gas wells 

were brought into production. And many new oil companies have moved into the province. 

 

We are now beginning to see the development of our northern timber resources in constituencies like Prince 

Albert and Cumberland East. 1966 saw the commencement of the new $65,000,000 pulp mill. The 

Government company which must provide raw pulp during the initial four years expects to start operations 

this month. Our Department of Natural Resources and Industry are working on several other lumbering 

projects which we will hope may materialize during 1967. And so I say, Mr. Speaker these new companies 

are transforming our forest areas from an asset of doubtful value to one which will provide a powerful 

impetus to the economic advances of the province. Several years ago this Government inaugurated an 

incentive program for mineral development. We began to pay up to 50 per cent of the costs of prospecting, 

up to $50,000 ceiling. As a result, today more than sixty of the mining grants of this continent are now up in 

Northern Saskatchewan looking for minerals. This year we saw 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

110 

 

two more small mines go into production and we saw greatly renewed activity in the field of uranium. There 

are indications that in the not too distance future a number of important finds may develop into mines. 

 

We saw a great many new industries this last year, Mr. Speaker. Three new sodium sulphate enterprises 

came closer to fruition and production. Numerous feed mills were built around the province — also several 

housing, construction and building firms. The capacity of IPSCO, our steel company, increased by 

$2,000,000. A new gypsumboard plant in Saskatoon, a new wire production plant, a Japanese plant in Moose 

Jaw. Yesterday the Minister of Industry (Mr. Grant) announced a new Farm Machinery Manufacturing 

Company. Many other companies could be mentioned, but I say, Mr. Speaker, the hard facts indicate that the 

Liberals have made some major progress along the road to industrial diversification. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Socialists claim that all this new expansion would have happened anyway. They 

say the resources were there, they would have been developed without the Liberals. Well, the fact is that we 

had a Socialist government for 20 years, Mr. Speaker. During all that time those industries didn‟t come into 

the province, and our resources were not developed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I must remind you today, Sir, that for two decades private investors avoided 

Saskatchewan like the plague. And only when the dead hand of socialism was removed did private capital 

move into this province in a major way. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — My honorable friends opposite say that this Government is selling out is resources to 

big business or to the Americans. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is sour grapes. How can our oil fields help 

our people unless they are developed? How can timber resources be of value unless some use is made of 

them? Who benefits if our potash reserves remain a mile underground? We Liberals believe that 

Saskatchewan‟s natural resources should be opened up and used for one main purpose — to provide good 

jobs and a better way of life for our people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — We Liberals would rather see our resources opened up with Canadian capital. But 

the hard fact of life today is that in a new developing country like Canada, there is simply not enough 

Canadian capital. We can either use outside capital and have new plants and mines today or we can wait for 

Canadian capital to develop our resources perhaps 50 years hence. Liberals believe that in the main, the 

people of Saskatchewan are interested in having full employment at high wages, not 50 years hence but now! 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

111 

MR. THATCHER: — If outside capital is needed to ensure full employment, then I think most people will 

wish the Government to continue seeking it out. In short then, Mr. Speaker, I say today that private 

enterprise is achieving in Saskatchewan what Socialism failed completely to achieve in their two decades of 

office. Last fall the Socialists held their Annual Convention, and I trust that many Canadians noted their 

attitude toward industrial development. 

 

MR. D.W. MICHAYLUK (Redberry): — Is that the one you attended? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — In connection with oil, timber, sodium sulphate, and other minerals the so-called 

new CCF platform called for a review of agreements made under the Liberals. They said, “If we come to 

power, we want renegotiations of those agreements.” As originally worded, this plank was even stronger. It 

called for the virtual tearing-up of these agreements in the event of re-election of the CCF. The plank calls 

specifically for renegotiation where possible. Now what this means in Socialist language is that a CCF 

Government would pressure and harass these companies to try and force them to renegotiate the contracts 

they made with the Liberal Government. I suggest that such action might well drive out many of these 

companies. It could bring a return to the stagnation in our resource development which existed for such a 

long period under the Socialists. 

 

Mr. Speaker Socialists are a strange breed. While they pretend they are not what they really are, their blind 

hatred and distrust of private enterprise corporations shows up inevitably, whenever they get together to 

prepare a party platform. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — At their Convention, the Socialist delegates again urged economic development 

through the establishment of Crown corporations. Do they never learn? After 1944 they tried to tan leather. 

They went broke in the process. The only thing they tanned were the hides of the taxpayers. 

 

They tried to make and sell shoes. The poor taxpayer ended with the pinch from paying out money to cover 

the losses. I met a man a month or so ago who still had some of those old CCF boots on his shelf. He had 

them for 20 years and he said, “I can‟t give them away.” 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Then, in Moose Jaw the Socialists embarked on a project to make blankets in 

woollen mills from wool. The sheep got fleeced and so did the taxpayers. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I won‟t take any more time on Crown corporations but I could remind the people of 

Saskatchewan of the Box Factory, the Paint Spray Company, The Guarantee & Fidelity Insurance Company, 

the Brick Plant, Wizewood, and so on. The original Crown corporation program 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

112 

 

was a disaster and a fiasco, and yet now they say the answer to an industrial program is to have more Crown 

corporations. Well, Mr. Speaker, I say that the whole Socialist attitude re-emphasizes why it is necessary in 

the not too distant future, to hold a provincial election. Industrialists from across Canada and elsewhere want 

assurance if they are going to place investment capital in this province, that it will not be endangered by 

crackpot Socialist theories. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that one of the major achievements of this Liberal 

Government has been its success in attracting new industries. This success means much to the average 

citizen. In future years it will not longer be necessary for our university students and our collegiate students, 

when they graduate, to move out of the province to find a job. Liberals are finding them jobs right here at 

home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — At the same time, the new businesses will assume some of the tax burdens which 

will permit this Government to improve services. For example, Mr. Speaker I mentioned yesterday afternoon 

in this debate, the fact that these new industries and mines are now paying major taxes and royalties. Because 

of that fact it was possible for this Government last year to pay a homeowner grant of $50 to most 

homeowners in the Province of Saskatchewan. This legislation is helping every homeowner in the province 

with local taxes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Yet, as I said yesterday afternoon, it was interesting to note when the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) was speaking he didn‟t have much to say about the homeowner grants and I really 

don‟t blame him. However, even though Socialists don‟t like this progressive legislation, it has been 

received very well throughout the Province of Saskatchewan. As I said yesterday, I watched with great 

interest the proceedings at the recent Socialist Convention last fall. According to those reports four CCF 

constituency executives and associations, Morse, Wadena, Touchwood and Kinistino, moved resolutions that 

the homeowner grant be abolished. Did that resolution . . . did those resolutions ever bring some of the CCF 

MLAs to their feet! For example, according to the Regina Leader Post of November 18, 1966 I quote: 

 

A.E. Blakeney, MLA for Regina West as one of the first to speak against the resolution stating, „it 

has appeal. It is a popular measure . . . it is not all that bad because Ross brought it in. We should be 

careful.‟ 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What a statement! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Said Mr. Blakeney: 

 

I realize that this may be waffling or dodging the issue, but I think we should take a good look at it. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

113 

As I said yesterday, such principles, such motivation! Now it was the turn for that deep thinker the Hon. 

Member for The Battleford constituency (Mr. Kramer). 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — He really spoke from the heart with concern and conviction for the little man. Said 

the Member for The Battlefords: 

 

I don‟t like the grant, it stinks, it‟s political bribery. But don‟t underestimate John Doe. We did it in 

1964 and we lost the election. 

 

Mr. Kramer said: 

 

There are many more who like the grant than those who don‟t. From a politician‟s point of view, we 

can‟t afford to annihilate the people who like this grant. We can‟t tell people their little plum is going 

to be taken away. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Kramer said: 

So we have to accept it and gild the lily. 

Then the Hon. Member for The Battlefords moves that this grant which he says „stinks‟, that this grant which 

he calls „political bribery‟ should not only be paid to homeowners, but should be paid to just about everyone 

else in this province also. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — That brought the old warrior from Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) to his feet. He 

grumped: “If we extend the grant to cover all householders, we‟re endorsing a Liberal Program. It may be 

that‟s how we‟ll have to do it. I don‟t want to see us tie our hands at this time.” According to newspaper 

reports there was a pretty acrimonious debate. 

 

Finally one of the grass roots members came to his feet, John Vershagen of Kinistino. He said this, 

„Some of you fellows may take a holier than though attitude about such things as the homeowner 

grant, but don‟t forget, it‟s working. Unless we have some of these things you‟ll keep Thatcher there 

for a long time yet. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — So, Mr. Speaker, the resolution to abolish the homeowner grant was defeated, not 

because any of my hon. friends opposite like it, but rather because just before an election they don‟t dare 

oppose it. The Socialist Convention did pass a resolution: 

 

That a CCF government would examine the grant to determine that the benefits from the money are 

available to the people in the fairest possible way. 

 

Those are weasel words, Mr. Speaker. Let me assure you again 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

114 

 

that a Liberal Government will keep the homeowner grant and gradually extend it. The election of a CCF 

Government would mean that the homeowner grants would be abolished, period. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — And now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to matters of health. I want to 

mention two specific new programs of the Liberal Government. May I refer first to our efforts to attract 

additional dentists to Saskatchewan. We inherited from the Socialist Government a critical problem in this 

connection. We have one dentist for every 4500 people in this province, one of the lowest rates in Canada. 

We have dozens of communities particularly in our north, where no dentist is available. In other 

communities, long waiting periods are required to obtain the services of a dentist. A great deal has been said 

in recent years about the merits of a dental care program. Our Government certainly believes that dental care 

is important. But before any steps can be taken to implement a comprehensive dental care program, we must 

have a much larger supply of dentists. For that reason our Department of Health for many months has been 

endeavoring to bring more dentists to Saskatchewan. As a first sep we have commenced construction of a 

Dental College at the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. That college was originally scheduled to 

start accepting students in 1969. We have now asked the University to consider the feasibility of having 

facilities completed by 1968. We have launched a program of greatly expanded bursaries for dentists. 

Bursaries are available to Saskatchewan students. No repayment of funds is required where a student returns 

to Saskatchewan and sets up practice for a sufficient period of time. One hundred and fifty of those dental 

bursaries were given in the past year. In 1966 ten new graduates returned to practice in Saskatchewan, and 

we expect 18 this year. 

 

During 1966, also for the first time, the Government began to pay inducement grants to graduate from 

various Canadian dental colleges. We have made available up to $5,000 to each young dentist for purchasing 

equipment and getting established in practice. They must agree to locate in Saskatchewan areas where the 

shortage of dentists is particularly acute. They must also agree to stay for a certain period of time. We have 

also tried to recruit dentists in Great Britain and the United States with only modest success. 

 

I turn to another major problem facing the Department of Health. The need for more hospital beds in the city 

of Regina. I remind Hon. Members and the people of Saskatchewan that on a per capita basis this province 

has more hospital beds than any other province or any state of the Union to the south. Unfortunately, the 

location of these beds leaves much to be desired — Socialist planning. Some areas have too many beds. 

Others including the city of Regina have too few. It is a fact that in our capital, many of our citizens must 

wait for months before they can obtain accommodation unless an emergency is involved. Why is the city of 

Regina in the present plight? Today in opposition, the Socialists protest and complain about the bed 

shortage, about the run-down condition of the General Hospital. I ask this Legislature: what did the 

Socialists do to alleviate the crisis when they were in office? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBER: — Nothing. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

115 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, from 1949 to 1964, the Socialist Government gave the Regina General 

Hospital a total of $182,000 or $12,000 per year. During those 15 years Regina grew by 42,000 people, yet 

the Socialist failed to add a single bed to the city of Regina. Not only were no new beds added, but repeated 

requests from the Hospital Board for major renovations were also ignored b y the Socialists when they were 

the Government. Compare such action with the Liberal record, Mr. Speaker. In less than three years the 

Liberal Government has given the Regina General Hospital $460,000 in capital grants alone. We have made 

it possible for that institution to add 80 additional new beds. In total, the Department of Health, under a 

Liberal Government has approved additions, renovations and new equipment to the Regina General Hospital 

amounting to almost $2,000,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Any way you look at it, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals have done more about this 

problem in a few months than the Socialists did over the last 15 years of office. Any reasonable person can 

only conclude that the major blame for a shortage of hospital beds in Regina, as well as any lack of modern 

facilities must be placed squarely at the door of the Socialists. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Socialist Member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) must bear some 

responsibility. He was the Minister of Health for a number of years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I regret to say it, but the Mayor of Regina must also bear some responsibility for the 

critical situation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — As far as we can ascertain from the records, Mr. Speaker, between 1957 and 1965 

the city of Regina failed to spend virtually any funds at the Regina General Hospital for any purpose. I must 

point out that during that period of time, for seven years the Hon. Member for Regina (Mr. Baker) was the 

Mayor. Not only did the city of Regina fail to spend any money on the General Hospital but from 1960 to 

1964 they took $335,000 paid to them by the Province for old hospital debt and used it for other purposes. 

Not one cent of that $335,000 was re-invested in building or equipment for the hospital. In other words, the 

Mayor used hospital funds to balance his budget. 

 

I say then, that the Socialist party, the Member for Regina West and His Worship, the Mayor shirked their 

responsibility to the people of Regina by allowing the General Hospital to become inadequate both in size 

and quality. For 20 years the Socialists were in power and ignored this problem. Now they are trying to 

blame the Liberals for the resulting lack of facilities. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, recriminations will not solve 

this issue. This is one more Socialist mess which must be cleaned up by the Liberals. Since taking office, I 

have contended, and this Government 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

116 

 

has contended that the city of Regina would be expected to pay its proper share toward hospital facilities that 

serve the people of this city. We have also stated, both inside and outside of this House, that our Government 

would face its responsibilities to the people of Regina and of southern Saskatchewan in regard to the supply 

of modern hospital facilities. May I remind this House that by approving the 80 bed McPherson wing, the 

renovation of the DVA wing, the additions to the Munroe Wing and other modernization, this Government 

has taken positive action to help solve the Regina hospital problem. Recently, by sharing in the cost of these 

projects, the city of Regina at long last has begun to assume a portion of their proper responsibility. I am also 

informed that major renovations still must be undertaken at the Regina General hospital. Of course, the city 

will be obliged to carry the largest portion of these cots. But even when these works have been completed, 

there are indications that a major bed shortage will remain in Regina. This city is growing rapidly. During 

the year, thousands of people from elsewhere in the province do come to Regina hospitals for treatment. We 

know that the local tax burden in Regina is even now probably the highest in all Canada for a comparable 

city. When we keep all these factors in mind, the Government has decided that a solution must be found. I 

wish to announce today the decision of our Government to proceed with a third hospital complex in Regina 

at the earliest possible moment. We would expect the complex to cost in the neighborhood of $16,000,000. 

For financial reasons, it may have to be constructed in phases. We believe that if the hospital can be tied in 

closely with the University of Saskatchewan as a teaching and research institution, we can receive up to 50 

per cent of the cost of construction from the Federal Government. The Provincial Government will be 

prepared to finance the balance. I remind you, Mr. Speaker, that last year we put $700,000 aside for this 

purpose. We are placing another $750,000 in the supplementary estimates. I remind you that we have already 

put aside 300 acres in the Wascana area. I have asked the Minister of Health to recruit a Chairman and Board 

immediately, and he will speak on this subject later in this debate. The Minister is also opening negotiations 

with Ottawa and the University of Saskatchewan with a view to immediately drawing the appropriate plans 

and specifications. Mr. Speaker, respectfully I say this great hospital complex is one more demonstration of 

how the Liberals act while the Socialists talk. 

 

Mr. Speaker the throne Speech indicates the Government‟s willingness and desire to extend RCMP facilities 

to additional communities. Within the last year the Attorney General has concluded an agreement with the 

Federal Government regarding police service in many towns and villages throughout the province. This 

action is desirable for several reasons. First of all because of the difficulty of obtaining trained personnel 

who know police work in many of the smaller centres. Secondly, because this new scheme will give these 

communities police services much more cheaply than they were formerly able to obtain. In the last year, 40 

town and villages applied for this assistance. In the coming year we expect to see this program expanded. 

The Government will obtain or entertain applications for at least another 50 communities during 1967. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to speak briefly about the Government‟s plans for continued development of the arts n 

Saskatchewan. I remind this House that in the last year of Socialist government the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board received $80,000. This year, in direct grants alone, it will receive $275,000 and other substantial 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

117 

sums in indirect grants. A number of new projects were commenced by the Board in the last year. Perhaps 

the most successful was the Saskatchewan Festival of the Arts. This festival was carried on in ten cities; 

32,000 people attended the festival, many of them school children. As Hon. Members know, a number of 

outside artists were brought to Saskatchewan, including the Winnipeg Symphony, Winnipeg Ballet, and 

others. Many local artists also participated. This year the festival will be continued and expanded. 

 

For the past several years, the Board has been conducting a summer school for the arts. Last year at 

Caronport, more than 400 children over a three week period were given instruction in band music, in drama, 

painting and so on. Response has been so enthusiastic that the Board has vigorously pressed the Government 

for larger and permanent facilities. As has already been announced, the Government has decided to establish 

a permanent School of Fine Arts. Ultimately we hope to have a school modelled on the famous Banff School 

of Arts, though this achievement may be several years away. As Hon. Members know, the TB hospital 

buildings at Fort Qu‟Appelle have been gradually phased out of use. These buildings are in the heart of the 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. The government has made four buildings available to the Arts Board. This winter we are 

spending $50,000 on renovations and next year we will spend a similar amount. 

 

Last autumn, the Government initiated a program to help establish and equip school bands throughout the 

province. Under this program, school boards can apply for special grants from the Provincial Government, to 

help in the operation of band training programs. We hope ultimately to have at least one band in every larger 

unit or every school district. The Government will pay special grants to school boards, amounting to 50 per 

cent of the cost of instruments and music up to a maximum of $2,000 per band. This year we will have 2,000 

Saskatchewan students receiving band instruction mainly because of these programs. Mr. Speaker, I hope I 

have indicated to you that this Liberal Government is committed to a policy of promoting the fine arts. It is 

our intention, year by year, to gradually increase the funds which are available for this purpose. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Throne Speech mentions the determination of this Government to provide better 

employment opportunities for our Indians and Metis. Two years ago, the Legislature approved a measure, 

establishing a special branch of Government to deal with development of the Indian and Metis people of 

Saskatchewan. Our Government took this step because many of these people for generations have been 

living in abject poverty, squalor and deprivation. We believe that this state of affairs is a shameful reflection 

on the people of Saskatchewan. Since the Indian and Metis Branch was established, numerous new programs 

have been launched to enable them to share in the general prosperity of Saskatchewan. From the outset, we 

made it very clear that we had no intention of simply adding social welfare payments. This year about 

$8,000,000 will be paid to our Indian people in that manner. In this past year, I have visited 12 or 14 of these 

reserves personally and I have seen unemployment and living conditions unparalleled anywhere in Canada. 

At the same time, we know that our native birth rate is one of the highest in the whole world. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

118 

 

I admit that the Government has found no simple solution to the Indian problem. However, we believe that 

the answer must come through enabling citizens of Indian ancestry to grasp opportunities for employment in 

our new and expanding industries. Then, more than a year and a half ago, our Indian Branch launched a 

major drive to find jobs for these people. You might be interested to now, Mr. Speaker, that more than 2,200 

of these people have been placed as a direct result of the activities of the Branch. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Government has tried to provide leadership. Many have been permanently 

employed in the civil service. Several hundred more have been employed on a part-time basis in our parks 

and so on. We have asked private industry to employ many of these people. Recognizing the need for 

training and upgrading before many of them can accept employment, we have established a number of 

training courses: one for highway equipment, one for surveying, one for lumber operations, and so on. 

Altogether, 400 of them are now in full-time employment. During 1967, the Government will vigorously 

expand the training and placement program. The Branch is proposing that all Government departments and 

agencies become more active in this field in the months ahead. However, there should be no illusions. No 

program will succeed without the co-operation of the Indians themselves. Any program must be two-way. 

Some method must be found to persuade the Indian, once he has taken a job, to remain with it. Probably the 

only final answer is education. The Government is doing all in its power to integrate Indian children from 

reserves into some of our white schools in towns and villages. We are encouraged with the results. During 

the past year, we have tried to improve living standards on some of our reserves. On a fifty-fifty basis with 

the Federal Government, we spent $500,000 on roads in reserves. Last year we brought electricity to 12 more 

Indian reserves, although only 325 people are as yet connected up to that electricity. In the same period our 

department built 60 homes for the Indian people. These programs will be continued and expanded. The day 

has gone when we can refer to this problem as „the Indian problem‟. It is everyone‟s problem in 

Saskatchewan. I extend an invitation and a challenge to all our citizens in this Centennial Year to join with 

us in conquering Saskatchewan‟s greatest social problem. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker as the Throne Speech indicates, we‟re proposing certain changes in the 

law pertaining to taxation on Indian lands. Throughout the province, it has become common practice for 

various Indian bands to lease some reserve lands to white farmers. While we would infinitely rather see 

Indians themselves farming this land where possible, nevertheless, the rental income does add to band funds. 

Today, while Indian reserve lands are exempt from local taxation normally, taxes must be paid where the 

land is occupied or used by other than members of the band. Frequently, while taxes are collected from 

lessees, no municipal services are made available, nor tax monies turned over to the Indians. It is our 

intention, therefore, to introduce legislation which will return to the bands concerned, 50 per cent of 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

119 

all taxes collected from reserve lands leased to non-Indians. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — As I indicated yesterday, the Throne Speech points out that huge new sums of money 

will be found, must be found for education. Since the Liberal Government assumed office, no program has 

received greater attention than the education of our young people at all levels. No one seriously doubts that 

today both our present and future s a province and as a nation, is determined by the extent and quality of our 

education. We know that since the war 80 per cent of the unemployed are those who have had grade eight 

education or less. Last year in this province, the total number of students in kindergarten to university level 

was 263,000. Last year we built 650 new classrooms; still the demand has expanded. The Leader of the 

Opposition, the Leader of the Socialists (Mr. Lloyd) claims that the Liberals are not spending enough money 

on education. I suppose it will never be possible to find all the money that is required in this field. Let me 

point out to the people of Saskatchewan that the Liberals are certainly doing far better in this regard than the 

Socialists ever did. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — How different are the CCF-NDP recommendations today from their actions a few 

years ago. I remember back in 1943, Mr. Douglas was campaigning to be elected Premier. He made a 

speech. I quote the Leader Post, February 16, 1943. He was talking about education: 

 

The first thing, said Tommy, a CCF Government would do would be to recognize education as the 

responsibility of the Provincial Government. There has been a tendency on the part of the Provincial 

Government to pass the buck to the municipalities and school boards for maintaining our educational 

facilities. 

 

But for 20 years, that promise was forgotten, Mr. Speaker. For most of those 20 years, instead of assuming 

all the costs of education, the Socialists paid about 25 to 30 per cent of it. The local school boards paid the 

rest. Even in the last two or three years they were in office, grants average about 40 per cent. Of course as 

soon as the Liberals were elected they put it over 50 per cent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I want to say that Liberals are indeed proud of the spending which we are doing on 

education. I remind the people of Saskatchewan that in their last year of office the Socialists spent on all 

education, everything, including schools, technical schools and the university, little more than 54,000,000. 

Their average spending for two decades was $20,000,00. This year, the Liberals will spend $92,000,000 on 

education, four and a half times more than the Socialists‟ average. 

 

Now the CCF cry for more aid to our university! Again, how different are their words in Opposition from 

their actions when they were in the government. I remind you again, sir, that the average grants made by the 

Socialists to our university during 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

120 

 

their 20 years of office for operating costs and for capital costs was less than $3,000,000. The highest they 

ever gave to the University of Saskatchewan was $11,500,000. This year the Liberals are giving 28,000,000, 

Mr. Speaker, to our university. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I‟m so pleased that we have a few university students in this Legislature today 

because there has been some controversy both on the Saskatoon campus and on the Regina campus about 

tuition fees. Why, the Socialists say, “the Government should wipe out university tuition fees. Those 

Liberals are being pretty cheap when they fail to do this.” Mr. Speaker, the Socialists were in power for 20 

years. What did they do about university fees? I remind you again today, sir, that in 1949 they raised 

university fees 39 per cent. In 1950 they raised fees another 40 per cent. In 1955-56 the Socialists increased 

tuition fees six per cent. In 1958-59 they raised them by eight per cent. In 1964, the Socialists increased them 

again by a whopping 32½ per cent. And yet these people, after increasing university fees five times, tell the 

Liberals we should wipe them out. Mr. Speaker, the Socialists talk out of one side of their mouth when they 

are in government, and out of the other side when they are in opposition. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — We are very proud of the fact that in this province tuition fees cover only 17 per cent 

of the cost to the students. Today, the state pays 83 per cent of the cost of university education. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — And I want the people of Saskatchewan to know that today, under a Liberal 

Government, out of 11,417 students, 56 per cent are attending university either because of a Liberal Federal 

Government or Provincial Government loan or some bursary or scholarship given by this Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Now I‟d like to say a few words bout text books. Back in 1944, the Reverend T.C. 

Douglas made this promise: 

 

“The second step which a CCF Government would take to provide a greater measure of equal 

educational opportunity for all would be to provide free text books and supplies through our school 

system.” 

 

What happened? Oh, a few readers and a few text books were supplied in public school, because there was 

little cost involved. But, as far as collegiates were concerned, Mr. Speaker they lifted not a finger to redeem 

their pledge. Once again, the Liberals are taking action. Last year, we provided free text books in Grade IX. 

This year, we are providing free text books in Grade X. And after we have been in office another one, two, 

or three years, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll bring them to Grade XI and XII, also. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

121 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about the cost of living. The Throne Speech 

indicated that our Government is co-operating with Alberta and Manitoba to investigate the high cost of 

living. The Socialists have been crying around this province, week in and week out, that this Government 

should be doing something about rising prices. I remind you again this afternoon that prices have been going 

up in this country and province ever since the end of the war. For two decades the Socialists were in power. 

What did they do about the rising prices? Not a single thing. I remember back in 1952, the former Minister 

of Agriculture (he‟s not in his seat) was worried about farm machinery prices. Thus he set up a special 

committee to investigate. I haven‟t seen farm prices come down. As a matter of fact ever since that 

committee was established, prices have been going up. I say that virtually nothing was accomplished by that 

Socialist committee. Most of the exercise provided a waste of time. 

 

I think that anybody can pose the problem involved by high prices, but it is infinitely more difficult to find an 

answer. And certainly, if the Socialists have any magic solution to rising prices, they have failed to advance 

it so far, either in Ottawa or in Regina, Nor, Mr. Speaker, have they proposed any realistic solution in this 

Legislature. A lot of wind, but no action. Personally, I think our people in about 2 months will be worrying 

about a softening of the economy across the nation, not about higher prices. 

 

The Throne Speech indicates that during 1967 large sums of money will again be provided for the 

construction of housing and special care homes for our senior citizens. This program has received 

widespread acceptance, and I know that every Member of this House agrees that the province should rightly 

provide such accommodation to the pioneers who helped establish and build Saskatchewan. The Liberal 

record looks pretty good, Mr. Speaker, when you compare it to that of the Socialists. I would point out that 

in their last year of office the Socialists spent $475,000 on senior citizen homes. During their whole 20 years 

of office, they provided housing for 4,500 people. In two years and three months, we‟ve provided housing 

for 3,400 people already. Moreover we have invested about $5,100,000 in the program or will invest in the 

program. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — This Liberal Government will not rest content until our older people have decent 

housing. 

 

Now may I say a few words about housing generally. With the greatly expanded industrial development 

being caused by Liberal programs, there has been a demand for new housing. Unfortunately, in the past year, 

tight money across Canada has had restrictive effects on home building. Housing starts in Saskatchewan as 

elsewhere were down sharply. But the previous Government took little or not action in their 20 years to do 

anything about housing in this province. Until recently, it was our belief that the financing of new housing 

construction should be left to the Federal Government or to the private sector of our economy. However, 

because of burgeoning demand, about on year ago, a Housing and Renewal Branch was set up in our 

Department 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

122 

 

of Municipal Affairs. And over the past year, in a small way, the Branch got into the housing business. 

During 1966, the Housing and Urban Renewal Branch of our Government administered about 600 units 

located in centres throughout the province. What about 1967? Recently our officials had very profitable 

discussions with the Federal Members in charge of housing, the Hon. John Nicholson. He came to Regina on 

January 24 to discuss the whole program. We have received assurances that in 1967 the Federal Government 

is prepared to make substantially increased amounts available to Saskatchewan for housing. However, there 

are still indications that because of tight money, the private sector will limit major financing. Under the 

circumstances, I wish to announce today that the Provincial Government is prepared to increase financial 

assistance for housing during 1967 in a material way. First, we shall construct a minimum of 75 houses in 

co-operation with Central Mortgage for resale. Secondly, we will participate financially and give leadership 

to a program which will provide for a minimum of 325 houses available for rent. These will be rented to 

those in the lower income groups, under a joint subsidized program. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — And may I say, Mr. Speaker, that if it is physically possible to increase that program, 

if we can make agreements with Central Mortgage, we shall substantially increase that number. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Department and the Minister of Municipal Affairs is presently considering 

subsidized housing projects and economic house rentals for Nipawin, Meadow Lake, Hudson Bay, 

Kerrobert, Humboldt, Esterhazy, Estevan, Weyburn, Swift Current, Moose Jaw, Carrot River and Regina. 

Regina has been a little bit tardy, but ultimately they may get straightened out. We are also undertaking land 

assembly projects at Shaunavon and Unity, where a total of 165 additional lots will be organized for new 

construction. We expect soon to begin land assembly in another 20 locations throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech refers to the need for more adequate driver training. In recent years the 

number of automobiles on Saskatchewan roads has sharply increased. Our Government has been deeply 

concerned with the mounting number of motor vehicle accidents on the streets and highways of this 

province. Of particular concern has been the increasing involvement of younger drivers, especially those 

under the age of 25. It is widely accepted that the most important factor in accident prevention is a high 

degree of skill and the proper attitude on the part of each driver. Because the under 25 year old driver, 

though only 26 per cent of all drivers, has been involved in 40 per cent of all accidents in the 1966 licence 

year, it seems most logical to attack the accident problem in that age group. The insurance industry has 

suggested that driver education available to all students in the school would be a major step in solving the 

accident rate. Because the number of young drivers is steadily increasing, our Government has decided to 

sharply expand the present program. To do this, we propose to place the responsibility for student driver 

education under the jurisdiction of the Department of Education. The Government proposes to begin a driver 

education program in the high schools of this province with the opening of the new school term in 

September. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

123 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — In 1967, it is expected the number of students benefiting from this program will 

increase to 6,000. It is hoped that within five years all young people in Saskatchewan will have the 

opportunity to receive proper driver training before reaching the age of 16. We believe that this new program 

will reduce the financial losses resulting from motor vehicle accidents. The saving will affect all drivers and 

all automobile insurance companies. And as with any other Government program it must be paid for. 

Therefore, the Government proposes to finance this program by introducing a tax of one per cent on all 

premiums for automobile insurance, including the compulsory Automobile Accident Insurance Act Fund 

premiums. The new levy will be effect April 1st. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech indicates that the Government is proposing a number of measures to protect 

the rights and liberties of individuals in Saskatchewan. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) will be speaking 

within the next few days to give details. The first measure has to do with legal aid to indigents. At the 

present time, it is often difficult for people in low income brackets to obtain legal counsel when they find 

themselves in difficulties. Our Government believes that all citizens have an equal right to a fair defense 

before the law. We are proposing, therefore, to establish a fund, which will provide counsel for those who 

cannot otherwise afford to obtain it. The plan would also provide for payment of defense witnesses, at the 

same rate as Crown witnesses. This is one more step by our Government to ensure equal opportunity for all 

before the law, regardless of their financial circumstances. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker the second such measure has to do with crimes of violence. While 

crimes of violence are less common in our province than in other parts of Canada, situations still arise where 

innocent citizens are injured, sometimes killed in the commission of crimes by others. Often these injuries 

take place at a time when private citizens are co-operating with police in preventing the crime. Our 

Government believes it is unfair that these citizens or their dependents should be crippled financially either 

through no fault of their own, or through their exercise of good citizenship. We will, therefore, introduce 

legislation to provide compensation for these people, or, where a deceased victim has dependents, to his 

family. 

 

HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — The Throne Speech indicated we are also planning new legislation to help protect 

the consumer. One of the Bills we are proposing will be a Credit Disclosure Act. The purpose of this 

legislation is to make certain that anyone buying credit or borrowing money, can understand clearly and 

precisely what the total cost of the credit is. They will be able to compare credit costs before deciding on 

purchasing or lending. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker one final matter this afternoon. I want to say a few words about the Saskatchewan Youth 

Agency. One of the great concerns of this Government, even when we were in 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

124 

 

Opposition, was the steady exodus of young people from Saskatchewan in the two decades following the 

war. Year after year in the period of Socialist administration, a large proportion of our collegiate and 

university graduates were forced out of the province to seek employment elsewhere in Canada or in the 

United States. We are determined to have a program that will prevent that, Mr. Speaker. We also believe that 

Saskatchewan should pay more attention to the physical fitness of her young people. We found, on taking 

office, that although more than half of our province‟s population was under the age of 30, very few 

Government programs existed to assist youth. We set up a commission to investigate. That committee found 

that many independent organizations were struggling hard to maintain youth programs with virtually no 

Government support. Many local organizations were hamstrung because of a lack of finance. Thus, the 

Saskatchewan Youth Agency was set up about a year ago. The Hon. Cy MacDonald has taken it over since 

that time. Let me emphasize that it is not the objective of the Government to operate most youth programs in 

the province. The role of Government is rather to encourage, advise, and co-ordinate the activities of 

hundreds of groups already working in the field. To date, the response to this program has been encouraging. 

The Agency now maintains contact with 350 organizations throughout the province. In addition, some 178 

municipal recreation councils are in contact with the Government. They receive advice and assistance from 

the Provincial Government in their programs. And we‟re particularly pleased with the success of two 

programs. We believe the lighted schoolhouse program will be useful. Under the program our Government 

will provide grants to municipalities and towns which make use of school facilities for youth programs 

outside the regular school hours. Until this program was introduced, hundreds of millions of dollars in 

school facilities sat in darkness outside of regular school activities. Today 26 communities have received 

these grants. Some 40 schools are today being used in this program. This year the grants will total $85,000 

for lighted schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about another program: a program which originated with the Minister, Mr. 

MacDonald who is Minister in Charge of Youth Agency. I refer to the so-called „Opportunity Caravan‟ 

which was mentioned in the Throne Speech. Now this Caravan, and it‟s a big one will provide a mobile 

guidance, counselling service, which will begin operation in a few weeks. Throughout our province, 

thousands of youngsters are attending school who will not go to university. There are many others who for 

one reason or other have dropped out of high school before graduating. Many of these are employed in lower 

paying jobs, some others are only partially employed. Up to the present time, very little has been done to 

assist these young people in finding better employment. Virtually nothing is done to provide them with 

advice about what additional training is available or what jobs exist. After studying the situation extensively, 

our Government has decided to proceed with a program which will make available to young people in all 

parts of Saskatchewan: (a) professional advice on training opportunities, and (b) direct counselling on the 

availability of jobs in all parts of the province. The Opportunity Caravan can best be described as a large 

mobile counselling centre which will move from town to town in Saskatchewan, and will be available to 

everyone who wishes to make use of its service. It will be staffed by two trained consultants. ARDA will be 

paying a good share of the cost, and we certainly thank the ARDA officials for the assistance they have given 

us and the help in getting this prepared. At all times, the consultants will maintain direct contact with 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

125 

Canada Manpower Centres throughout Saskatchewan, in order to enable them to make direct job referrals 

where these are feasible. We believe that this new service will make job opportunities more accessible to our 

young people, particularly in the rural areas. The first four months the Caravan will visit twenty centres. And 

then we are going to appraise the program. This is a new program, the first in all of Canada. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker at the outset of my remarks, I said that our government‟s philosophy was devoted to 

achieving three basic objectives: first, a healthy agricultural industry — today in Saskatchewan we have it; 

secondly, taking the steps necessary, through education and industrial development, to ensure full 

employment and good wages — today in Saskatchewan we have full employment; and thirdly, to providing 

programs to assist those of our citizens who, for one reason or another, are unable to help themselves. I have 

reviewed a number of our achievements in this field to day and outlined what we believe are progressive 

programs to meet these three objectives in the year ahead. 

 

We believe our agricultural policies will help to promote diversification. We believe our program of 

industrial development and the giant strides we have made in the expansion of educational facilities are 

improving the opportunities for all our citizens for a higher standard of living. Finally, through a number of 

programs dealing with welfare, health and consumers, we have attempted to extend a very large measure of 

help to those in need or lacking protection under the law. 

 

Economically, we have made great progress in the last 32 months. We do not claim that the Government 

alone has made all this possible. To a very large degree, the progressive attitude of our people has helped 

achieve these goals, because they are determined that Saskatchewan will stand in the forefront of Canada‟s 

growing prosperity. 

 

Our Government believes that we can continue to make outstanding progress if we adhere to sensible, 

middle-of-the-road policies. We can continue to rapidly expand our economy, if in the future we avoid fuzzy 

Socialist thinking. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I contend that this Liberal government is doing the job it was elected to do. It is 

getting Saskatchewan moving economically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will obviously support the Motion before the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. M.P. PEDERSON (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker I‟d like first of all to join with the Premier, in 

extending a welcome to the University of Saskatchewan students and particularly to the International group 

who are represented here this afternoon. I‟m sure that if they have an interest in politics, regardless of the 

political stripe of the speakers, they will find the events in this House as entertaining as any in other 

jurisdictions in this country. I notice that our guests, the Members of Parliament, who came in a small group 

earlier, have left, but I would nevertheless like to send a 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

126 

 

welcome to them and to their group in Regina who are presently sitting as all Members are aware, on a 

committee discussing problems affecting agriculture. I want to wish them well in their deliberations and I 

hope that when they leave that they will be convinced, as many farmers are, that we do have problems that 

need attending to. 

 

I found the Premier‟s address this afternoon, extremely interesting, Mr. Speaker. Interesting from the point 

of view, that it struck me that it contained more disclosures than there were in the Throne Speech that was 

handed to us the other day. And there are many of these things that I could comment on, but I think the most 

outstanding announcement that he made concerned the plans for the construction of a base hospital in 

Regina. In my opinion, this is the most welcome announcement that we have hard since this House convened 

a matter of a week ago. I believe that many Members, and certainly the public, have become sick and tired of 

hearing this question being used as a political football. We‟ve been fed up, and I most certainly have been, 

with the quarrel that has been played up, and carried on between the Premier and the Mayor of Regina (Mr. 

Baker) surrounding the construction over this much needed hospital. I believe, as many citizens do, that the 

medical facilities and the high standards that have been maintained in southern Saskatchewan are in jeopardy 

unless something is done and done quickly to bring about construction of a major facility down in this part of 

the country, the southern half of Saskatchewan. And I‟m delighted that the Premier has finally decided that 

the feud between him and the dual-purpose Member from Regina has come to an end. Now, all farmers 

know what a dual-purpose creature is. He‟s one that, although he may look like it, he isn‟t much good for 

milk, and although he‟s a bit chubby, isn‟t all that good for beef either. And I suppose, the Premier‟s decided 

that he had run to the end and had stripped out the last few drops of milk of publicity that he could get out of 

the Member from Regina and has therefore made the announcement. I‟m sure that I express the sentiments of 

everyone when I say that I hope that we have at last arrived at the end of these types of things and that the 

Government will make plans to commence work on this building as quickly as possible. 

 

Also, as usual, I was rather amused by the Premier because from time to time, I noticed him referring to the 

Members from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) as „waffling‟ on one occasion. It crossed my mind, just what 

was the Premier doing when he talked about Liberal grain-selling policies? Was he perhaps not „pancaking‟ 

because he certainly fell that flat. For the Liberal party to stand up and take credit for laying the groundwork 

and in fact bringing about the extensive grain selling programs that we have witnessed over the last several 

years is as farcical as the naming of dams that had been built by other governments. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEDERSON: — Well, well, my little friend from Prince Albert always has to have his word. 

 

I was listening to the remarks made by the Premier yesterday, which I heard repeated verbatim today, except 

for the little campaign speech that he started with. As a matter of fact I wondered if he was going to 

announce an election before he sat down yesterday, and if he was launching a campaign to see who would 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

127 

invite him to run and where. I was a little puzzled to try and figure out if he was looking at Morse, or in fact 

trying to set himself up as a running mate with the gentleman from Moose Jaw, while all the time hoping 

someone would invite him to run somewhere in Regina. 

 

I was further amused when he tried to explain away, in his usual inimitable fashion, his trips around this part 

of the world. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, that I have no criticism of the Premier of this 

province travelling in this capacity on behalf of this province, in an effort to promote our Province of 

Saskatchewan and the services, facilities, and the resources that we have. But I don‟t appreciate very much, 

any more than my hon. friends on this side appreciate the type of political vendetta that he seems to carry out 

from time to time. And although, perhaps I wouldn‟t be as personal as the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd) was on this score, I do believe that the Premier, when he travels outside of this province should 

not use occasions such as he has done from time to time to take a hard left-handed swipe at his friends in this 

Legislature. I used the phrase, Mr. Speaker, „left-handed‟ because I believe that‟s what they are. But I think 

that he would be well advised to remember that he speaks as a Premier and a representative of this 

Legislature and all of the people of this province. 

 

I would like to ask a question which was not asked; that is — outside of the trips that the Premier has made 

and the speeches that he has made — what specifically has this Liberal Government done to encourage 

industry to our province? What specific steps in proposals, what specific programs have they inaugurated 

and initiated which they can put their finger on that says, “This brought in industry.” He said that if he hadn‟t 

made that trip we wouldn‟t have a pulp mill and I accept this as a fact. But what else is being done, outside 

of these trips, to promote Saskatchewan? What efforts are being made for instance to bring a major 

implement company into Saskatchewan to serve Western Canada as well as perhaps the mid-western United 

States? Bringing a company such as this into this area, as all Members know, would probably go a long way 

towards eliminating some of the high prices of machinery in Western Canada, by removing some of the 

exorbitant freight rates that we have to pay on bringing this machinery in. What about the establishing of 

resource commissions selling the potential of Saskatchewan, not only outside of Canada but throughout 

Canada as well? All I‟m asking, Mr. Speaker, is what specifically has the government done, outside of 

sending our salesman of the year abroad from time to time, to tell them how bad the Socialists are, but they 

re now gone and everybody can come home. 

 

I want to turn now to what I believe are some of the things that should be uppermost in the minds of all 

Members and particularly the Government in a year such as this. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that I share with all 

Hon. Members in this House, as well as members of other legislatures across Canada and the House of 

Commons, a sense of pride in having been fortunate enough to be accorded the privilege to serve in this 

capacity as a representative of the people during the year which marks out nation‟s one hundredth birthday. 

 

I want to express to the Premier my thanks and appreciation for the several statements he has made, not only 

today, but over the past several months, not only endorsing the numerous events that are taking place 

throughout Canada this coming year, but 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

128 

 

also for initiating many events which will belong strictly to Saskatchewan. And I hope, Mr. Speaker that on 

this occasion my comment in this regard will be taken inn the spirit in which it is intended. When I say that I 

include even the moving of homesteads in that general category. I believe that the Premier has expressed the 

sentiments, not just of this Legislature, but of all people in Saskatchewan when he has enthusiastically 

endorsed Saskatchewan participation in this greatest event of our century. 

 

I must say, Mr. Speaker that I have been shocked and indeed I deplore the statements that have come from 

the province of Quebec about their lack of desire to participate in the Centennial celebrations, because to my 

way of thinking, these are the types of divisive actions that have helped to imperil the very event that we are 

celebrating, namely, the Confederation of Canada. And I would hope that as the year develops and that as the 

various national events take place that the little people of that province, who I believe are great Canadians, 

just as the rest of us are, will take it upon themselves to repudiate some of the statements of their leaders, and 

participate in the fashion that I know the people in Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada will participate. 

 

I have given a good deal of thought to the significance of the events of 1967. When the Throne Speech was 

read last Thursday I found myself wondering if our Government in Saskatchewan did in fact realize that 

having attained the stature of nationhood, and making it official by celebrating our one hundredth birthday, 

this places upon our people and our Government a responsibility to assume a more mature and international 

position in the world today. 

 

I felt that in this year, Government measures which were proposed would be geared in such a way as to 

enable Canada and particularly Saskatchewan for which we are responsible, to share with the world, the 

abundance with which we‟ve been blessed. 

 

This past one hundred years, as all Members know, has called for the nurturing of our people and our 

economy from the pioneer days when no one had very much, and the husbanding of our resources, so that we 

as individuals as well as collectively in this nation, could obtain the economic, educational, and cultural base 

from which would flow to underprivileged people and nations, the fruits of this bountiful land and its 

generous people. 

 

For us to embark on a second century, clinging to the concept that the vast resources of our country should 

be developed at a pace that was merely commensurate with the needs of our people does not in my opinion 

indicate an awareness of our position either as a responsible nation or the obligations to the world that a 

responsible nation must assume. 

 

Leading scientists in the United States and elsewhere who have been studying the twin spectres of 

population explosion and food shortages, have produced some very startling facts. Consider for an example 

the fact that it took from the beginning of time until 1930 for world population to reach two billion people. 

At the present rate of growth, that is the rate of growth today, the world population will increase in the one 

hundred years following 1930 to fourteen billions, an increase of seen times in one hundred years which it 

had taken a millennium to reach up until then. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

129 

World population this year alone will increase by seventy millions of people, a figure that is equivalent to 

three and a half times the present population of Canada. And what do these startling figures reveal or 

represent in so far as the individual in Saskatchewan is concerned? It means two things. First, it means that 

there will be a ready market, not only for all the food that we can produce, but also for all other products that 

we can manufacture from the wealth of our forests, and our mines, as well as a demand for the technical 

skills that we are capable of developing through the scholastic halls of our educational system, and the 

practical schools of agricultural experiences. Secondly, it signifies that ways and means must be found to 

increase production in all areas at an unprecedented scale to meet these world demands. 

 

Most farmers in Canada as well as in the United States realize that the days of farm surpluses have reached 

an end. World demands for food stuffs plus massive give-away programs have depleted on this continent, in 

some instances to the danger point, the stocks of cereal grain, butter fats, and protein products. 

 

The scientists acknowledge and indeed they predict that, unless there is a continual expansion in sales of 

food and also an expansion in technical and programs combined with a continuing growth of food for famine 

relief programs, there will be widespread famine in India, Pakistan, and Communist China by the year 1970. 

In a very few years following 1970 that famine area will spread to Brazil, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Turkey and 

elsewhere. 

 

This is the challenge, Mr. Speaker that faces our nation today, and more specifically this, I feel is the 

challenge to our Government in Saskatchewan and to its people. 

 

My friend the Hon. Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) who spoke in moving the motion to 

the Throne Speech, indeed I might add, did an admirable job, made a statement with which I must take issue. 

And that is, he said, in his opinion the Government of this province is meeting the responsibility to 

agriculture. The Premier has claimed that we are a have province, and that a large amount of credit for this is 

due to the huge wheat crops that we grow. 

 

But in looking a the Throne Speech, I feel that this Government has completely failed to recognize its duties 

and responsibilities as part of a mature nation., clamoring for world-wide acceptance of our position as a 

responsible nation in that world. It seems to me that the measures that have been outlined are parochial in 

their intent and in their effect. 

 

Necessary, and I readily concede this, necessary though the provisions outlined in the Throne speech may be 

for agriculture, in order to provide a greater degree of stability for our agricultural community, nevertheless 

they are only measures which will tend to bolster the opportunity for increasing, in a small way, return to 

farmers. They are not measures designed to provide massive increases in food production at a time when 

such increases are essential. These increases are essential., first of all, so that farmers may have a greater 

return on their capital investment, and by so doing, not only encourage greater numbers to remain on the 

farms, but also to help beat the cost price squeeze. They are also essential, as I mentioned earlier, to meet the 

increasing demands for food all over the world. 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

130 

 

In an affluent society such as ours, it is far too easy for governments to fall into the trap of producing 

measures that serve no other purpose than to provide more means for filling already filled bellies. 

 

It is hard to remember when we are well fed that millions in this world starve. This is the trap that I believe 

our Government has fallen into. Now the question arises immediately; what are we to do? How are we to 

encourage increased production so that we may play a more significant role, and more readily met our 

obligations to our people, and to a hungry world? 

 

First of all, I believe that there has to be an acceptance that growth in production in agriculture can no longer 

be allowed to take its leisurely course, dependent on the initiative and ingenuity of the farming population to 

bring it about. Farmers have, by and large, always set the pace for increased production and advanced 

techniques and new methods of expanding, within their own limits. There must be a marked change in the 

concept of government, that says, and will accept this concept, that the expenditure of roughly ten millions 

of dollars per year for agriculture, an industry which produces roughly one billion dollars in return, is not 

good enough. I say, Mr. Speaker, it is not good enough, and there must be a change if we are to increase 

production on the scale that is required of us, very, very shortly. 

 

I notice in the press recently as an example that Agricultural Minister (Mr. McFarlane) on numerous 

occasions, calls on farmers to increase production of hogs in order to meet growing demands. Yet in spite of 

this, as we‟ve heard, hog marketings are down. We can only believe that either the Minister‟s exhortations 

and his persuasive powers are ineffective, or else some new method must be found that will bring about the 

desired result. Most certainly what has been taking place is not achieving results. 

 

I readily agree that perhaps it‟s a little too early to judge whether the granting of loans by the Industrial 

Development Office to set up hog producing industries will be effective, or not, but I suspect, Mr. Speaker, 

and I predict that unless something else is done, that the present downward trend in hog production will 

continue unless the Government is prepared — I suggest this to them — to spend substantial sums in 

subsidizing the housing requirements and the capital requirements of even the smallest hog producer, let 

alone the big operator. Hog production, just as in livestock, is largely geared to the incentive offered the 

small farmers, because he produces the largest number of the total production, not the big operators. That‟s 

been demonstrated time and again in the cattle population; it is equally true in the question of hog 

production. 

 

Although the marketings for cattle last year were up, and I believe that this is largely because of the high 

prices that prevailed through the year 1966, it‟s still a long way from being satisfactory. The combined 

increase in livestock production, the combined increase of Saskatchewan and other provinces producing 

livestock does not as yet meet the yearly increase in demand. In other words, Canada as a whole is falling 

behind in its production merely to meet the demand on livestock. Projected figures as I have them, indicate 

that Canada may well be importing beef in a matter of two or three years unless steps, and drastic steps are 

taken to vastly increase our own production. I have spoken on this subject of increased production of 

livestock in particular several times before in the House; methods that I have 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

131 

described and outlined which I felt would go a long way in this direction. But apparently to no avail. 

 

In the hope that repetition may eventually get results, let me outline again the measures that I would suggest 

as basic essentials if we are to expand as quickly as we want. The concept of a Fodder Bank cannot be 

delayed any longer. I notice that in the announcement by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

yesterday regarding the availability of land in the Broderick irrigation district that there was some mention 

made of the starting of a Fodder Bank from approximately one thousand acres that the Government would 

operate. That is not the type of Fodder Bank I‟m talking about. We must have a province-wide one with all 

of the background work done so that a proper reserve is built and not merely a haphazard type of program 

such as one here and one there. The Government should take immediate steps to establish such a program. 

 

From what I‟ve seen of the fodder shelter program initiated by this Government and referred to by the 

Premier this afternoon in glowing terms, a program to which they have allocated minute funds, has turned 

into a fiasco. In so far as building a reserve of fodder on farms is concerned, it is like the proverbial drop in 

the ocean. Worse than that, this system for storing feed, piling up of feed stock, is a perpetuation of what is 

fast becoming an outdated method of feed storage. Only the old fashioned styles prevail in the concept of 

food storage as far as the government and the Department of Agriculture are concerned. 

 

None of the new techniques that are available for pelletizing and so on are being, to my knowledge, 

investigated and most certainly are not be initiated. With the completion of the South Saskatchewan River 

dam this year and the vast potential of feed production possible, the Government, in my opinion, should be 

investigating and laying plans for the establishment of fodder pelletizing plants to preserve the production of 

these irrigated acres. I‟m not talking only about the hay production on those acres that will be put into hay, 

but I am talking about a supply of fodder that is available out of all type of irrigation. The tops off potatoes, 

the vines from peas, and so on all lend themselves to a pelletizing formula which could build up a vast 

source of food supplies that otherwise might go to waste. The Government must take this action because if it 

doesn‟t, we have no hope in the immediate future of increasing our livestock production. The fear of not 

having sufficient feed in any given year has driven the cattle industry out of vast areas of our prairie land and 

unless steps are taken to guarantee these people a reasonably priced supply of fodder, in a form that can be 

handled cheaply such as pellets, we will never have the incentive required to keep these people producing 

livestock on an ever increasing scale, not only do we require, but indeed the world requires. 

 

Over and over again I have advocated and asked this Government to sponsor practical schools in irrigation. 

In the irrigation area and in the surrounding district, the farmers who live in that area and who have to 

participate, and farmers in the surrounding district as well, could learn something of the scientific techniques 

of irrigation, soil testing, plant management, and livestock production and so on. You cannot operate 

irrigated farms unless you have training in some of these very highly technical skills. Unless you have this 

training you stand in danger of destroying the land and the irrigated acreage that has been brought about at 

fantastic cost to the taxpayers of this 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

132 

 

country. These are the skills that are essential if we are to avoid the trial and error approach that must be 

followed by farmers in that area without these skills. 

 

And that, I might say, Mr. Speaker has proven disastrous in many irrigation schemes around the world in the 

past. One irrigation scheme as an example in southern California has been in operation approximately fifty 

years by farmers who had no technical skills in the operation of irrigation. That entire scheme is now lying 

waste and will cost more to restore than the original irrigation program had fifty years ago. This can happen 

in the alkalized areas of central Saskatchewan unless there are some schools. They should have been 

established two years ago but it would still help if we had them now to train these farmers and tell them what 

they must do and how to carry on and operate an irrigated farm. I envisage, Mr. Speaker, a small school. It 

must be kept small so that everyone can participate in the various communities surrounding the proposed 

irrigation area, so that the farmers could attend. In my opinion, they should be free. Farmers could learn 

something of the collective problems that they face and their solutions, as well as some of the individual 

problems that they will face on a particular piece of land, and to which they could find solutions. 

 

Nothing has been done in this regard. Now wonder the farmers are skeptical and apprehensive in that area. 

No wonder there was a tremendous amount of resistance of buying a pig in a poke. The more funnelling of 

money and making the land purchases and the agreements for the leasing of land and the leasing of irrigation 

plots do not solve the whole problem. Working in the hearts and minds of most of those people in this very 

serious problem — Now that I‟ve got it, what in heaven‟s name do I do with it? I believe that these things 

must be done immediately because it is not only essential that we utilize as quickly as possible the produce 

of this irrigated area, it is also essential that we bring into full production as quickly as is possible all of the 

area being served by the ditch, starting next year. 

 

This will require I think, that these things have to be done to make certain that we encourage farmers to 

employ to the fullest extent the facilities of irrigation. As an example, in the row cropping business, it will 

require negotiations for the type of industry such as canneries, sugar refineries, freezing plants, and so on, 

that will be needed to be established in that area, if they are going to handle the row crop production of 

irrigated land. Too late to start talking about bringing in soup factories and sugar factories and refineries, 

once the crop has been planted and gone into production. That‟s too late. Initial plans must be made so that if 

necessary, so many acres may be contracted to them, in order to guarantee supplies and get a factory 

established in their district. 

 

I believe it will require incentive programs to encourage farmers to produce livestock not only on the lands 

that are irrigated but in the adjacent districts and indeed all over the province. I believe that these incentive 

programs must be brought about through a guaranteed fodder supply. I believe that we can have a thriving 

livestock industry in Saskatchewan. I believe that the Government has to be prepared to put up if necessary, 

on a subsidized basis, just as in the hog production business, funds that will be required for housing 

facilities, the corrals and so on, as well as provision for the acquisition of the initial herd of stock. I know 

that there are methods to borrow for 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

133 

these things, but in order to encourage farmers, as far as possible, to go into these types of programs, the 

Provincial Government must bear a greater responsibility than it has in the past and be prepared, as I say, to 

allocate grater sums of money to these proposals. The mere asking of farmers to switch to livestock 

production will not get the results we need, and some of these measures that I have outlined must be used as 

incentives to bring on this production. 

 

Another startling area in which this Government, in my opinion has failed to recognize the problems 

besetting farmers is in the failure to recognize the desperate need to provide a labor force for our farms. 

Nowhere before have I heard anyone say that something must be done to provide a labor force for industry or 

anything else. Figures indicate that every year there are less people remaining on the farms, and the trend for 

intensified farming which has been in the past carried out by large numbers of family farm units is being 

replaced by the corporate farm and the land baron. The Premier talked about a shortage of labor this 

afternoon when he bragged about the fact that everyone was fully employed. And he said, if you don‟t 

believe me, ask any farmer when he tries to get a man. Well I can second that; and yet in the same breath he 

had no solution, no offer of relief for the farmer. He merely held this up as a yard stick that things were 

booming because the farmer couldn‟t get a hired man any more. In talking to farmers all over Saskatchewan, 

the chief reasons cited for the change taking place n our province; that is, the exodus from the farms, is that 

it is impossible to obtain competent help in the operation of the farm. In my opinion, this fact of not being 

able to get competent help has done more to increase the debt position of farmers because it has forced them 

into resorting to the very expensive alternative of automation. It has done more to put them in this debt 

position than any other consideration, such as the costs that are incurred in increasing production and so on. 

That is the biggest single reason why farmers continually buy new and bigger and more powerful and more 

expensive machinery. They cannot get competent help. 

 

Lack of competent help also is the greatest single factor in driving people from the farm when they are no 

longer able to carry on, on their own. Governments everywhere, including this one, have accepted the 

principle that public monies should be spent to provide facilities for teaching the technical skills spent to 

provide facilities for teaching the technical skills that are required by the labor forces supporting our 

industries. As yet no one has accepted the equally valid argument that technical training should be provided 

to support the farm labor force. As things now stand, anyone can acquire a trade, such as a plumber, an 

electrician, and so on, but where are the facilities to produce the highly skilled labor force required to operate 

a modern farm? I‟m sure that most farmers will agree with me that they are reluctant to turn over high priced 

expensive and complicated machinery to an unskilled laborer; highly technical and high priced machinery on 

which he will have an opportunity to experiment and learn. Very few farmers are prepared to do that. 

 

It is not only the lack of experienced help to operate complicated machinery that bothers the farmer. Coupled 

with that problem is the equally complex and unsolvable problem of finding someone who knows something 

about the exacting science of farm production, based on modern methods, such as the use of fertilizer and the 

very precise science these days of livestock production. The farmer has no labor force on which to draw 

except the residue of the unskilled, unemployed, who for one reason or another have 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

134 

 

not been drawn off into the manufacturing or industrial labor force. To suggest that a farm laborer must go to 

university to acquire these skills is ludicrous. Yet these are the only courses that are given specifically to 

teach him the skills of modern farming. I also don‟t believe that it is practical to merely put a man in a 

classroom for a certain number of months and expect that he will make the type of employee that is required 

on a modern farm. What he requires by way of training is a combination of the practical on the one hand 

with the academic on the other. This can only be accomplished through the establishment of what I would 

like to see established; small agricultural schools throughout this province. These schools must be kept small 

and operated like an actual farm, perhaps no more than one section in size, completely equipped for grain 

farming, stocked with most varieties of livestock and the classroom facilities to train while they are actually 

learning by doing. Only by doing that are we going to be able to build up a skilled labor force and give 

farmers an opportunity to hire people like these. As I have said, these schools could offer practical courses in 

farming through school room activity as well as in the actual operation of a mixed farm. If we are to succeed 

in halting the flow of people from the farm to the city, and if we are to succeed in bringing about an increase 

in both livestock and grain production, this basic problem must be solved immediately. 

 

An announcement by the Federal Government recently that it is going to include farm laborers under the 

Unemployment Insurance Act will do nothing but add additional numbers to the tax rolls in the winter 

months, unless that move is accompanied by the provision of adequate training for farm laborers so that 

farmers will have an incentive to keep these employees, those trained, specialized employees the year round 

rather than follow the practice they are now following of using them the minimum time they can get by 

because they are not qualified to do any one of a dozen of the jobs around the farm. They use them for the 

shortest period they can possibly manage and they get rid of them. Unless we start to train this labor force 

that is precisely what is going to happen, and all of these people who now work on farms in the summer will 

be just added to the tax rolls in the winter and we will have cured and solved nothing. 

 

Closely allied with these problems and some of the solutions, and allied with our responsibilities to the 

country as a whole, for increased food production is the very serious problem of adequate water supplies and 

in particular fresh water. A very serious problem and accompanying it is the very, very great menace of 

pollution. I was pleased to note in the Throne Speech that the Government recognizes that serious water 

pollution problems do face us, and that they are to take steps to provide adequate authority for the control of 

pollution. I know that there is a great deal of interest surrounding the danger of wide spread pollution from 

the by-products of our potash mining industry in Saskatchewan. I hear people talk about this everywhere and 

I am sure that Saskatchewan citizens will be pleased to know that the potash industry itself is equally 

concerned and has taken and is taking very extensive, and in some cases very costly steps to ensure that 

pollution does not occur. 

 

But I am concerned, however, Mr. Speaker with the growing use of the salt by-products from potash mining 

as a material for hard surfacing roads. It is my hope that the Government has taken whatever steps are 

necessary to make sure that sufficient research has been carried out, looking into the possibility of these 

salts, impregnated in the roads, being leached out of these 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

 

135 

roads into the surrounding agricultural lands. If this has not been done, then it should be investigated 

immediately before this practice becomes widespread. 

 

I am also concerned, Mr. Speaker, about the multi-million dollar expenditure we are making on the so-called 

S.E. Saskatoon water distribution system. Much has been made by the Government of the need for this water 

for the potash industry. I have seen myself statements to this effect. This is one of the reasons, and in the 

minds of many people this is the main reason for bringing in this water. If this water is needed for irrigation, 

then I believe it is the Government‟s duty to justify this expenditure in these terms. However, to try to justify 

this program on the ground that the potash industry needs water just does not make sense. The water 

consumption at the potash mine producing one million tons a year is equal to the water required for the 

irrigation of one and a half sections of land. The cost of such a program cannot therefore be reasonably 

attributed to the needs of potash. So far there is little evidence, that I have been able to see, that this water 

being brought up in this canal system will be used extensively for irrigation once it has left the Brightwater 

and Blackstrap Reservoir. This then leaves recreation and a water supply for the communities through which 

the canal will pass. There is a growing suspicion, Mr. Speaker, in the minds of many people and 

in fact in the minds of many experts that the water flowing in this canal will pass through soils containing 

sufficient quantities of alkali salts that by the time the water reaches some of the communities south and east 

of Saskatoon, it will be so heavily salinated that it will be almost useless as a source of fresh water. I make 

this observation, Mr. Speaker, in order to give the Government an opportunity to clarify its position on this 

huge expenditure and to demonstrate in a fashion other than it has, the need for us to proceed with this vast 

and costly undertaking. 

 

I do hope that we may have assurance, among other things that the very substantial quantities of fresh water 

that will be tapped from the reservoir of the South Saskatchewan River Dam, that these waters are not going 

to merely end up as unusable, salt-laden bodies of stagnant waters lying in a bed, creating a dead water lake. 

I believe that waters, fresh waters are very precious and could perhaps be put to far better use than that. 

 

Another area of pollution to which the Government must direct its attention to the type of problem that arose 

recently in Saskatoon about the question of dumping semi-processed sewage in the Saskatchewan River. It 

was the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) who mentioned something about this in his remarks, and he 

pointed out to the Government and I believe rightly so, that the Local Government Board‟s turning down 

requests made to it for local councils such as in Saskatoon, to have by-laws placed before their citizens for 

the erection of these water treatment plants, has something to do with the growing danger of pollution in this 

area. I believe that something else, another area should be looked at. I believe that the Saskatchewan Water 

Resources Commission should expand its activities to provide for the financing of construction of sewage 

treatment facilities for municipalities in this province, particularly where adequate plants do not exist. 

Programs such as this have been in existence in the province of Ontario since 1965, and in that province 

extend to the construction of water supply and sewage treatment systems throughout the province. Ontario 

has recognized that a large degree of control over pollution must be exercised by the Provincial Government. 

By providing finances for many 



 

February 8, 1967 

 

136 

 

of these projects, that is, sewage projects, it has helped to prevent the continuing pollution of rivers and lakes 

through the dumping of raw sewage into these fresh water bodies. I recognize, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission probably has its hands full at the present time making 

provision for the use of the water from the South Saskatchewan dam, but I hope that in the near future 

consideration will be given to expand their activities in the area that I have outlined; that is water supplies 

made available to communities throughout this province. I believe, Mr. Speaker like many others, that water 

will become, if it has not already become, one of our most precious commodities. 

 

We must not allow ourselves to accept the complacent attitude towards the supplies that we now have. This 

attitude has been built up because of the tremendous reservoir in the Saskatchewan River, making some 

believe that these supplies are adequate for all time to come. I would hope that the Government would 

continue to discuss with the Federal authorities and the Provinces of British Columbia and Alberta the 

feasibility of diverting part of the Arctic water shed in to the Prairie Provinces. If we are to avoid the 

continuing pressure that will be directed to us as Canadians, to export our water south of the Border, we 

must be able to demonstrate an awareness of the value of water, as well as demonstrate our need to utilize 

this water for our own purposes. Otherwise the pressure will become unbearable. Schemes that will reverse 

the flow of rivers and bring them over the top of mountain ranges into the prairies are not accomplished over 

night. Everyone know that. I said at the outset of my address, Mr. Speaker, our awareness of our position as a 

nation must be demonstrated by the action we take in the usage of this second great resource, that of water 

and investigative steps must be taken now in order to lay plans for the utilization of these plans as much as 

ten or fifteen years from now. It is never too early to start looking into this proposal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have dealt with two of the three major resources of our country and our province and 

the approach we should take in using them to the best advantage, namely food and water. Our third resource 

is of course, our people, and they are the essential ingredient required in conjunction with the first two in 

order to give our nation purpose and an attitude of responsibility to the world. In view of the hour, Mr. 

Speaker I would like to conclude my remarks tomorrow and therefore beg leave of the House to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 o‟clock p.m. 


