




















































Hansard: February 24, 1967


687 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

16th Day 
 

Friday, February 24, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. C. G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, it has been drawn to my attention that there is a 

group of students in the gallery from the Star City High School. This is in the Melfort-Tisdale 

constituency in the famous Carrot River district, the famous Carrot River Valley. At this time I want to 

welcome them here on your behalf and to wish them a very find time while they are in the city of 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, as Star city is my home town and I would know many of 

these find students, I would like to extend to them greetings, and wish them a very interesting day and a 

good trip home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to 

introduce a group from Lindale High School of Moose Jaw. They are a group of 73 and are 

accompanied by their teachers. I know the House would want to wish them a most instructive and 

educational afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I also draw to the attention of the Hon. Members the fact that we have in the galleries 

school groups from Waldeck, Mortlach and from Yorkton. 

 

ANNOUNCE RE: VISIT BY DIRECTORS OF EXPO ‘67 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Before the Orders of the Day I would like to inform the Assembly that I have been 

advised that at approximately 4:30 today, the Board of Directors of Expo 1967 will visit the Legislature, 

and that this House will be asked for unanimous consent to suspend the sitting in order to meet the 

Board Members. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE: GUNNAR MINES 

 

Hon. A. C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Before the Orders of the Day, I have an 

announcement to make which I think will be of interest to the Members of the Chamber. I would like to 

announce that a deal has just been consummated in which Gunnar Mine will undertake to move back 

into Saskatchewan and to open up the property formerly known as the Gulch Mining uranium property 

in the Beaverlodge area. 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

688 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — They will immediately in the spring be moving in with a crew to undertake a 

program of diamond drilling, of re-assessing the ore body and proceeding to evaluate it with the aim of 

going into production at as early a date as possible. I am sure you would want me to welcome back to 

Saskatchewan Uranium Area Gunnar Mine which has had such a tremendous record in the field of 

hunting, searching and production of uranium. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would certainly like to add my words of welcome to Gunnar Mines. This was a tremendous Company 

for operation and getting things going. I take it, the Minister said they were going to take the Gulch 

property, is it? Well, we certainly will wish them the best of success in the development of that property 

which was worked and developed and explored to a great extent a good many years ago and probably 

would have gone ahead except for the slump in the uranium market. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member isn‘t going to take credit for this 

mine also! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER RE: QUESTION PROCEDURE 

 

I wish to call the attention of all Honourable Members to the fact that the Legislature over the years has 

been faced with an increasing number of Parliamentary Questions which it is believed will continue to 

multiply in relation to population increases and the complexities of modern government. 

 

In order to conserve the time of the House, it has been suggested that we streamline the procedure as 

follows: 

 

When the Clerk calls a Question number, that Question shall be deemed to have been asked unless the 

Member in whose name it stands indicates that he wants to drop the Question. Once the Question has 

been called, the Minister concerned will immediately indicate: 

 

(1) that the Question is answered; or 
(2) that he wishes it to stand; or 
(3) that he wishes it to be changed to a Notice of Motion for a Return; or 
(4) that he wishes it to be changed to an Order for Return. 

 

I ask the House, is it agreed that we should tentatively try this new procedure? 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Thatcher (Provincial 

Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do not leave the Chair, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. 

Blakeney, (Regina West), 



February 24, 1967 

 

689 

Mr. C. G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, today I wish to discuss the Budget primarily as it 

affects highways. Over the years, that is as long as the present Premier has been a Liberal, Mr. Speaker, 

he has ranted and raved about the period the CCF were in power, claiming that nothing was 

accomplished during the CCF term of office. Mr. Speaker, no Government in the history of 

Saskatchewan owes so much to its predecessor as does the Government which now sits to your right. 

And the Premier and other Members of the Government know it, Mr. Speaker. On the other hand, no 

Government in the history of this province owned so little to its predecessor as did the CCF Government 

of T. C. Douglas when it assumed office in 1944. The CCF took over from a Liberal Government which 

had done nothing to lift Saskatchewan out of the doldrums brought about by the 30‘s. During the Second 

World War the Liberal Government in Ottawa was unconcerned about this province, while, as I said last 

night, the Provincial Liberal Government sat seemingly helpless in the backwash of the Canadian 

economy. Prior to 1944 the Liberal Government did nothing when there was so much that needed to be 

done and was done, Mr. Speaker, after the CCF assumed office. Before 1944 power facilities were 

inadequate and power rates were high. There was no program to seek out and develop our resources. 

Adequate supplies of water were scarce. There certainly wasn‘t a reliable road system, provincial or 

municipal prior to 1944. Industry had largely bypassed the province. Agriculture was the main source of 

livelihood producing about 80 per cent of the wealth of the province. 

 

Upon assuming office the CCF formed the Saskatchewan Power Corporation which over the years was 

built up into a strong centralized producer of power and distributor of gas, serving adequately and 

efficiently all parts of the province. Our timber resources were put under the control of a Crown 

corporation, the Timber Board, and plans were put into effect to control production and the harvest of 

our forest products in the interest of the people of the province. Exploration for minerals was 

encouraged with oil, gas, helium, uranium, salt and potash being brought into production along with 

coal, clay, zinc and sodium sulphate. Agriculture continued as the principle industry in our province but 

by 1964 the non-agricultural sector of our economy, comprising forestry, fisheries, trapping, mining, 

electric power, manufacturing and construction was producing 60 per cent of our wealth. 

 

And throughout the period the CCF were in power our roads and highway system were developing and 

played a major part in our over-all development. In 1944 Saskatchewan had a provincial system of 

highways, a system of sorts, Mr. Speaker. At least it was marked on paper and there were highway 

markers at strategic points throughout the province. At that time the system was totally inadequate as a 

safe, reliable means of transportation. Of the approximately 9,000 miles designated as Provincial 

highways, about one half were gravelled surface, 123 miles were paved and the balance was earth 

surface; this, Mr. Speaker, in 1944. Mud in the spring and summer was a serious hazard while in winter 

snow blocked travel. Travel by automobile any distance in the province was an adventure not taken 

lightly 20 odd years ago, and probably not taken at all in the winter time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Upon assuming office the CCF gave high priority to highway improvements for both Provincial and 

municipal roads. This didn‘t mean that the highways improved notably in a year or two, for although 

about one tenth of the Budget was allotted to highways. 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

690 

the total highway budget for 1944-45 was only $2,500,000. However, priority continued throughout the 

years from 1944 to 1964. During this 20-year period every mile of the province‘s 8,600 miles of 

highway was constructed or represented-constructed. Extensive gravelling soon took Saskatchewan out 

of the mud, and because of a higher standard of construction winter travel became more general. Then 

paving and oiling to provide greater comfort and safety to the motorist were emphasized. By the end of 

1963 almost half of the highways had a dust-free surface. And during the same year, 1963, Mr. Speaker, 

75 per cent of all travel on our on our Provincial highway system was on a paved or oiled surface. By 

1964 there was an arterial network of dust-free main highways throughout the province. Every mile of 

Provincial highway had been constructed to a standard based upon estimated traffic needs for 20 years 

into the future. No. 1 Highway had been completed across the province. New highways, the Otosquen 

Trail, the Hanson Lake Road, No. 102 north of La Ronge, the road to La Loche were extended into the 

North to encourage development of resources and to attract tourists. And above all, Mr. Speaker, from 

1944 to 1964 we did not have the huge budgets for highways which the Department of Highways has 

been allotted for the coming year. But with the funds available to the Department over the 20 years of 

CCF Government there was a maximum of achievement; the people of Saskatchewan can be assured 

they received value for every tax dollar spent. When the Liberal Government assumed office in 1964 

there was a blacktop network of highways to almost every major community in Saskatchewan. Some 

change, Mr. Speaker, in 20 short years! Some stagnation! By 1964 motorists travelled Saskatchewan 

highways with confidence, both in the summer and the winter. And this is no more dramatically brought 

home to us, Mr. Speaker, than by the swarms of students from many parts of the province who have 

visited the Legislature each session for the past few years, and this, Mr. Speaker, in the middle of winter. 

Over the past twelve or so years they have descended upon this Legislature during sessions in ever 

increasing numbers and from almost every constituency in the province. And over the years they have 

come in confidence that they could make the journey safely and in comfort. To me, this trust which 

parents and teachers and bus drivers have developed in our highways is ample evidence of the great 

improvements in our highways during the CCF term of office. 

 

And now we come to 1964, Mr. Speaker, the year the Liberals took over the responsibility for the 

maintenance and improvement of Saskatchewan‘s highway system. The Thatcher Government 

immediately announced plans for building of a super-highway system. Headlines appeared in the paper 

proclaiming for all to read that there was to be an expanded highway program. The public was informed 

that the Government intended to sharply increase highway spending. Money would be made available. 

The problem, said the Premier, was with the availability of contractors to do the work. The Provincial 

Treasurer was quoted as saying: 

 

We will bring in contractors from Alberta and Manitoba or even expand our own departments to 

get the work done. 

 

Again, 

 

  Expenditures on highways may go even higher if it were physically possible. 

 

And a little later a crash program was announced. The results of a Government determined to carry out a 

greatly increased highway policy seemingly at all cost could have only one outcome. 



February 24, 1967 

 

691 

And that, Mr. Speaker, was that the prices rose, and rose dramatically. Saskatchewan became a 

contractor‘s paradise or should I say, a happy hunting ground for contractors. If it made the Provincial 

Treasurer happy to spend money, it appeared that contractors would do everything possible to make him 

much happy. Over the three years from 1964 to 1966 as a result of the crash program, the announcement 

by the Premier and others, the bid prices for highway work skyrocketed. For moving dirt, prices went up 

in three years by 62 per cent. Bid prices for oil treatment aggregate increased 76 per cent over three 

years, Mr. Speaker. Bid prices for bituminous surfacing increased 48 per cent and for gravel surfacing 

aggregate bid prices went up 117 per cent. And very little attempt, Mr. Speaker, seemingly was made to 

control costs. As costs rose and more money was needed to carry out the program, more money was 

provided. In 1965 an extra $3,000,000 was made available. In 1966 $6,500,000 was added to the 

highway budget. And these amounts apparently, Mr. Speaker, were just to meet mounting costs. The 

then Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant), the Member for Regina South, told a meeting at Humboldt that 

he did not have additional money available for additional work because there was actually an over-run 

on the original budget. It was no wonder there was an over-run, Mr. Speaker, with the increase in costs 

as a result of the government‘s action. The Member for Regina South, the former Minister of Highways, 

also told the meeting at Humboldt that because of the over-run and because the $5,000,000 or 

$6,000,000 was already largely committed there would be no oiling on No. 20 Highway in 1966. Mr. 

Speaker, the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) was boasting earlier this week that the CCF never 

built highways the way the Liberals are building now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, I would be the first to admit that the CCF never built highways with so 

little regard for costs as the present Government has done over the past three years. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Didn‘t build highways, period. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Build highways, period, regardless of cost. I said that, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier 

backed me up on the statement. That is what happened in the last three years. Costs rose, and they rose, 

Mr. Speaker, because of the actions of the Provincial Treasurer who up to now seemingly has shown no 

public concern over these increased costs. 

 

Yesterday the annual report of the Department of Highways for the fiscal year 1965-66 was tabled in the 

Legislature. I haven‘t had time to examine it thoroughly, but scanning its pages confirms the 

skyrocketing of prices since this Liberal Government assumed office. The first full year of Liberal 

administration was 1965-66. The highway program was drawn up by them and executed under their 

orders. This was the beginning of the crash program. On page 28 in the report there is an interesting 

graph setting out comparisons of unit bid prices from 1961 through 1965. I was struck by the 

resemblance of each graph to human hands, Mr. Speaker. There are five bars on each graph. Each graph 

has the appearance of a hand pointing the way to the sky. The bar representing the 1965 prices is the 

long index finger towering above his fellows. To include the bar for 1966 prices – that is to be done next 

year in next years report – the graph will 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

692 

have to be further extended to accommodate the further increase in highway costs. There is one 

paragraph on page 27 of the annual report Mr. Speaker, which gives percentage increases for the one 

year, 1965-66 in unit bid prices which I would like to read into the record. The report states: 

 

   1965 unit prices increased substantially for all types of work. 

 

and then later reported, 

 

the unit prices for earth excavation increased approximately 15 per cent over 1964, and oil 

treatment gravel crushing prices increased approximately 43 per cent. Unit prices for sub-base and 

base course increased 52 per cent and 40 per cent respectively over 1964 and unit price for 

bituminous surfacing increased 19 per cent over 1964. The unit price for hauling surfacing 

commodities increased by 26 per cent. 

 

And these increases, Mr. Speaker, were for one year only. Members opposite may claim that increased 

costs are due to the inflationary period we have been experiencing. All costs have gone up, they might 

say, Mr. Speaker, all costs have not gone up. I asked a question in the House this session as to the cost of 

oiling a mile of highway in 1966. I asked a similar question last year re: 1965. The 1965 average cost for 

a mile for oil surfacing done, Mr. Speaker, by Government crews was $2,537 per mile in 1965 and 

$2,686 per mile in 1966. This is an increase of only $150 per mile or one per cent of the 1965 cost. 

Nothing to be concerned about here, Mr. Speaker. However, the same answers listed the costs per mile 

of oiling done by private contractors. In 1965 the cost by private contractors was $3,119 per mile and in 

1966, $4,670 per mile. This is an increase in one year of $1,500 per mile or almost 50 per cent of the 

cost the year before for oiling done by private contractors. These figures more than anything else, Mr. 

Speaker, condemn the Government for the manner in which they are handling highway construction. 

The Government said in effect to the contractors: come and get it, and the contractors did just that. And 

it illustrates too, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the Provincial Treasurer‘s remark last Friday when he said: ―It 

is always easy to spend money, particularly when it is someone else‘s.‖ 

 

In regard to the new Budget presented to this Legislature a week ago it appears as though the Provincial 

Treasurer is repeating the same mistakes he has made up to now. The Provincial Treasurer appears to be 

determined to increase still further the highway program in spite of the danger of higher costs. The total 

budgetary amount for highways last year was $47,520,000. The actual amount spent was $54,000,000. 

This year‘s Budget calls for an expenditure of $56,000,000. The major emphasis in 1967 will be on 

paving, the Provincial Treasurer says. The Department of Highways plans on paving 316 miles during 

1967-68, and yet, Mr. Speaker, last year only 182 miles were paved. This almost 50 per cent increase in 

the paving program has all the appearances of another crash program, a crash program which will result 

in increased costs to the taxpayer of the province. We have had two successive crash programs under 

this Thatcher government with disastrous price increases already. The dangers of emphasizing results 

regardless of cost should be apparent now to the Government. The $42,500,000 announced in the 

Budget Speech as expenditure on capital projects will not accomplish as much as $30,000,000 would 

have two or three years ago. Here is a 



February 24, 1967 

 

693 

waste of $12,000,000, Mr. Speaker, due to the crash program of this Government. This is nothing short 

of folly, Mr. Speaker, Thatcher‘s folly. The people of Saskatchewan are paying dearly for the luxury of 

a Liberal Government. Even with a buoyant economy with a revenue Budget of over $300,000,000 this 

coming year, the largest in Saskatchewan‘s history, the Provincial Treasurer finds it necessary to borrow 

another $6,500,000 to further speed up highway construction. This, Mr. Speaker, is irresponsible 

budgeting. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan, present or future, can‘t afford the luxury of further crash 

programs, and certainly not when paid for by borrowing. Well, Mr. Speaker, most of us will be around 

ten years from now when the $6,500,000 borrowings will have to be paid. We will be paying back not 

$6,500,000 but approximately $10,000,000, a further increase in the work which they will be doing next 

year. And what a fantastic amount of waste there is in this Liberal Budget, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial 

Treasurer opened his budgetary remarks on highway construction with the statement: ―This Government 

continues to give a major priority to highway spending.‖ There is no doubt that spending is a major 

priority and spending seemingly without regard to value received. 

 

I would think, Mr. Speaker, that responsible contractors would even find fault with the emphasis this 

Budget placed on crash programs. It seems to me that they would rather have a moderate, steady 

increase in program on a continuing basis whereby they have assurance that their outfits will always 

have work at a reasonable return. Well, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to recall the words of a 

famous president of the United States when he said, ―Ask not what your country can do for you, but 

rather ask what you can do for your country.‖ Mr. Speaker, if a resident of Saskatchewan were to ask 

this Government opposite what he could do for his province, I am sure the answer would come back 

loud and clear, ‗Pay more taxes.‘ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, I will vote for the amendment and against the motion. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — This is the first time I have spoken in the House during this 

session and I wish at this time to pass on my respects to the family of the late John Cuelenaere, former 

Minister of Natural Resources, Member for Shellbrook. It is unfortunate that Saskatchewan lost such a 

good citizen, and certainly there is no doubt that a terrible gap will be found among the ranks opposite in 

losing this type of an individual. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I note that our radio time is being cramped a bit today due to late 

starting of the House. I will try to get through my talk as quickly as possible to allow those who are to 

follow me as much air time as possible. However, because of airtime one must confine themselves very 

strictly to notes and I will do my best to try to stay within my twenty-two minutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to add this, that since your elevation to Speaker, we do miss some of the good 

administration lib speeches that were not read in this House and I still maintain that these are the best 

kind of speeches. However, airtime necessitates that one 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

694 

stays very strictly to their notes. 

 

First all, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this regarding the Budget. This is a huckster Budget. This is a 

deceitful Budget. The Budget plays down the fact that Saskatchewan has gone seriously into debt under 

this so-called good business administration that was promised. some $200,000,000 more worth of debt 

has been enjoyed under Thatcher Administration, $200,000,000 more debt since this Government took 

over, direct, indirect and hypothecated. Besides that they robbed the Medicare fund to bolster their 

Budget. They robbed the scholarship fund to bolster their Budget. They robbed the fund for the public 

administration and they have sold a tremendous amount of Crown property, Crown lands, Crown 

corporations, which has also been squandered for their own purposes. I said when this Government took 

office that they were like the wastrel son who inherited a fortune. They inherited the farm, they inherited 

the business, and it didn‘t take them long, like him, to squander the resources. 

 

Getting up into north-western Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have witnessed a gradual deterioration of 

our highway system all this while, as the former Minister of Highways said, the Government goes on 

blandly and blatantly suggesting that it is going to do more than before. It is spending more dollars. 

Let‘s see the construction. I thought it was only in northwestern Saskatchewan that there was no 

construction, Mr. Speaker. I though it was because it wasn‘t good country according to the Premier‘s 

yardstick. However, I find that regardless of where I go, we see the same situation, deterioration, Mr. 

Speaker. There is a new term for these bad spots you find in the highways up in our country; they call 

them Thatcher-holes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I tried to get up to the Meadow Lake Stampede last year. My son was 

going to participate in the stampede with his horse in the gymkhana and rodeo events. Well I started out, 

Mr. Speaker, a day ahead of time. 

 

Mr. I. H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Would ‗Chubby‘ from Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) please keep quiet. You know 

I‘m trying to give you a bit of radio time, so just hold your horses. I tried to get up to Meadow Lake with 

the horse trailer and the station wagon. About twenty miles from Meadow Lake it looked as if we were 

going to get there too late for the event, so I said, ―Son, you had better unload the horse and try to make 

it by yourself; I‘ll catch up later.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, so much for the Thatcher-hole. I would like to point out that we 

had some programs for northwestern Saskatchewan that were not carried out. No. 40 Highway east to 

the Alberta border was supposed to be completed in 1965. How much has been done? About half 

graded, nothing else; a hazard to the public. What about that mess up at Lloydminster, the road you have 

been puddling around with from Lashburn to Lloydminster, No. 5 Highway? More Thatcher holes, more 

bunk. About 



February 24, 1967 

 

695 

the only thing that this Government is adept in doing in highways is driving stakes. Saskatchewan has 

now become the great staked plains. Let‘s have a few less stakes and a few more highways, Mr. Minister 

of Highways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Let‘s have a few more actual bits of construction. And I would like to say a word for 

the benefit of the Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) about a gravelling contract I had a look 

at during the early moose season; that gravelling contract from Floten to Canoe Lake. You know that 

gravel turned out to be coarse sand and that will no more stabilize that highway from Floten to Canoe 

Lake than a layer of dust. It was just a plain bit of squandering of public money. It just so happened that 

most of the trucks that were there hauling happened to have the address of Morse on the, from the 

Premier‘s constituency. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What is wrong with that? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Nothing wrong with that at all. But I would like to see them put gravel on the 

highways, not a cheap job for the benefit of the contractors. It just happened that the sand was right 

beside the highway. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Prince Albert): — How was the moose hunting? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Take it easy Shorty, take it easy. The Hon. Member from Prince Albert complained the 

other day about my referring to his stature. I would be the last one, Mr. Speaker, to refer to his physical 

stature. It is his mental stature that I am referring to. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Stand up, Davie. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Another area where it has been great on headlines and short of action has been in the 

technical training facilities. We in 1964, had budgeted money for a technical training college in north-

western Saskatchewan. This was ditched, not proceeded with, Mr. Speaker, and it is to the everlasting 

shame of this Government, to the everlasting shame. They fiddled around. Finally the Minister of Public 

Works (Mr. Gardiner) and the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) and the Premier himself, kept 

promising that something was going to be done. The Department of Education officials didn‘t have 

much faith in them because they said, ―Now look, fellows, if we are going to get anything out of this 

outfit, you just better decide you are going to pay something yourself.‖ So they devised a comprehensive 

school. Well, we weren‘t too anxious to pay extra money ourselves when we were going to get it free of 

charge from the former Government, but we needed it, so the School Board arranged for a vote. What 

happened last fall when we went to ask the Local Government Board for a bylaw vote? Under the 

direction of this generous Premier the answer was no. No training facilities. He turned it down. And last 

year, Mr. Speaker, the year before that and again next year, thousands of students are going to miss the 

opportunity for an education. Now it is all very well for the Thatcherites to say that we have not lost 

young people. The records show in their own sessional paper, according to a question in this House, 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

696 

that some 880 students were turned down last year. There will probably by 1,000 this year and the year 

after that. We would like to see some bricks and mortar, less headlines and a little more action. We need 

some action of we are going to keep our young people in this province, Mr. Speaker. We want some 

action and I recommend that to the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — They are great on headlines, but not much on action. I have been a Member of the 

Legislature for The Battlefords now for some 15 years… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Don‘t forget, fellows I‘ve got some time here, and if you insist on interruption, I‘ll 

take it. 

 

Mr. I. H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — We‘re not saying anything. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, the city of North Battleford used to be the fastest growing city of its size 

anywhere in Western Canada. Under Thatcher‘s stagnation it has actually slumped. Sitting still. Marking 

time. No growth. If this technical training institute had been built as it should have been, we would have 

been looking forward to nearly $500,000 of a payroll today with actual activity taking place. This loss 

combined with the phasing out of the Saskatchewan Hospital, boarding out mental patients in an ill-

planned and somewhat ill-conceived manner, certainly does no good for north-western Saskatchewan. I 

want to congratulate my friend, the Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Snyder) for bringing out some of 

these facts in the Legislature, regardless of the fact whether some gossips failed to back up their talk 

when they were asked to do so publicly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go into another area. Time is a sort of relentless thing. It has a way of catching up 

on people and on perusing the Northern Affairs Branch reports for the last four years, we find some very 

interesting reading. We have heard a great deal in the past from the Members opposite and especially the 

Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) concerning social aid in the North. We have heard a lot more recently, 

again in headlines, speeches and statements by some recently hired civil servants supposedly working 

for the Saskatchewan Youth Agency, but in reality they seem to be doing a little organizing and 

propaganda work for the Liberal party. 

 

We have heard of thousands, this is what their propaganda sheet says, of Indian people and native 

people being placed in jobs, Mr. Speaker, some of them have been placed in jobs, but I am sorry to say 

they have been placed in jobs only to provide window dressing for the Thatcher Administration and his 

Indian and Métis Branch. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — They have been placed in jobs long enough to provide a statistic to be quoted over the 

air and in the press. Then they have been sent home by their employers, humiliated, frustrated and 

harder to rehabilitate than ever before. This work can 



February 24, 1967 

 

697 

be credited to the Hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). When in opposition, this Member went across 

the North agitating among the natives that the CCF was too niggardly with social aid. when work 

programs were instituted he told them not to participate in slave labour. He continually sabotaged every 

effort of the previous CCF Government for a meaningful program in the North but, when out of the 

North, this same Member and other Liberal Members and candidates went up and down the country, 

telling people that the CCF were destroying the native population with social aid, in fact, with so much 

success, Mr. Speaker, that it resulted in the defeat of the CCF in 1964. Well, Mr. Speaker, chickens have 

the happy faculty of coming home to roost and let us take a look now at the social aid picture and job 

placement from the North. 

 

In 1964, when the CCF Government was supposedly buying votes with social aid, 4,584 people were on 

social aid in the northern half of Saskatchewan. What is the picture today? The last DNR report and I 

have it here on my desk, indicates that social aid costs are up by 42 per cent. More money spent in social 

aid by the present Government under the stewardship of that able parliamentary assistant, that three pay-

cheque civil servant MLA, the $18,000 a year man. This expert who was going to settle the entire 

situation and be the Saviour of the North, the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker … 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Jealous? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The truth is…Boy, I‘d sure have to be feeling pretty low to get jealous of the lothario 

from La Ronge. 

 

This Government failed in its native program, it failed miserably because the MLA for Athabasca (Mr. 

Guy) has been putting politics ahead of people and has not permitted people who understand their work 

to proceed with programs that would have provided at least a partial solution to this knotty problem. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is a knotty problem. It‘s not easy. However, it would be much easier if certain 

politicians would allow people to be objective and work the problems out without a continual eye on the 

ballot box. Mr. Speaker, I submit that a 42 per cent increase in social aid costs in the North is adequate 

proof of the Liberals‘ dismal failure to meet the challenge of this situation. Here again, one main reason 

was the fact that they failed to maintain the confidence of good staff. I believe the former Director, Mr. 

Ewald, who resigned recently, was a good and efficient man. I believe if left alone, without political 

harassment, he would have been able to do a great deal. And I challenge the Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Steuart) to table Mr. Ewald‘s letter of resignation in this House. I suggest his letter will 

bear out a great deal of the things I‘ve said. 

 

I would like to say a few words at this time about another gem of the Northwest, The Battlefords 

Provincial Park. I am sorry that development work in that park ground to a near halt in 1964. But I do 

congratulate this Government on at least maintaining the thing and keeping up the maintenance and 

taking fair care of it. But unfortunately hundreds of tourists were turned away because of that lack of 

development and because of labour lack of accommodation. I suggest the people who were turned away 

last year will not be back and they will not be advertising the park 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

698 

back home. If we are going to encourage tourist development, we certainly must be prepared to accept 

growing numbers of visitors each year rather than a cheap retrenchment, simply because the park is not 

in good country by the Premier‘s now famous yardstick. That is just not good enough. The Premier has 

turned thumbs down on this and on a regional park in The Battlefords. I certainly hope that the 

Provincial Treasurer can see fit to allow some continued development including a golf course. The Hon. 

Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Steuart) – I note, and I am told is a golfer of some adeptness - I hope 

will see fit to provide some golfing facilities after three long years of waiting. We have also started a 

new ski club in that area, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that the Government will be as generous with The 

Battleford Ski club as the former CCF Government was at Buffalo Pound when it established White 

Track for southern Saskatchewan, over almost the dead bodies of some of the Members who sat on this 

side of the House at that time. 

 

It is fortunate that we enjoyed excellent crops this year throughout most of the province. I want to add a 

word now to the situation of those unfortunate farmers in north-western Saskatchewan. Some of the best 

citizens of Saskatchewan are up in that area, Goodsoil, Peerless, Goldenridge, Mr. Speaker, and I 

suggest they deserve something better than Liberal buck-passing between the Federal and Provincial 

Governments. It is unfortunate that they do not have a spokesman in this House to do the same effective 

work that the former Member, Martin Semchuk, did while he so ably represented that area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I notice that the Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) is blushing and possibly 

I was a little unkind. He did make a contribution. He represents the turkey interest. And last year we had 

a tax cut on turkey saddles, Mr. Speaker. He did make some contribution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Turning to the general farm picture, I believe that it is unfortunate that we have not 

had a stand from this Government on the situation, high cost, the costly business of high prices. The 

province has provided us with good crops, and I believe that we should not allow our farmers to be 

forced to the wall by these tremendous high costs and I think that something more than just lip service to 

this situation should be rendered by this Government. 

 

Our Premier has a strange sense of priorities and a strange sense of justice. Ever since this Thatcherite 

Government was elected, we have seen democracy and fair play tossed out the window. 

 

Let us take a look at the one per cent sales tax reduction as compared to the $20 increase in Medicare 

and hospitalisation. The Thatcher yardstick said, ―Oh! we are going to be fair with this hospitalisation 

increase.‖ Yes, they were. The old age pensioner, the low income workers, were increased by $20. our 

millionaire Premier and his wealthy friends paid exactly the same $20. One horse, one rabbit, Thatcher 

equality. When they buy a Cadillac or a mink coat, they save hundreds of dollars. How much do the 

low-income persons save on their cloth coat or their 



February 24, 1967 

 

699 

second-hand compulsory arbitration? Pennies, Mr. Speaker, just pennies. More Thatcher equality. When 

one of the big companies here built $5,000,000 worth of new buildings in 1965-66, $50,000 saved on 

one per cent. How much does a $3,000 a year worker save? Pennies again. More Thatcher equality. 

Thatcher equality even invaded the realm of the five cent cigar. Someone once said that what this 

country needs is a good five cent cigar. Well, we had one until this outfit came along. He didn‘t even 

forget the equality though, one cent on a nickel cigar, one cent on a 20 cent cigar. Twenty per cent for 

the poor, five per cent for the rich. More Thatcher equality. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we heard a great deal of ballyhoo from these people opposite. They believe that they 

can kid the public through the press which is largely their vessel. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Time‘s up. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — We had an announcement here from the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) 

on radio time. I have a page to finish, Sir, and I‘ll not be cramped. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we 

have witnessed, as I said, the third huckster Budget. There are many more things that I want to say. We 

have not only witnessed a gradual deterioration. The only progress that has been made has been made by 

publicity and propaganda. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Industrial development has not moved further ahead any faster than it did before. In 

some instances not as fast. This good business Government has thrown us into debt, has robbed every 

piggy bank that was in the Treasury, and we have had, finally, to add insult to injury, their high paid 

help from Ottawa come in with the Manpower Report and make some untidy remarks on the low IQ of 

the farmer. 

 

Well, this is still largely an agricultural province, Mr. Speaker, and I suggest that when these people 

opposite dare to go and get a decision from the people in the country as well as the city, they will find 

out how high the IQ of the people of Saskatchewan is. The sooner they do so, the better. 

 

So there‘s been a lot of election talk. Bring it on, Mr. Premier, bring it on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment but I do not support the motion. 

 

Mr. D. G. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, first I would like to point out that the Member 

for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) encroached upon the air time of this side of the House by close to ten 

minutes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I spoke twenty-two minutes, the twenty-two minutes that were allocated to me. Would 

you draw to the attention of this 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

700 

gentleman who came in late, that the House did not open at the proper time, Sir? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I‘ll draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the fact that had I opened this House at 

2:30 when I should have done, the House would have adjourned for lack of a quorum and the Member 

for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) wouldn‘t have had any time at all, because when this House adjourns 

for lack of a quorum, it is adjourned to the next sitting day. I delayed the opening of the House and I 

dragged my feet and that was the reason why they were dragged. Under the circumstances I don‘t think 

that the point of order is very well taken, and that is that. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‘m surprised with all the bellowing that comes from the 

Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) that he did survive the moose season. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I‘ll survive a few more seasons, boy. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Mr. Speaker, it is a real pleasure to participate in this Debate as a Member of the 

Government party. I am sure any sincere Member of any House in Canada would be most pleased to 

support a Budget such as the one that was brought down in this Chamber last Friday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan:  The Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, were green with envy. They were shocked 

and surprised to learn that the people of Saskatchewan under a Liberal Administration are going to enjoy 

more Government services than ever before, and for the third straight year, no net tax increase. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer said in his Budget Address that the preparation of a Budget was a difficult or 

frustrating task. If this is true, Mr. Speaker, then he must be commended for doing an excellent job. The 

Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, certainly must find their role in this Debate very frustrating and very 

difficult. This was only too evident in the remarks made by their financial critic, the Hon. Member for 

Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). He too, Mr. Speaker, expected bigger tax increases and I am sure prepared 

a speech condemning this Government for the increases that never came. 

 

With no tax increases, with greater government services, what did he do? He did, Mr. Speaker, what all 

Socialists are experts at. He talked and he talked, and he talked, for almost two hours. But, Mr. Speaker, 

did he say anything? Well, any remarks he did make on the Budget were of little or no consequence. He 

dug up some of his old speeches and belaboured on them for awhile attempting in this oration to draw a 

red herring over this Debate. I did not expect him, Mr. Speaker, to point out the true facts of this Budget 

to the people as that would scuttle their already sinking ship. He did not, Mr. Speaker, point out that this 

Government is doing far more in every field for the people of Saskatchewan than did the Government 

that he was a member of. He did not mention that this Government has gone into new fields of tax relief 

such as: homeowner grants, purple gas in farm trucks, the 



February 24, 1967 

 

701 

removal of mineral tax on farm lands. He did not mention that this Budget has meant more monies 

available for snow removal on municipal roads, more monies for the maintenance of grid roads. These, 

Mr. Speaker, were programs that did not even exist in his Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan:  He did not mention or compare highway spending under this Government to that 

of his Government. This Government, Mr. Speaker, and I will compare it, is spending more than double 

on road building than his Government ever did. Mr. Speaker, in my own constituency of Last Mountain, 

more miles of oil and pavement have been built in the three years of Liberal Government than in 20 

years of Socialist Government in this province. 

 

He did not point out that the larger school units are receiving more money from this Provincial 

Government than they ever did from NDP Government. He did not point out that this Government is 

spending more than double the money his Government spent on our universities. And, Mr. Speaker, on 

his comment on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, he criticized the Government and the 

Corporation for taking some of the profits made by the Corporation and putting them into the 

Consolidated Fund. The Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are extremely touchy and sensitive about this 

and they have good reason to be. Under Socialist management profits were next to non-existent and the 

equity owned by the people of Saskatchewan had slipped to only 7 ½ per cent of the company. It is no 

wonder they are sensitive when they see our equity share go up by 4 per cent and our net profit up to 

$10,410,000. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan expect the SPC to make a profit and 

they expect some of these profits to be used to finance Government services. They will, Mr. Speaker, 

once again be appreciative of this Government‘s handling of this particular Corporation. Under new 

administration, the Corporation is not only making greater profits but it is also providing greater service 

to our people. 

 

The Member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) in his comments on this Corporation did not point out that 

under new Liberal policy 85 communities in Saskatchewan will get natural gas under a new program 

initiated and started in the past year. This means to my constituency of Last Mountain that the 

communities of Guernsey, Lanigan, Nokomis, Govan, Semans, Raymore, Quinton, and Duval will all 

get natural gas, something denied to them by the CCF Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Opposition fail in their remarks to point out that many people in rural Saskatchewan 

under the CCF-NDP Government did not enjoy the use of the telephone. This Government feels that a 

telephone is not a luxury but an absolute necessity and consequently this Government took firm action to 

provide a program where the people will be able to enjoy this service, something the Socialists failed to 

do. 

 

The Opposition financial critic, Mr. Speaker, belittled this Government‘s action on the cost of living 

issue. He criticized the Government for setting up a Royal Commission. He did not mention the fact that 

the Governments of our neighbouring provinces of Alberta and Manitoba also saw fit to participate in 

this Commission. 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

702 

The Governments of these three prairie provinces have every confidence in the success of this 

Commission despite the attempts of the Opposition financial critic to sabotage this most respected body. 

He attempts to sabotage this Commission by belittling it. He and all his colleagues can talk long and 

loud on the cost of living but the simple fact remains that when they were in a position to do something, 

they did nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the establishment of a base hospital in southern Saskatchewan is sorely needed, and I am 

sure all residents of southern Saskatchewan welcomed this announcement, all I am sure except the Hon. 

Member for Regina West. For some cheap political reasons and for what he hoped would be some, I 

suppose, political gain, he again belittled this announcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite are bitter in their comments on this Budget. The financial critic was 

even bitter about Saskatchewan being a have Province. He is envious that in three years of Liberal 

Government, Saskatchewan has risen from the ranks of the poor to be placed in the ranks of the 

prosperous and great have provinces, Provincials such as British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario. 

 

While this Government is inviting new capital to come in to participate in our new prosperity, to come 

in and locate new industries and new mines, the gentleman opposite, Mr. Speaker, is saying we are a 

have not province and there is no new prosperity here. This, Mr. Speaker, is hardly the way a sincere 

Saskatchewan elected member should talk about his own province. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. 

Member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) is doing his Province and the people he represents 

Saskatchewan disservice with such a comment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was delighted to see in the Budget that the homeowner grant program will once again be 

continued. We have said many times, Sir, that we intended to reduce the tax burden especially the tax 

burden on the homeowner, in view of the fact that the homeowner was perhaps the hardest hit. Our 

increased grants in schools and other forms of local government benefit all types of property owners. 

The homeowner grant provides direct tax relief in the form of cheques up to $50 for the resident 

homeowner. This year, Members will be interested to know, over 170,000 such grants were made, 

totalling approximately $8,200,000. 

 

A closer analysis of the assessment information in a large number of Saskatchewan communities reveals 

the real value of these grants. The rebate amounted to about one third of the total levy on an average 

home in most communities. in terms of mill rate, an average of 20 mills or more. Not only has the 

homeowner grant meant a very substantial reduction in property taxes to resident homeowners of the 

province but the people of lower incomes have benefited the greatest in proportion. Many people, 

particularly in the smaller centres, were able to get a grant equal to half of their tax bill. 

 

The Premier at the opening of this Debate outlined the changes that we intended to make this year. He 

also discussed another important side benefit of this program – local tax collect ions have never been 

better. 

 

Yet, we still hear complaints from our friends opposite and other sources that the grants should be 

abolished. The latest to join in this chorus was the Saskatchewan Farmers Union who 



February 24, 1967 

 

703 

presented a brief to the Government earlier this year. The SFU represents less than one-quarter of the 

farm families in the province. They do not always reflect the thinking of the Saskatchewan farmer and 

this was clearly shown when this Resolution was brought to this Government. This program has proven 

its popularity in only one short year, Mr. Speaker. It was substantial, direct and immediate tax relief to 

over 170,000 Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one item in the Budget that I was more than pleased to see was the amount of money to be 

spent on the Provincial Youth Agency. This amount has been increased by $90,000 over the last year, 

bringing the Youth Agency budget to $500,000. This Agency in a short period of time has done a 

remarkable and a commendable job. 

 

Before the Youth Agency was set up last year there were only 72 recreation boards in the entire 

province. In the past year, 123 recreation boards were set up. This brings the total number of these 

boards up to 195. These boards are located in 88 villages, 85 towns, 10 cities, nine rural municipalities, 

two LIDs and one Indian reserve. 

 

Under the 20 years of Socialist Government, Mr. Speaker, only 72 of the 195 that presently exist were 

set up. In one year under our Government – 123 boards. A great achievement. New boards, I am 

informed, Mr. Speaker, are being set up at the present time at the same rate and with the same 

enthusiasm as they were in the past year. 

 

The Youth Agency, Mr. Speaker, is responsible for many more popular programs, one being the Lighted 

Schoolhouse Program. Under this program, grants up to $500 per school are available for a community 

using the school facilities for at least 30 days in the year. These funds are being used by these recreation 

boards, not only for the total benefits of the youth but for people of all ages. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the real tragedy of the past under the former Government was that they deprived the 

youth of Saskatchewan of what was really theirs. The Federal Government made available $64,000 in 

grants to help develop and train our youth in the year 1963-64. The CCF-NDP Government only 

claimed $28,740 out of this amount; again left money sitting in Ottawa that could have gone to our 

youth in this province. 

 

The Provincial Youth Agency, Mr. Speaker, in agreement with the Federal Government awards 

scholarships and bursaries to students taking degrees in physical education and recreation. In the past 

they awarded 29 scholarships and 13 bursaries. 

 

The former Government, Mr. Speaker, awarded only three scholarships and nine bursaries in their last 

year in office. This proves, Mr. Speaker, that they are not only unconcerned about our youth, they 

ignored them to the extent that it was almost unbelievable. 

 

This Agency, Mr. Speaker, in cooperation with ARDA and Canadian Manpower Services will, on 

February 28, in Humboldt inaugurate a program designed, not as the Member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) 

intimates, to take our youth away from our rural communities, but instead to give them the same 

opportunities youth in our cities already enjoy in career counselling. This service will not only help them 

in careers they might seek away from home but will also 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

704 

better prepare them to serve in their own communities. This is an outstanding example of another new 

service provided by the Liberal Government to the youth of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that this service will come to my constituency in the towns of Lanigan 

and Nokomis. The Opportunity Caravan will be in Nokomis June 11 to 17, and in Lanigan June 18 to 

June 24. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that I will vote for the motion and that I will vote against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J. W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I‘m very pleased that the Hon. 

Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) took so much time this afternoon. I‘m quite certain that his 

25 minutes will do more good for the Government on this side of the House than any words from this 

side could do during this Debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to have the only Provincial Treasurer in the prairies and possibly in Canada present a 

surplus Budget without changes in taxes is an achievement in itself. And at the same time to be able to 

add to existing worthwhile programs, new programs, indicates the able manner in which the 

Government has been conducting the affairs of our province. 

 

Thirdly, in stressing the priorities, education, health, highways, and welfare, the Premier has once again 

indicated in no uncertain terms that these are the priorities recognized by our Government as those 

requiring major attention. 

 

The amendment moved by the official critic (Mr. Blakeney) for the Opposition is one of the most 

ridiculous that has been presented to this Legislature, ever. Since this Government came to office, Mr. 

Speaker, there have been no increases in power rates. In act the only major change was a reduction in 

rates which took place at the time of the sale of the Regina power plant to the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. Increased efficiency and better operation over the last two years have realized increased 

benefits to the citizens of the province and will eventually not only result in decreased taxes but also in 

reduced rates. If this is the only reason the official Opposition can find for moving an amendment or 

opposing the Budget of the present Government then, Mr. Speaker, they have become very barren of 

ideas. 

 

During his remarks in the Budget Debate the Member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) was kind enough 

to make reference to taxes within my constituency, and with particular reference to the village of 

Goodeve and Stanley municipality. To indicate to you this attention what our Liberal Government has 

done for the people in this province in the last three years, I want to take the case of a typical farm 

family in the Stanley municipalities with three quarters of a section of farm land, and using an 

assessment figure of $10,000. Due to the increased municipal grants and grants for snow removal and 

maintenance of grid roads, Stanley municipality in 1966 received approximately $10,000 more than they 

did in the previous year in equalization grants and the new grants provided by our Government. This 

would be equivalent to approximately five mills on the taxes of the farmers of that municipality. 

Secondly we have the homeowner grant, which on the basis of a $10,000 assessment would again 

represent five mills of the farmer‘s 



February 24, 1967 

 

705 

tax dollar. Then if the farmer in question had his mineral rights on his three quarter section, he now no 

longer has to pay the $14.40 or approximately one and a half mills on his assessment. The savings from 

legislation permitting farmers to use purple gas in farm trucks saves the average farmer $50 which again 

represents five mills to the farmer. 

 

Let us assume as well that the farmer has one child in Grade nine and one child in Grade ten, and let us 

assume that prior to the last two years the cost of textbooks amounted to $50 which is a very minor 

amount, again another savings of five mills. Education and health tax, an average of $12 per person over 

the province or $48 for the average family, another five mills off the taxes. The reduction in income 

taxes and other changes in education and health tax particularly for the farmer approximately $20 or 

another two mills to make a savings to the farmer in this municipality of 28 ½ mills over the last three 

years of Liberal Government. 

 

I do not deny, Mr. Speaker, that there have been some small increases in this municipality in the mill 

rate for schools and education, but, when you place the meagre increase mentioned by the Budget critic 

for the Opposition in his address beside the 28 ½ mills saved through Liberal legislation since 1964, it 

definitely indicates what has been accomplished by a Liberal Government in a very short period of time. 

 

I would like as well to indicate the savings to the individual who also lives in the village of Goodeve to 

which references were made by the Member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney). I would think that $2,500 

would be a fairly high assessment for an average home, and any home with this assessment receiving the 

homeowner grant receives assistance to the extent of 20 mills. Again, if he had children in Grades nine 

and ten it would mean another $50 or 20 mills, and similar tax changes as have been indicated 

previously with regard to education and health tax would bring the full savings to a resident of the 

village of Goodeve in the average home to a total reduction of 68 mills; I don‘t think they even had that 

many to start with. When you compare this, Mr. Speaker, with the small increase in mill rate suggested 

by the Member for Regina West, it once again indicates what has been accomplished by a Liberal 

Government since 1964. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, take as an example any home in the city of Regina, even a highly assessed home, 

and find that just in the case of a homeowner grant and the reduction of the education tax that there has 

been a reduction of some 20 mills to the taxpayers in a city such as the city of Regina. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this indicates more than any other measurement that can be made at this 

time, the success of this Government in carrying out its commitment to bring tax relief to the people of 

the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This does not at the same time take into account the many other dollars that have been realized by 

municipalities due to former municipal grid roads having been taken into the highway system. I here 

refer to my own constituency and to the road between Balcarres and Ituna, a total of 25 miles. If it had 

not been for this, the particular municipalities to which that road belonged would have paid out 

thousands of dollars in snow removal during the last two years since it‘s been taken into the highway 

system. 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

706 

Assistance was also given to urban centres in the construction of main streets; in my constituency the 

amount of $400,000 in the city of Melville and the town of Balcarres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that in the increased amounts that have been allocated for: equalization grants, 

snow removal assistance, urban road assistance, assistance to provide feeder roads, increased assistance 

to libraries, the lighted schoolhouse policy, and the Airstrip Improvement Program and anticipated 

savings due to new welfare policies, the picture I have painted this afternoon will be much brighter in 

1967 than it was even in 1966. 

 

I realize full well that there may be pockets or small areas that for one reason or another may not enjoy 

exactly the same benefits as the areas I have indicated, but I do believe I can assure the people of my 

constituency and the people of Saskatchewan that the Liberal party is going to see to a fair distribution 

of tax dollars to all areas of the province, both now and in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only major point of importance brought forward by the official critic had to do with the 

accusation that this was a deficit Budget because of the capitalization of grants for construction at the 

University, and also of the capitalization for construction of four-lane highways in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think for too long we have been leaving the impression that schools, hospitals and roads 

are dead weight debt or different from the loans for the Power Corporation and Telephones and do not 

return benefits and dividends to our province. I personally feel there is no undertaking which returns 

greater dividends than does education and the provision of educational facilities. 

 

Secondly, I believe in a province such as ours there is no facility that returns greater dividends in the 

long run to our province than a good highway system. I believe this is borne out by the ever increasing 

revenues received from the gas tax, licences, and also the millions of dollars that are spent by tourists 

who make use of our highways as we progressively improve them. 

 

I would be inclined, Mr. Speaker, to state that possibly we have not spread sufficiently enough 

expenditures over the future years in the fields I have mentioned, so that the taxpayer of today does not 

have to pay the entire expenditure for facilities and benefits that will be enjoyed for many years by the 

taxpayers of our province. Many of the benefits that we enjoy today we would never have enjoyed 

except for the courage and foresight of the people that have gone before and the courage to invest money 

in the future of our province. 

 

I believe, in the past and we will find in the future, that in almost every 25 year period, changing 

conditions make it necessary for much larger expenditures to be made by governments than can be 

handled by general revenues by the taxpayers of the day. I believe that we have arrived at such a 

position, not only in this province, but in almost every province in Canada. We have arrived at the time, 

when major facilities provided in past years, have now reached a point where they must be almost 

completely replaced and must be replaced quickly if we are to continue to progress and advance in such 

a manner that we can keep pace with the rest of Canada and the rest of the continent. 



February 24, 1967 

 

707 

We cannot live as an isolated unit, but must be prepared to develop along with those who surround us, 

and if possible advance even more rapidly than do our neighbours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been references in this Debate and I just want to briefly refer to them with 

regard to the state of agriculture in the Province of Saskatchewan and also references have been made 

with regard to the record of the Liberal party in the past regarding agriculture. I want to read you just a 

few figures to indicate to you the record of the attention to the problems of the agricultural producer 

down through the years by Liberal Governments in the past, not just the last few years which have been 

exceptional I will admit, but I‘m going to take the crop years of 1952-53 to 1956-57, and the first five 

years under a Conservative Administration in this country from 1957-58 to 1961-62. What do we find, 

Mr. Speaker? We find that in the five years of Liberal Administration from 1952-57 the total sales of 

Saskatchewan wheat amounted to 1,253,000,000 bushels, while in the same number of years under a 

conservative Administration they had sold only 1,157,000,000 bushels, giving the life I think for all time 

to the story that the Conservative party federally, was responsible for the marketing of Canadian grain. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we are to take another figure of the sales of Western Canada, taking two six-year 

periods, from 1951-52 and also from 1957-58 to 1962-63, what were the figures for those years? the 

sales of the farmers‘ wheat in Western Canada in the six years of Liberal Administration was 

$2,423,000,000 and in the six years of Conservative Administration, $2,300,000,000 bushels. In other 

words the sale of over 100,000,000 more bushels of wheat in the same period of years under a Liberal 

Administration than in the years of Conservative Administration. And when you go into the sale of all 

grains, you find that the figures are even greater for the period under Liberal Administration. there is one 

other figure I want to relate to you with regard to agricultural production and welfare in this province to 

which reference has been made from time to time. This has to do with the net income of farmers in our 

province. The net income of farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan for the last ten years under a 

Liberal Administration from 1947 to 1956 averaged $381,000,000. In the first six years under a 

Conservative Administration the comparable figure was $278,000,000 or more than $100,000,000 more 

a year net income to the farmers of our province under a Liberal Government than under a Conservative 

Government. I think, Mr. Speaker, that this indicates very clearly that if we were to take the last four 

years of great prosperity, we would find that the figures would show up even better for the 

administration of the present Federal Government in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, reference has been made on one or two occasions in this Debate with regard to the fact that 

over the past two years monies that have been budgeted for public works have not been expended, and 

that there have been delays in programs due to this fact. I think that Hon. Members realize that this is not 

just a fact of today but has been a recurring problem for many years. The Department of Public Works is 

really the servant of government and the servant of other departments. Other departments develop 

programs and then the Department of Public Works is given the job of producing the facilities for other 

departments to make use of. This has resulted in a number of years‘ programs being delayed or 

programs being changed from time to time, resulting in adverse effects on expenditures by the 

department in those particular years. 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

708 

In the years 1960, ‘62 and ‘64, large portions of the Public Works program were either changed or not 

carried out by the previous Government. In the year 1962, $1,166,000 of the Public Works program 

went unexpended; in 1961, $1,279,000 went unexpended; in 1960, $1,061,000 went unexpended; and in 

the year 1964, $1,183,000 of the budgeted expenditures were not spent by the Government of the day. I 

believe it would be expected that in the year 1965 with a new Government taking office, a new look 

would need to be taken with regard to various government programs that would affect Public Works 

expenditures. We therefore find that in that year, although as has been stated, $1,590,000 budgeted for 

was not spent. There was another $1,076,000 that was over-expended in order to complete programs that 

had already been started by the previous Administration. 

 

In the year 1966 new plans were formulated with the largest expenditure committed for the Technical 

Institution at Saskatoon. As all Hon. Members know, quite late in the year the new program with regard 

to nurses training again meant a revision in the plans for that institution. If it had been proceeded with, it 

probably would have ended up costing the Government of this Province and the people many dollars had 

we not waited until proper plans had been completed for this institution. Difficulty with regard to the 

procurement of land in the case of Dales House in Regina and decisions with regard to location of the 

new women‘s jail in Prince Albert were responsible for the delayed construction in both these instances. 

The third major item is the psychiatric wing at Prince Albert where the funds were frozen and payments 

made by means of a grant to the Prince Albert Hospital to provide the Government‘s contribution for the 

necessary services in this field. 

 

I believe I can assure Hon. Members that the Budget for the present year will be completely spent and I 

would hope that if dollars are available, that program will even be able to be overspent in cases where 

valuable work can be continued and completed in the next fiscal year. 

 

For some years now the previous Government and the present Government have been undertaking 

extensive administrative management studies of the Department of Public Works. It was finally decided 

in this past year that action should be taken with regard to the department reorganization in order to 

better carry out the functions for which the department was constituted. 

 

A new Planning Branch has been added to the Department. This Branch will be undertaking space-use 

studies to meet governmental requirements, as well as carrying out all requirement studies associated 

with the capital construction program of the Department. This will provide a new service to program 

departments in order to put into action the program requirements of the Departments. It is hoped that this 

Branch‘s activities will allow much more advanced planning of building requirements, provide for better 

construction scheduling, and allow the Government to get more for its money in building construction. 

 

It is hoped that the reorganization of the Department will provide more professional staff at the middle-

management level. This will allow a greater competence, particularly with regard to advance planning 

and construction supervision as they relate to the Department‘s capital construction programs. It is my 

belief that the Department has suffered for many years from a lack of professional staff, with subsequent 

deficiencies in construction supervision. 



February 24, 1967 

 

709 

The Saskatchewan Training School in Moose Jaw is probably an example of this problem. The 

institution was built in 1953 at a cost of approximately $3,700,000. Since that time just over $150,000 

have been spent in represented-building the structures. Close to $200,000 was spent this year on an 

emergency basis. Next year $310,000 more is proposed and an additional $280,000 will be required to 

complete the represented-building. In total, close to $1,000,000 will have to be spent on this institution 

just 12 years after it was constructed. Within two years after construction, roof failures occurred and 

bonding companies refused full responsibility, alleging that the failure had occurred because of poor 

workmanship. In some instances the structure shown on plans available is different from actual 

construction. Sawn timbers were used in some roof girders when glulam was called for, shrinkage 

occurred which contributed to early roof failures. In some cases, columns called for in perimeter walls 

were omitted. Glazed tiles in some locations have pulled loose due to non-anchoring of door frames and 

some evidence of poor mortar. These items indicate a mediocre level of construction supervision and 

contribute to excessively high maintenance and rebuilding costs. 

 

A further objective of the reorganization is to provide for a decentralization of management in the 

interests of providing local service to other departments and to the public with respect to space 

requirements and public building management. The province has been divided into six districts with a 

supervisor in each district: Prince Albert, North Battleford, Saskatoon, Weyburn, Moose Jaw and 

Regina. 

 

The studies also indicated a need to strengthen the middle-management areas of the Department to keep 

pace with the technological developments in building construction, operation and maintenance. There 

have been three civil engineers hired in the Maintenance and Operations Division who will direct the 

activities of the Operations, Maintenance, and Regina Operations Divisions. In addition to improved 

service, the Branch will not be in a position to initiate management techniques in the area of building 

maintenance and operations cost control and planned preventative maintenance programs for the 

province‘s multi-million dollar investment in public buildings. The Engineering and Architectural 

Branch has been strengthened with the addition of three engineering specialists in mechanical, 

structural, and electrical engineering. Two senior architectural positions have been added as well as a 

permanent engineering and architectural drafting service. These skills should provide for a higher level 

of design capability and construction supervision. 

 

Administrative procedures and systems are also being streamlined with more mechanical data 

processing and modern management techniques being employed. In such a reorganization our greatest 

problem, however, is recruitment of professional staff, particularly engineers, and this is slowing the 

implementation of the reorganization somewhat. However, it is hoped that this will improve and within 

12 months, the improvements expected from the reorganization should be showing read effect. 

 

The capital estimates for the next fiscal year which have been presented in the Provincial Treasurer‘s 

Report. I can assure Members, as I stated a few moments ago, will be carried out because of the 

increased activity in the Planning Branch. Most of the plans are now formulated for the construction that 

will be taking place in the 1967-68 fiscal year which will allow early tendering of projects and the 

completion of the program that has 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

710 

been adopted for the coming year. 

 

The major program of the Department will be in the field of education where estimated expenditures at 

the Saskatchewan Institution of Applied Arts and Science, Saskatoon, are $3,600,000. Improvements 

and changes at the Technical Institution at Moose Jaw are estimated at $140,000 and other minor 

improvements at this Institution are $32,000, making a total expenditure at these two Institutions 

estimated at $3,772,000. In the program for providing new facilities for the Department of Highways, it 

is estimated at $733,000, with the largest item being the construction of a maintenance repair depot at 

North Battleford at $450,000. The program which has been under way for the construction of equipment 

storage buildings will be continued with construction taking place in 1967-68 at St. Walburg, Moose 

Jaw, Shellbrook, Fort Qu‘Appelle, Kindersley, and Mile 97 on Highway No. 196. 

 

This year the Department of Public Works has taken over the major capital construction program of the 

Department of Natural Resources, involving construction of buildings which will result in an 

expenditure of $377,000, largely for tourist facilities and accommodations at Provincial Parks 

throughout the Province. The Department of Public Health will see a continuation of a program of 

repairs and renovations to the Saskatchewan Training Schools at Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, the 

Rehabilitation Centre at Regina, and the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford. The total cost of 

these improvements and renovations will be approximately $638,000. 

 

Here I want to turn for a moment to the program of renovations within the Legislative Building itself to 

which references have been made on a number of occasions in debate in this House and have also been 

referred to by Members of the other side of the House in political addresses throughout the province. I 

would remind you that in my remarks of March 1, 1966 in my Budget Address, I indicated quite clearly 

the approach that was to be taken by the Department of Public Works in initiating improvements to the 

Legislative Building. I would like to read to you briefly, the remarks that I made at that particular time 

with regard to improvements to this building and I quote: 

 

Initial studies indicate that for purposes of considering renovations, space in the building can be 

divided into two categories: 1. those which are used by the public, 2. those which are used for 

carrying on the work of the Government. The importance of the building to the public generally 

leads us to concentrate first on the public area. It is the intent that the renovations be approached 

through a spirit of restoration. The designed must maintain a deep respect for the building as a 

building of its period. Within this context it is proposed that renovations will consist of the 

follows: 1. Improvement of floors and wall materials in the corridors. Careful observation will 

reveal that the foyer, main stairway, rotunda and a few other areas were constructed with material 

of high quality in both appearance and fact. In the corridors leading away from the central area, 

compromises were made to reduce construction costs. Compare the cracked terrazzo, plaster and 

the wood finishes in the corridors with the marble finishes in those areas which are in the central 

part. 2. Construction 



February 24, 1967 

 

711 

of modern washrooms for the public and staff. 3. Improvement in the direction and intensity of 

lighting in the foyer, main stairway rotunda and corridors. Careful attention will be paid to the 

character of light fixtures. $. Improvement in the floors, walls and ceilings of the basement. major 

surgery is required to bring the basement up to a level reasonably compatible with the remainder of 

the building. 5, Possible changes in stringers, risers and balustrades in stairwells. 6, Construction 

of a multi-level observation in the exhibit area in the tower space above the rotunda. 

 

I was pleased to note in the remarks of the Member for Moose Jaw, (Mr. Davies) that he was pleased 

with the fact that renovations were going to take place and also suggested that renovations were going to 

take place and also suggested that more room be made available for legislative purposes. As I remember 

on that evening I didn‘t have time to complete all of my remarks which involved the changes for 

legislative purposes. On March 18, 1966, Mr. Davies made the following statement, and I quote: 

 

I was pleased to note, however, reference to the speech of the Minister of Public Works to the 

continuation of improvements in the Legislative Buildings. As all Members know, over the last 

decade considerable amounts of money have been spent in improvements in this building and I 

think all of us would want these improvements to continue. I would estimate that over the last 

decade that something in the order of $1,000,000 has already been spent. As I now understand it, 

the Minister has employed the services of a prominent architect and a number of improvements are 

being made to provide more facilities, especially for the satisfaction of the general public. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like at this point to appeal to the Minister and appeal to the Government to 

consider in this investigation, the rights of the Members of the Legislative Assembly, because 

originally, Mr. Speaker, the principal use of this Building was to revolve around legislative 

activities. Over the years, because of the increasing need for space and in some years, a tight 

financial situation, space for Members became more restricted. I think, therefore, that Members 

have not, because of this, secured all the space that would enable them to operate and function to 

their maximum efficiencies for the purposes for which they were elected. This has become a 

recurrent problem over the years. When I became Minister of Public Works in 1960, some steps at 

that time were taken to provide more space for the Opposition Members of the day. However, it 

was acknowledged by all that improvements would need to continue. I am suggesting at this point 

it would be a good time for us to make more progress now that the architect is to survey the 

building; now that other uses are to be considered. This is the opportunity for us to make sure that 

the Members of the Assembly are to gain that space, to gain those opportunities that will enable 

them to function as well as they can for the benefit of the constituents who put them there. 

 

I am now through with the quotation of Mr. Davies, and I am very pleased to report that along with the 

improvements that are being 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

712 

made this year, other actions of the Government have made it possible for us to free other space in the 

Legislative Building so that more importance can be given to the legislative functions of the building 

and more space eventually made available for Members on both sides of the House. Of course it is quite 

understandable that there will continue to be some fluctuation in space, because I am quite certain that, 

following the next elections, for example, the official Opposition that sits to your left, Mr. Speaker, will 

require much less space because of reduction in the numbers of their supporters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardiner: — Let us now review for you, the renovations that are under way at the present moment. 

An over-all design study for the basis for the new work focussed on the desire to improve the function, 

quality and appearance of the public area such as corridors and washroom facilities. We are also 

attempting to establish the building as a centre of the legislative functions of the Government. This has 

been undertaken by restoring some of the original architectural features, and in a more specific way, by 

providing more office accommodation for the Members of the Legislative Assembly. The work will 

spread over a period of several years so as not to unduly inconvenience the work of government, and 

this of course accounts for the work proceeding in stages. Generally, the building, in most of its public 

area has become run down with plaster cracked and loose, with panelling warped and cracked at 

doorways and with terrazzo cracked and crumpling, wherever deflections in the structural sub-floor 

occur. The terrazzo floors in the corridors were placed in 1912 and are now 55 years old and show 

severe deterioration in many placed, including the few places that still remain in the building. The 

condition of the original marble in the building and the beauty of design materials, it became obvious 

that this was the consistent way of improving and public area in the building. The value in using this 

material apart from its find appearance and durability is that the joints allow the sub-floor to deflect 

without causing ugly cracks, while damage, if it does occur, can be removed by replacing the marble out 

of surplus stocks. The Government was fortunate to obtain marble from the original quarry, and due to 

an operation change-over at the quarry, a low unit cost for the marble was obtained. This over-all cost of 

removing old and cracked terrazzo plus replacement with new marble will cost, not the $600,000 or 

$700,000 or $1,000,000 which has been quoted in the press by Members of the Opposition, but a total 

cost of $300,000 covering 31,100 square feet of flooring. The normal price which marble of this 

standard would run would be between eight and fifteen dollars per square foot, while the unit price 

obtained by the Department at this time was $4.50 per square foot. Because of conditions prevailing in 

the quarry which, as I stated, was the quarry from which the original marble was purchased many years 

ago, the total value of the marble installed today is $142,000. The rest of the work would have had to be 

done whether marble was placed, whether terrazzo was placed or anything else. The floor would have 

had to be removed and something put in its place in return. And so I would say that the total cost and the 

extravagant statement of my friends across the way have done nothing but harm to the fact that they 

approved last sessions, renovations to the most important building in this province. The number of 

tourists and visitors to the Legislative Building last year doubled the attendance of the previous year. 



February 24, 1967 

 

713 

a rate of increase which was phenomenal. this trend will undoubtedly increase and it goes without 

saying that we do not want to continue to put on display the most important public building in our 

province, looking more and more run down, shoddy and neglected. 

 

Much of the interior of the building is in serious need of repair and redecoration and this is most evident 

in the basement which has been a dungeon of crooked floors and dirty exposed mechanical piping, much 

of which is no longer operational. A new mechanical and electrical distribution system in an assessable 

crawl space has therefore been installed. In doing this work it has been discovered that all the old 

underground piping was totally corroded, and the collection of water and sewage around the footings 

took a period of two months to pump dry. This was a serious threat to the structural soundness of the 

entire building. Washrooms for visitors until now have been nonexistent and the washroom facilities 

near the dining-room have been inadequate. Public washrooms near the entrance foyer are being built 

this year and new washrooms are being built in the basement near the elevators directly below the public 

washrooms. 

 

The opening up of central areas below the rotunda for exhibition purposes, by removing deal storage 

vaults will provide for the first time, a proper and dignified place in the new central gallery for the 

display of portraits of dignitaries and also for other uses. The new side galleries will provide well lit 

areas for prints and other pictorial documentation to be exhibited. Generally, these new spaces will echo 

the central theme of the building inherent in the domed rotunda space leading to the Legislative 

Chamber. In the coming year major expenditures will be made to complete the improvement of the 

hallways and also to complete office accommodation both for MLAs and Ministers of the Government. 

As was stated at the beginning, the total over-all program will take some time to complete and together 

with other areas such as the cafeteria facilities, the Legislative Assembly itself, the other architectural 

features will continue to be dealt with as funds are made available for this purpose in future years. Mr. 

Speaker, because of arrangements that have been made for this time in the process of the Legislature, I 

would just like to close my remarks by stating that other remarks that I had to make can be made on the 

Estimates I believe, when I‘m dealing with those, and to say to Members of the Legislature that I will be 

supporting the Budget and of course will not support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on the Budget which the 

Government has brought down I should like first of all to express my gratitude to the people of the 

Gravelbourg constituency for the continuous support which they have given me during these last few 

years. I think I should also like to thank my staff in the Department of Labour and Department of 

Cooperation and the Workmen‘s Compensation Board for the loyal assistance which they have given me 

in the performance of my duties. I am convinced that the warm relations which they have established 

since 1964 between the people of Saskatchewan and our Government employees will continue in the 

future for the best interest of all. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is an outstanding Budget presented to us the other day. It was an 

exceptional and well 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

714 

delivered Budget Speech and with a responsible approach. It is quite evident that Premier Thatcher, the 

Provincial Treasurer has remembered that every dollar that he must spend must first be taken from the 

taxpayer. The problem of balancing budgets nowadays is really difficult, and this balancing I am proud 

to say, our Premier has done. This Government, Mr. Speaker, under the leadership of the Premier had 

therefore made efforts to curtail unnecessary and unessential spending. In this Budget, Mr. Speaker, the 

Government has genuinely tried to see that the services our Government is providing are in answer to 

the legitimate needs of people, realizing of course that our rapidly expanding economy and province 

require increased spending in such fields as education, university, health and highways. I do hope to 

have a little more to say on education shortly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

However, the most gratifying thing I find, as Minister of Labour, is the economy expansion that 

continued in 1966 and this expansion will continue for the coming year. You know, the Socialists across 

the way, my friends across the way, have been critical at all times. In fact one of our Socialist friends 

told his Pastor that he was afraid he was going to be of no use to the world because he had only one 

talent. ―Oh, that need not discourage you,‖ said his Pastor. ―What is your talent?‖ The talent is 

criticism‖, said the Socialist. ―Well‖, advised his Pastor, ―do with it what the man with one talent in the 

parable did with his. Criticism may be useful when mixed with other talents, but those whose only 

activity is to criticize might as well be put away, talent and all.‖ This we will do when the election 

comes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pretty good defence. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — However, Mr. Speaker, this does not mean that we have to be indifferent to matters 

like industrial safety, an adequate minimum wage or portability of pension credits. We believe that a 

Government which has the interest of people at heart should encourage industrial development where 

such problems have taken a definite shape. Thus this Government has embarked on a comprehensive 

highway program because it believes that such a program is necessary, a very necessary prerequisite for 

industrial expansion. 

 

At the same time we have increased the minimum wage twice, since I first became Minister of Labour, 

from $36.50 per week, the minimum wage first brought to $38, and then to $40. On a monthly basis, Mr. 

Speaker, this represents an increase of $15.17, which is more than the Members across the way have 

done for any comparable period during their administration. We also have introduced a revised formula 

for paying public holiday pay to employees in the construction industry. We are bringing in an 

Employees Wage Act, at which attempts to bring in have been made for the last 12 or 15 years, but 

which the Members across the way, when they were the Government, were not considering. We‘re 

bringing in the Pension Benefits Act. We have reduced hospitalisation and education tax. We have 

introduced homeowner grants; all these measures, Mr. Speaker, favour the lower income groups, 

especially our working people in offices. All these measures, Mr. Speaker, as I mention, favour lower 

income groups in office, shops and factories. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is this anti-labour? I suppose after 

all this that it was only natural that some shining knights in armour, the sad sacks across the way, would 

call our Government anti-labour. But what of it, Mr. Speaker, if it‘s not true? Since when have these 

unhorsed shining knights started 



February 24, 1967 

 

715 

to worry about the truth? Smear, smear! No matter how fantastic the smear is, some of it will remain, or 

so they obviously hope. You know, it does remind me of the Socialist approach to what they do. One 

rainy day, standing at a window, a well-known Socialist was asked how Socialists were going to bring 

about all these great changes that they made so much talk about. And he pointed to the rain, gentle, 

steady, and said in a voice no less gentle, ―I want Socialists to work like this, without noise and without 

fuss.‖ And then using another simile, under the earth are the burrows of the moles where we must work 

unobtrusively, slowly and gradually undermining the existing Government until such a day as it 

subsides. This is what they are doing in the meantime. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Labour, I‘m happy to know that the 

income across the Province of Saskatchewan has increased appreciably. Our farmers have been favoured 

with excellent crops, our Wheat Board has been successful in closing several deals on favourable terms, 

which have resulted in more substantial payments to our farmers than has been the case in the past. In 

addition to this, Mr. Speaker, we have entered the potash era. The output of oil and gas is at a high level 

and is increasing rapidly. The province has at last got a pulp mill which I‘m proud is going to provide 

eventual employment for 3,000 to 4,000 people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — However, Mr. Speaker, we Liberals or the Government are not so conceited as to 

claim credit for all the good things that have happened in Saskatchewan during the last three years. The 

prosperity of our farmers is undoubtedly due to the excellent weather conditions we have enjoyed. Of 

course our Socialists would claim this. The revenue which we get from our mining industry is due above 

all to the fact that Providence has put so much potash under our wheat fields. However, we do claim 

credit for improving the political climate in our province, as a result of which investors are more 

inclined to use their capital and know how to develop the latent resources of our province. We claim 

credit especially for the vast expansion of educational and training facilities which has taken place in 

recent years, and which is our pledge to the younger generation that they will not be left again to 

vegetate as they had been prior to 1964. You know, Mark Twain is reported to have said: ―Everybody 

talks about the weather but nobody does anything about it.‖ I suppose that if Mark Twain were to be 

sitting beside me, he would say: ―Everybody across the way talks about education but nobody explains 

why they did not do anything about it when they had a chance.‖ In the last three years this Government 

has made great strides, Mr. Speaker, and we have largely overcome the difficulty which beset the 

educational field prior to 1964. This is of great importance to labour and to all our working people, to all 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In this connection may I say one of the strangest things I have learned since I have taken office as the 

Minister of Labour, is the ambiguity of the word, labour. Basically, and needless to say, that labour 

means work. Everybody who performs some useful function in our society, therefore forms part of the 

labour force of society, since everybody must work for a living except those who happen to be disabled 

or those who are too young or too old 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

716 

for work. Labour is and should be something that we have in common; something that unites all 

members of the community. For a variety of reasons, some good and some bad, however, that term, 

labour, has come to be used or to be designated in only a small segment of our labour force. There are 

many people who would apply that name only to workers organized in labour unions. They would 

exclude from the definition professional people, who may call their respective organization by some 

name characteristic of the particular profession, but which is in effect a labour union. This state of 

affairs is regrettable inasmuch as it tends to create differences among the various components of the 

labour force where there should be no differences. There is no reason whatsoever why an engineering 

technologist should come under the definition of labour whereas a barber should not. Likewise, there is 

no reason why an electrician should be considered as labour whereas a nursing assistant is not. 

 

The time has come upon us where people in all walks of life must begin to study the problems of the 

growing economy, problems of what has been called the affluent society. In a society of this kind, it is 

inevitable that, along with our concern for improved working conditions and wages, we concern 

ourselves also with the qualification of our labour force, starting at the level of trade training, and 

moving to the level of university education. And then I ask you again, is this anti-labour? 

 

Members of this House, Mr. Speaker, will be interested to learn that two new trades have been 

designated under our apprenticeship program, those of glassworkers and heavy-duty equipment repair. 

Total training provided under our apprenticeship program has increased considerably during the past 

three years. I‘d like to draw the attention of this particularly to my famous friends across the way who 

have been criticizing this Government for some of its activities. From some 30,428 man-days of training 

in 1963, that‘s the last year they were in power, that number has increased in only three years to 62,077 

in 1966. I‘m asking you to note that this increase in man-days training is not anti-labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — This means, Mr. Speaker, that more young people in our province will get 

Government assistance toward the obtaining of educational and technical training which will prepare 

them for productive and useful lives upon graduation, and encourage still greater numbers of persons to 

avail themselves of technical training through the apprenticeship program, and this will help meet our 

rapidly growing manpower requirements. 

 

SUSPENSION OF SITTING 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, with reference 

to your remarks on the Orders of the Day, may I now ask for unanimous consent to suspend the sitting 

so that Members may meet the Board of Directors of Expo ‘67. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

VISIT BY DIRECTORS OF EXPO ‘67 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Members of the Legislative 



February 24, 1967 

 

717 

Assembly, I call upon the Premier of our province, the Provincial Treasurer, the Member for Morse, the 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher, to introduce our guests to the Assembly and to extend to them an address of 

welcome. In the name of our province, Mr. Thatcher. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislature, we are indeed 

honoured today to have with us the Directors of Expo ‘67. As Honourable Members know, they are 

holding their first meeting in Western Canada. Among the Members are His Excellency, Pierre Dupuis, 

the Commissioner General, former Canadian Ambassador in countries in Europe. Also we have the 

aggressive Mayor of Montreal. I hope when I have concluded my remarks that these gentlemen may 

wish to say a few words at the bar of the Assembly. May I suggest that they might come to the 

microphone where the Hon. Member for Saskatoon (Mrs. Sally Merchant) and the Hon. Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. A. R. Guy) are sitting. If no Hon. Member has any objection, I would ask them to speak 

from there. 

 

May I introduce at this time, each of these various gentlemen, and first of all, His Excellency, Mr. 

Dupuis. Would you mind standing, Mr. Dupuis? Mayor Jean Drapeau, Montreal, Mr. Robert Shaw, the 

Deputy Commissioner of Expo. It gives me great pleasure to introduce Mr. Herb Pinder, Saskatchewan 

Director of Expo. Mr. Norman Beaupre, Mr. Andre Rousseau, Dr. Solandt, Dr. Piche. The next 

gentlemen is Mr. Maurice Riel, a distant cousin of a very famous citizen of Western Canada. Mr. 

Philippe department Gaspebeauvien and Mr. Andrew G. Kniewasser, Mr. Kniewasser is the General 

Manager. I understand that these gentlemen that I mention will speak later. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  May I call upon the Leader of the Opposition, the Member for Biggar, the Hon. 

Woodrow S. Lloyd. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. S. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislature and our distinguished visitors, it is 

pleasing to have an opportunity to join with the Premier and all the rest of the Members in extending a 

word of welcome to our visitors and of appreciation for the fact that they are here. I wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, if I may be forgiven if I am entirely irrelevant and a bit irreverent in a sense, to say that it is 

nice to have a way to get Herb Pinder into the Legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd:  I‘m sure the people of Saskatchewan along with all the rest of the people of Canada have 

watched with mounting interest and with increasing excitement, the proof of the success of preparations 

which are being made for this central spot in the observance of our Centennial Year. We had the 

opportunity at noon – those of s who were fortunate enough to be at the luncheon – to hear something 

from the Mayor and the Commission of the problems and the anticipations and the promises of this 

extremely and exciting method of giving some credit to Canada‘s first one hundred years, and of giving 

us a send-off in our second one hundred years of the Canadian nation. When the Mayor of Montreal was 

speaking 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

718 

during the lunch hour, he used a phrase which caught my imagination very much. He referred to ―an 

apprenticeship in being a Canadian.‖ This it seems to me is in a sense a good definition of the entire 

Centennial observances and in particular of the Expo activities. Apprenticeship in the art of being a 

Canadian; there is much that we can profit and learn about this matter of being a Canadian during the 

second century of our history. When I had an opportunity some weeks ago along with the Deputy 

Premier and a Member of Parliament to speak to a group in Saskatoon about Centennial observances and 

about Canada, I thought the occasion which we were observing was worthy of the text – I found a text 

which I thought gave a rather apt description of Canada as well as providing some direction for the 

future. And that text was this: ―A good land, a land of brooks of water, and fountains and ducts that 

spring out of the valleys and the hills. A land of wheat and barley, of vines and fig trees and 

pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey.‖ And later it added: ―Here thou shalt eat bread without 

scarceness, thou shalt not lack anything.‖ That seems to me to provide a very good elaboration of the 

description of what we have in Canada and what we are celebrating. It seems to provide a very apt 

endorsation of the direction of where we in Canada can go. I want simply to add my thanks to the 

Directors that are here today for doing what they are doing to help us better describe our Canada and to 

help to point more effectively, the way of the future of a great Canadian nation. We hope they have 

enjoyed their stay here and we wish them all the success possible in their endeavours on their own 

behalf and on behalf of all the Canadian people. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  May I ask the Member for Arm River (Mr. M. P. Pederson) if he would like to rise at 

this time and say a few words. The Leader of the Tory Party in the Legislature in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, the Member for Arm River, Mr. Pederson. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. P. Pederson (Arm River):  Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members, Your Excellency and Members of 

your Board, like the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition, I am delighted to be given this 

opportunity to extend a word of welcome to you from those people that I represent in this House as well 

as from all the people in this province. I couldn‘t help but remember when I heard the words of 

introduction of the Premier, that several of you who come from other parts of Canada may have found 

our climate rather rough. I hasten to assure you that the fact that it is rather bitter and miserable out here, 

in no way reflects our attitude towards what you are doing on behalf of Canadians in preparing the site 

and planning for Expo ‘67. As a matter of fact I hope that you will realize that our climate is the 

converse of the warmth that we feel toward your efforts. We hope that you will in your efforts, be able 

to bring about a realization on the part of all Canadians, that we do in fact have a great nation; that we 

are a united nation, and we are fortunate people and have a great future in front of us. I ant to assure you 

that all the citizens of this province join with Canadians everywhere in their enthusiasm and in their 

support, for the projects of this Centennial Year. If I were to judge by the number of people who say that 

they are going to go to Expo this year, I don‘t know if the Premier will have much work to do in this 

province – all our citizens will be away. But I want to 



February 24, 1967 

 

719 

just conclude by saying to you once again how delighted we are for the work that you are doing, how 

pleased we are with the contribution that you are making to Canada as a whole, to wish you well in your 

work and your activities in the coming year and thank you on behalf of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  In matters legislative and parliamentary, I wish to call upon His Excellency, Pierre 

Dupuis, the Commissioner General for Expo ‘67 to address us here at this time, Mr. Dupuis. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pierre Dupuis (Commissioner General for Expo ‘67):  Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members of this 

Legislature, when the Prime Minister of Canada invited me to come to Ottawa in September, 1963, to 

offer me the post of Commission General, I had no idea of the reason why I was called in consultation, 

but when he said that this was offered to me as a wonderful occasion of serving my country, I had no 

hesitation in accepting. Because I thought there was no better tribute to be paid to Canada than to have 

on the occasion of our Centenary, a large number of nations coming to pay tribute to what our ancestors 

and our generations have done to discover and develop this country as they have. I must say that my way 

of reasoning has been convincing when I talked to foreign governments. One of the reasons that so many 

of them have accepted and are joining us in Montreal this year is because they want to show their 

appreciation for what Canada is doing in the world; for what you are doing, you gentlemen, in your 

Legislature, what others were doing at different levels to make this country a great country. There were 

other reasons naturally, because a universal and international exhibition is meant to give a true picture of 

the world as it stands in a different year in every field – technology, science, sociology, philosophy, 

culture, etc. We are in other words giving to the younger generation an explanation of the world we are 

living in, in trying to show them a few avenues leading to the future. We want to show them that what is 

uniting us is more important than what is dividing us. This is the main purpose of this exhibition and this 

is why I personally accepted without hesitation. We have a very large country, it is quite normal that 

because of distance, we, scattered all over, should have concentrated on our 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

720 

respective problems. But now that distance is abolished by speed, now that telecommunication gives us 

a sense of ubiquity, a country that remains so vast is getting smaller as far as our lives are concerned; 

and I think that Montreal at its exhibition this year will offer a wonderful occasion to discover each 

other, a wonderful occasion of appreciating each other and a wonderful sense of community. I want to 

finish on this word ―community‖ which I‘ve been trying to serve for some 45 years of life. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Thank you, Your Excellency, for the very good address which you have just given to 

us. Now I would like, before I call on the next gentleman, to draw your attention to the fact that we have 

a Lady Member on the other side of the House who unfortunately this afternoon is unable to be with us. 

However, just to keep things balanced and completely impartial, may I draw your attention to the fact 

that in this Legislature we are very proud of having not only two page boys on this side, but two page 

girls on that side. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I wish now to call upon the Mayor of the City of Montreal, Mayor Jean Drapeau to 

address the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jean Drapeau (Mayor of Montreal):  Mr. Speaker, I am sure you will understand how deeply 

moved I am, belonging to the lower of the three levels of government, to be invited to address the 

Members of a higher government, not only in the Parliament Building, but in the Legislative Assembly 

with all the Members at their desks during an adjournment of the regular meeting. I want to assure you, 

Mr. Speaker, that I won‘t abuse this privilege, I won‘t abuse it and I‘m fully conscious that I must avoid 

being charged by the Opposition of taking some of their time that they might want to use criticizing the 

Government. And I don‘t want to be charged by the Government of taking too much of the time they 

may need for the rebuttal. After reassuring you, Mr. Speaker, maybe I should also assure my fellow 

citizens at Montreal that I will not let this situation seduce me too much. I have no intention of making it 

a habit of addressing Parliament. It would be quite difficult for me to take it should I ever let the 

seduction operate over me. I would never live a day like today, but I feel I can rally all the parties on 

both sides of the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Drapeau:  But I will take just one minute to say that if I expressed at one time the gratitude of 

the City of Montreal toward Western Canada and especially Saskatchewan, I did it not only in my 

capacity as Mayor of Canada‘s metropolis, but the more I try to interpret my own feelings, I come to the 

conclusion that I do it above all as a Canadian citizen. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 24, 1967 

 

721 

Mr. Drapeau:  Expo ‘67 may prove to be the turning point and will really be a new departure for 

Canada. Thank God this will happen in the Province of Quebec in the metropolis of Canada, Montreal. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

RESUMPTION OF PROCEEDINGS 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

Mr. Speaker, resumed the Chair at 5:09 o‘clock and the Assembly resumed debate on the Budget Motion 

and amendment thereto. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, I‘d like to say at this point, may I point out that in a 

dynamic society it is not enough to have good policies and good programs, but they must result in 

services for the people who need them in the communities where they live. We have sought and we have 

been largely successful in our endeavour to maximize the availability of training facilities throughout 

our educational system. I‘m drawing this particularly to the attention of the Members across the way 

who have been criticizing the Government for lack of building of physical plants. You must remember, 

Mr. Speaker, that on previous occasions they have built white elephants, technical institutes that have 

remained open only from 9 o‘clock in the morning to 3 o‘clock in the afternoon for approximately six 

months of the year and the rest of the time you could not get students in. I was quite aware of that when 

I became Minister of Labour. I tried to have people into the classes after a certain date and of course 

there was no one available to teach them. We immediately changed that and we are now making it 

possible to get the maximum utilization of the plants, consequently the increase in training. It‘s not the 

buildings that count but it is what comes out of these buildings, Mr. Speaker. I may say at this point we 

may not be going as fast as we would like to, but we are going much faster than our predecessors. In 

terms of fees, the Saskatchewan students for example pay proportionately less than students in any other 

province. and this is of great importance for our working families who want to send their sons and 

daughters to universities and to young men and to young girls who want to work for a living while 

completing their education. And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is this anti-labour? At the present time we in 

Saskatchewan have full employment although this is the month of February, which is the worst from the 

standpoint of unemployment owing to the severe winters and climatic conditions. The Dominion Bureau 

of Statistics estimates that only some 2.6 per cent of our labour force is now unemployed and the only 

people who could be classified as unemployed are those who are partially disabled, and those who have 

not got the required training. 

 

The shortage of skilled manpower persists. Why are we short of this skilled manpower? This is a 

question I would like to ask the Members opposite. Why are we short of this skilled manpower? Because 

after all it takes several thousand man-hours to train a young man or girl to the desired level of technical 

proficiency. Had the previous Government not been utterly incompetent, they would have done 

something about it, but they didn‘t If they had been concerned with the truth, the gentleman across the 

way would have come forward and confessed their sins today that they didn‘t do what they should have 

done. But no, it is so much easier to blame the Government today for not straightening out in three years 

what it took them 20 years to botch up. 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

722 

Yes, that‘s right – 20 years to botch up. This is why our technical training is so much behind. The 

greatest injustice to labour has been done in the last 20 years under the former Government for not 

giving our youth and our untrained work-force a fair shake, for not providing them with necessary 

educational facilities. In other words, Mr. Speaker, they sold our youth and our workers down the river. 

 

A diversified economy goes hand in glove with the urbanization of our population and fewer and fewer 

people are required to work on our mechanized farms and more and more people will come to live in our 

towns. thus an increasing number of people will and must make a living in industrial and commercial 

occupations. Complete statistics from the 1966 Census of Canada are not yet available. However, we 

estimate that at the present time, three-quarters of our labour force is occupied in the various industries 

other than agriculture. This growing complexity has required also a diversification of Government 

policies. The common denominator of our policies of course remains the idea of industrial development. 

however, we want to remain flexible enough so as to be able to deal adequately with any problem that 

may arise out of the adjustments necessary to grow in a dynamic economy. 

 

Much has been said about the Hillis Report. Now I‘d like to give the facts as they are. The Hillis Report 

has been quoted over and over again or I should say, Mr. Speaker, has been misquoted. The quotes have 

not been complete. My Socialist friends across the way have the uncanny knack of quoting out of 

context the facts in the Hillis Report. As is well known, Mr. Speaker, the statistics of the Saskatchewan 

labour force which we get from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics leave a great deal to be desired. 

According to figures published in the Saskatchewan Economic Review of March, 1964, the non-

agricultural labour force of June, 1963 was 193,000 people. According to a special communication 

which we received from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics on March 8, 1966, our non-agricultural 

labour force in January, 1966 was 240,000. From additional information published monthly by DBS, it 

may be seen that between January and December, 1966, employment in Saskatchewan had risen in that 

one year by 12,000 people. 

 

Mr. W. E. Smishek (Regina East): — Oh come on. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — All right, you can laugh. But you have to refute DBS. These are not my figures. I now 

refer you to something – Dominion Bureau of Statistics special table, catalogue No. …take your pencil 

and check it but don‘t use Socialist arithmetic. DBS special table catalogue No. 9603-525. Check it my 

friend. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — What does the Hillis Report say? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — You know all the answers. Check it. And on this basis, the total increase in 

employment since 1963 could be estimated at 59,000. However, this figure of 59,000 could be too high 

because the figure has turned out to be somewhat inaccurate. Now, when that figure is corrected, it 

should be and, when on the other hand an allowance is made for further growth since I said last 

December, a more reliable estimate can be made. And such an estimate shows that between 1963 and 

the present moment, the number of jobs in industries other than agriculture has increased by 

approximately 45,000 and a more accurate figure could be 



February 24, 1967 

 

723 

in the neighbourhood of 49,000. Who knows? It could be more if it had not been for the socialist 

policies to chase out of the province our young people for those years. The only problem and the only 

reason that it is not more is that we did not have enough people in the province to fill the jobs. The 

figure could have been much higher. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre:  These fellows across the way always speak of anti-labour. The Youth Agency which 

was set up some time ago by the Provincial Government is organizing a counselling service for our 

young people both employed and unemployed. This mobile counselling service has just been launched. 

It is the first of its kind on this continent. Its purpose is to advise our young people across the province 

of existing job opportunities and also of existing training opportunities. We do not wish to keep in the 

dark our young people in the town and country. Darkness is for those who have something to hide. Some 

of our critics obviously love darkness. I wonder what they‘re trying to hide. Some shady deal or their 

rank incompetence? We want light. We want to have more information on what goes on in this province 

and elsewhere in Canada, and we want useful information in the hands of our young people who are the 

hope for tomorrow. 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — Chocolate bar eaters, eh! 

 

Mr. Coderre:  The former Government has been most vociferous about what is being done. While 

they cry in the wilderness, we act. I‘ve just outlined, as Minister of Labour, why I am proud of this 

Government‘s activities, this Government‘s action and I would say it is not anti-labour. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Is there a turkey on the chocolate bar? 

 

Mr. Coderre:  Much could be said about the Women‘s Bureau; about the Boilers and Pressure 

Vessels Branch. I have so much to say, Mr. Speaker, about the activities of my Department, Labour 

Standards Branch, that there is no end to what we can say. Some of our critics across the way, especially 

the musty steers, I mean the musketeers across the aisle seldom fail to suggest that labour management 

relations in Saskatchewan are not as good as they might be. As usual, Mr. Speaker, they‘re wrong. They 

are wrong even in thinking that they will be able to deceive somebody. I want to stress that the time lost, 

due to strokes in industries under Provincial jurisdiction in Saskatchewan, remains relatively low. More 

time has been lost through strikes in industries under Federal jurisdiction, especially in railway 

transportation. By the way, railway strikes are only one of the factors beyond our control which plague 

our economy. But, while people strike, railroads close. 

 

I do not agree with everything that Dr. Forsey, Director of Research for the Canadian Labour Congress, 

says, but I agree with him that there are cases where strikes are absurd and harmful and must be 

prevented. last fall the Canadian Transport, the official publication of the Canadian Brotherhood of 

Railway, Transport and General Workers, quoted Dr. Forsey, the Research Director of the Canadian 

Labour Congress as follows: ―We must face the fact that compulsory arbitration is inevitable in a 



February 24, 1967 

 

 

724 

railway strike. No Government, even one presided over jointly by David Lewis and Claude Jodoin, 

could allow a rail strike to last more than a few days.‖ And he says, ―I am becoming convinced that 

strike in this vital industry is simply a ritual method for railway workers to lose a week‘s wages. instead 

of strike weapon there should be some kind of legislation that would guarantee the workers fair wages 

and working conditions.‖ 

 

Needless to say, similar absurd situations may arise in places under Provincial jurisdiction. This could 

become especially embarrassing in certain essential services such as hospitals, light and power plants. 

We have been criticized from time to time for having introduced the Essential Services Act last year. 

This criticism has come mostly from backward groups or from politically prejudiced labour officers, 

who would have liked our province to remain an under-developed area instead of growing and 

prospering, and, I said that to many of them, through a well-balanced industrial expansion. It is 

gratifying to see, therefore, Mr. Speaker, that on basic issues like those involved in our Essential 

Services Emergency Act, there is a general agreement in principle. The Province of Newfoundland did 

something about it. It is also people in responsible positions in various political parties and various 

professional and labour organizations who realize that something can be done. The Canadian people and 

their elected representatives are not in business looking for the philosopher‘s stone like my friends 

across the way. We may not be able to solve all our economic, social and political problems once and 

for all. We are in the business of developing practical though often temporary solutions to practical 

problems arising out of the needs of everyday life. But we are right as may be seen from the fact that 

legislation has been brought in by Newfoundland and Quebec. Just recently Quebec had its problem, 

seeing danger in hospitals; the hospital patients being deprived of nursing care. So much more can be 

said. My time is getting very short and I promised my friend, the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) a 

few minutes of time to speak. These great standard bearers of labour, the Smisheks, the Davieses, were 

not too vociferous, Mr. Speaker, when Bill No. 2 was brought in. They were quite vociferous when 

some of the members of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and the labour organizers were in the 

gallery, but then once they walked out, they quietened down. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Check the records! 

 

Mr. Coderre:  But now they‘re screaming from the top of their voice, and from every house-top 

about this legislation. This screaming and bellowing about what should be done. But when the 

legislation was on the floor of this Legislature they‘re almost silent. If people really believe in doing 

something in opposing legislation, then they can do so without just getting up and saying a few words. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw): — Mr. Speaker, the Member well knows that when this item of 

legislation was up for discussion… 

 

Mr. Coderre:  Mr. Speaker, he‘ll have an opportunity to speak. He has no point of order. I‘m glad he 

gave me this opportunity to say something. If you believe in something strongly enough you will 

bulldog and hold on to it but you don‘t get up after speaking for five minutes. They had an amendment 

or so and then they 



February 24, 1967 

 

725 

sat down and didn‘t do anything about it. They got up over and over again in the Committee of the 

Whole which is what they should have done in Opposition. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is quite obvious that I 

will vote for the motion and not for the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways):  Mr. Speaker, the time is very short and I think it is to the 

advantage of some of the Members opposite that I will bring down my crash highway program on 

Monday for the benefit of the former Socialist Minister of Highways, the Hon. Member from Tisdale, 

(Mr. C. G. Willis). I think the shortness of time is also for the benefit of the Member for Regina North 

(Mr. Whelan). I was going to rebuff some of the statements that were made the other day on 

Government Insurance. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:20 o‘clock p.m. 


