



















































Hansard: February 22, 1967


566 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

14th Day 
 

Wednesday, February 22, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to your attention the fine group of 

students from Kinistino High School in the east gallery. They have come here, 200 miles to visit our fair 

city today and I‘m sure you‘ll all join with me to wish them a very educational tour. They are led here 

by their teachers, Mr. Dennis Buck and Mr. Jim Kurmay, and the bus driver and his wife, Mr. & Mrs. 

Clifford Larson. I want to say that I hope the Members of the House will join with Member to wish them 

a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like through you and through the 

Members of this Assembly to bring greetings to a fine group of students in the west gallery from Buena 

Vista School in Saskatoon. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Hoge and I‘m sure that all 

Members will join with me in wishing them a very educational and entertaining day and a safe trip 

home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart: (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome on behalf 

of the Legislature, 20 students from the Leask High School, grade 12 students accompanied by their 

teachers, Sister Cecilia and Sister Marie Ellis. They tell me they had to get up at 4 a.m. this morning. I 

hope they enjoy their stay here and I hope they enjoy their day and I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day, I‘d like through you to 

call the House‘s attention to a sparkling group of young people who are in the top rows of both the west 

and the east galleries from William Grayson Public School in the friendly city of Moose Jaw. They are 

the grade eight classes and they are accompanied by their principal, Mr. W.T. Olson and Mrs. S.E. 

Boller, teacher of English. I think, Mr. Speaker, they are unquestionably as superior a group as ever 

graced the galleries. Everyone will wish to join in welcoming them here this afternoon and I hope that 

something of the rather hard-to-understand processes of the parliamentary form will be explained by 

their visit and that it will further encourage them to interest themselves in these onward and political 

matters and they‘ll come back here often. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I would like 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

567 

again today to welcome and introduce to you and through you to the other Members of the Assembly 

another group of students. I believe they are sitting in the east gallery. There are 39 in number and they 

are a portion of the 200 grade eight students from the Junior High School in Weyburn. Today this group 

is accompanied by two of the teachers, Mr. McLeod, and Mr. Johnston, and again their bus driver, Mr. 

Tait. I know that all the Members will join me in expressing our desire that their visit with us proves 

very pleasant and profitable and I‘m sure we all wish them a very safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — As there seems to be a little bragging going on, I have 

a very select group of students from a new school in Regina South, the W.C. How School. These grade 

eight students are under the direction of Mr. Ochitwa and they are sitting in the Speaker‘s gallery. I trust 

that their stay with us will be most educational and informative and I hope not too entertaining. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all Members of the Assembly I would 

like to take this opportunity to welcome a group of students from Henry Kelsey School in Saskatoon. 

Kelsey is very close to me in more than one way. They are situated in the Speaker‘s gallery and I don‘t 

see their principal. Mr. Russel there, although I do want to say that I am aware that he has shown a 

considerable amount of leadership in his school to his students in the matter of Jubilee and Centennial 

projects and I think that they are to be commended for following his leadership. I hope they have an 

interesting day here and a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to your attention and through you to 

welcome to this House a lively and intelligent-looking group of students from the Wascana School in 

Regina West. They are seated in the west gallery in the front rows here. They have had a tour of the 

Legislative Building and are now sharing with us our session this afternoon. I‘m sure that you, Mr. 

Speaker, and all of us would wish to extend our best wishes to them for an educational and enjoyable 

visit to our Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. W. Ross Thatcher 

(Provincial Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair, and the amendment thereto by Mr. 

Blakeney (Regina West). 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of my remarks today, I 

wanted to take this opportunity to congratulate the Members across the Chamber in making some 



February 22, 1967 

 

568 

effort to be sure that the young people of this province are involved in the political process which we all 

hold so dearly. I notice an ad that appeared in the Prince Albert Herald; I‘m told that it relates to the 

Northern Saskatchewan Youth Conference which was held on February 18 in Prince Albert and was 

sponsored by the Prince Albert Young Liberal Association. I just want to say something about the 

success of that convention. I‘m sure the Hon. Members across the way put all they had into it to make it 

a success. They had some of the northern lights there, one was Hon. D.G. Steuart from Prince Albert and 

then there was the junior Member from Milestone, (Mr. MacDonald). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — I notice also a report of the convention in the Prince Albert Daily 

Herald, February 20. It says: 

 

More than 150 high school students from Prince Albert and surrounding areas attended this 

particular conference. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with this I think our party deserves a little bit of praise too. We held a 

convention in Saskatoon the same weekend. I‘d like to report to the Chamber that we had 650 delegates, 

not just 150. I want to report to the Chamber that at the banquet that evening we had 1,500. We had a 

very outstanding address by Stephen Lewis, the son of David Lewis. 

 

An Hon. Member: — …never hold them all in one city. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Are you trying to tell me it‘s just a regional conference? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): My first words, Mr. Speaker, in the Budget Debate must be to 

congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) on the forceful manner in which he put forward his 

Budget Speech. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I must congratulate our financial critic, the Member for Regina 

West (Mr. Blakeney) for the powerful presentation he gave. As was his duty, he sought out the 

weaknesses in the Treasurer‘s Budget so effectively that the Government backbenchers are completely 

disheartened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Our financial critic stated that he would not deal with the matter of 

drugs in the Medicare plan because of a time limitation. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Members of this 

Legislature, especially those to your right need to be reminded that a long time ago they promised to 

implement a plan of prescription drug benefits into Medicare. Alas, another solemn Liberal broken 

promise. 

 

I suppose the hon. Members in the House saw the picture and description in the Leader Post some time 

ago about an exhibit at the Expo ‘67 this year. The picture is of a spider that spins a web, not a 

conventional-shaped web, but a rectangular-shaped 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

569 

web. The purpose of this particular exhibit is to show the influence of marijuana, one of the psychedelic 

drugs that we hear so much about these days. Well, they tell me the more drug they give the spider the 

wilder and more unconventional his web becomes. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer of this province (Mr. Thatcher) reminds me of that little spider. He spins his 

little distorted web to catch votes but it won‘t catch too many, Mr. Speaker, because it‘s full of holes. 

Psychedelic drugs, it is reported, tend to blur some aspects of reality and to accentuate some areas of 

perception, thereby giving a highly coloured and largely distorted picture to the partaker. True to the 

symptoms the Treasurer‘s reds are redder, his blues are bluer. He shows a distorted interest in Socialists 

and Socialism, mentioned 13 times in his address. The Treasurer‘s escape from reality has him believing 

that Saskatchewan‘s population is bounding ahead when in reality the population growth is slowing 

since he came to office. He believes he is reducing taxes, when in reality net increases in taxes, fees and 

other charges are climbing faster than they were in 1964 and prior to that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — His grandiose election promise of 80,000 new jobs in four years will 

never be met. Actually he is creating net job opportunities at a slower rate than the previous CCF 

Government. This fly-now-pay-later Budget is designed to deceive the Saskatchewan voters. Why is it 

deceiving? It states its terms and conditions, but, Mr. Speaker, it must be judged by past budgets of this 

Government. Money will remain largely unspent in important vital areas such as technical schools, as it 

was in 1965 and 1966; such as continuing education as it was in 1965 and 1966; such as Student Aid 

Fund Scholarships as it was in 1965 and 1966; such as the Department of Health as it was in 1965 and 

1966; the capital budget of the Department of Public Works as it was under-spent in 1965 and 1966. As 

a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it seems to be popular to quote dialogues in this House so I‘m going to just 

quote a little dialogue here: 

 

   Oh Mr. Premier. 

 

‗Gotta run Wilf‘ said Thatcher bounding past Mr. J.W. Gardiner, his Minister of Public Works, 

and he bounded down the stairs and into his new black Chrysler which was still just a little bit 

creased after last night‘s meeting with the aeroplane. ‗Don‘t know what I‘m gonna do with Wilf, 

he‘s a good man, but he‘s obsessed with putting up new public buildings, any new public 

building‘. 

 

   ‗I want to build a building, Ross‘, he says. 

 

   ‗No, Wilf, not today Wilf‘. Then if he‘s not back a few days later. 

 

   ‗Today?‘ 

 

   ‗Not today, Wilf‘, I tell him as nice as I can. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What paper is that? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — I‘ll be glad to reveal what 



February 22, 1967 

 

570 

paper it is as soon as I get done with the quote. 

 

Then the other day I catch him slipping the building cost into the annual estimates as if I won‘t 

spot it, like it‘s petty cash or something. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this article, if anything, understates the case as it exists in the 

department of Public Works, Page 745 of the Public Accounts; I‘m not going to the Estimates because 

Liberal estimates aren‘t too accurate or reliable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — I‘m going to the Public Accounts, Department of Public Works, 

Psychiatric Centre, Prince Albert. Total appropriation for the year ending March 31, 1966, $250,000 

unexpended portion, $250,000; South Saskatchewan Base Hospital, Regina, appropriation $100,000; 

amount unexpended $100,000; Sanatorium, Saskatoon, appropriation $115,000; unexpended amount 

$110,941; Provincial Correctional Institute, Regina, $1,510,000 appropriated; unspent, $938,268.90; 

Provincial Correctional Institute in Prince Albert, appropriation $200,000; unspent $154,388.50; Dales 

House, Regina, appropriation $155,000; amount unspent $152,315. Now for the Members over there 

that were eager to check the accuracy of my statement, I would suggest that this quote was taken from 

The Canadian, February 11, 1967. They can check it out themselves. 

 

There are many other areas that cause me to doubt the Government‘s work. Take for example traffic 

safety. There have been huge increases in liquor profits. In 1964, the liquor profits Mr. Speaker, there 

has been no corresponding increased provision for the treatment of alcoholism. I just want to refer for a 

moment to the Resolution that we submitted in this House in March, 1965. Moved by Mr. E. Whelan, 

seconded by my fellow Member from Saskatoon, Mr. A.M. Nicholson ―that this Assembly recommends 

to the consideration of the Government that a special Legislative Committee be appointed to conduct an 

enquiry, following prorogation of the Assembly and during the intercessional period, into all matters 

relating to highway traffic safety and that such Committee review present traffic laws, the enforcement 

of such laws, consider measurements to reduce the number of accidents and the loss of life and property 

resulting therefrom, and hear representations regarding highway traffic and safety from interested 

citizens and organizations.‖ I agreed with that Resolution, Mr. Speaker. The Resolution was amended by 

a Government Member to include, in short, ―the relationship between the drinking of alcohol and 

accidents and consideration of measures to reduce the number of accidents and the loss of life:, and I 

agree whole-heartedly with the amendment. I think the Government was wise in putting forward this 

amendment. I think the Government was wise in putting forward this am. The amended motion was 

supported unanimously by this Legislature. I must refer at this time to the report of the Traffic Safety 

Committee. The recommendations of this Committee had certain reservations and one reservation had to 

do with alcohol. this ‗alcohol and accidents‘ was the reason the Government amended the Resolution 

and that is the reservation; the Government was not prepared, or at the least the majority of the 

committee members were not prepared to act on the recommendation the Committee made with regard 

to alcohol at this point. I am hoping they will seek that earliest opportunity to act on that matter. Our 

policy… 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

571 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — The Hon. Member happens to say something that isn‘t correct. 

I know that he doesn‘t want to. He wasn‘t a member of the Committee. Anything that he knows about 

the Committee, presumably he read in the report and the report is an unanimous report so far as the 

alcohol is concerned. Everybody agreed that we should press the Federal authorities for action so far as 

the rule is concerned. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I did read the report and there are reservations in 

the report, and I‘m sure that Attorney General is perfectly aware of the reservations contained in this 

report, the same as I am. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Yes, but you said that the Members of the Committee didn‘t agree. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — He‘s entering the debate on a point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the policy of this party will be to 

follow at least as a minimum the recommendations of the Traffic Safety Committee in whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — Another area. What about the cost of living? This Government, Mr. 

Speaker, refused to discuss this pressing problem in September of 1966; they refused CCF MLAs the 

opportunity to discuss the high cost of living in December, 1966 when this House sat. A report of the 

Three Province Royal Commission on Cost of Living will probably become public after the next 

provincial election or at least so close to that date that the Members of the Government will be able to 

avoid the issue, the cost of living. I challenge the Premier to state that the date of the next provincial 

election will not fall in the time period that I have outlined previously. Our policy, Mr. Speaker, is well 

known and we will introduce legislation in the field of consumer protection at the earliest possible 

moment. 

 

Referring back to elections, it has been about 23 years since the Liberal party called an election in 

Saskatchewan. It is quite evident, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan people don‘t too often allow them 

to be in a position to call elections. Simply put, they just don‘t trust Liberals. Twenty three years ago in 

1944, the Liberals called an election, not after the customary four years, Mr. Speaker, not after the legal 

limit of five years, Mr. Speaker, but after they had extended their life by one more year; six years, and I 

suggest if that law had been tested in the courts of this country, it would have been found ultra vires, 

playing politics with the election date, Mr. Speaker. the CCF called elections five times, every time, four 

years apart. The people of Saskatchewan can rely on the CCF party to hold elections at regular intervals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 22, 1967 

 

572 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon): — For the benefit of the young people in Saskatchewan, and I see some 

of them across the way there, the junior Members from Cannington and Last Mountain, and Milestone, I 

want to remind them of the dire consequences of playing politics with the election date again as the 

Liberal party did in the past. They may not remember what happened then. After all they were just little 

fellows then. 

 

As you may have gathered, Mr. Speaker, I must support the CCF amendment. Mr. Speaker, I cannot 

support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. L.M. Larson (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to welcome the students that 

are in the Assembly. I wish their stay to be a pleasant one and may you all have a very safe and pleasant 

journey home. I hope the storm will not interfere with your travels. 

 

Now this is the first opportunity that I have taken to participate in debate in this session and I do want to 

use this opportunity to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer on the very able presentation of the Budget. 

He did a very commendable job. I want also to join with other Members who have congratulated the 

Hon. Member from Milestone (Mr. Macdonald) on his appointment to the Cabinet as Minister of Social 

Welfare. It is my hope and belief that he will use his many talents wisely and well and that the people of 

Saskatchewan who will need his services and the decisions of his Department will benefit. may I also 

take the same opportunity to extend my best wishes to the Ministers who, during the past year have 

changed their portfolio. May their new ventures be both rewarding and fruitful. 

 

Now, Pelly, Mr. Speaker, is basically an agricultural constituency. We therefore have all the various 

problems that are associated with farming. Like many other farming communities in Saskatchewan, we 

have seen and felt the impact of the agricultural revolution. We were at one time considered to be one of 

the most densely populated areas in the province as far as farms go. Half-section and quarter-section 

farms were common. Anything larger at that time was considered a fairly large farm. Today, of course, 

all this has changed and is changing or is in great need of change and improvement. Although we have a 

fair network of highways in my constituency there are many parts and many portions of it, especially in 

the north that will never directly benefit from these highways. The largest town in Pelly constituency is 

Kamsack with a population of some 3,100 people. It can therefore be seen that we are basically an 

agricultural constituency. In Kamsack alone its elevator system has handled a total volume of nearly 

2,000,000 bushels of grain last year, and has an annual average over the last ten years of 1,500,000 

bushels. Being this kind of a constituency, it‘s natural that I should be looking for what the Budget 

contains by way of programs and expenditures for our main industry. There are three main areas of 

concern that I want to spend some time on. These are the areas of farm programs and needs, roads, 

taxation. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, before I go into this I want to spend a few minutes in this, Canada‘s Centennial 

Year to pay tribute to the pioneers who have made this great country of ours possible. Without their 

courage and sacrifices, Saskatchewan and Canada as 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

573 

we know it today would not exist. When we stop to consider their accomplishments and weigh their 

achievements, we see the read challenge that faces us as a province and as a nation for the next one 

hundred years. It is very fitting indeed that we should take this occasion to celebrate and be merry. Expo 

with all its pomp and show is indeed a very worthwhile effort and to a large extent displays some of our 

country‘s last one-hundred-year achievements. On the other hand, if we sincerely want to keep faith 

with our pioneers, we must pause and consider our needs and wants. Having done this, it therefore 

becomes the duty of every Canadian to plan and work for the fulfilment of these plans. If we are going 

to bring about the full vision of our pioneers for our country we must accept the challenge. 

 

I want to now spend a little time dealing with farming and the Budget. Some of my observations will no 

doubt be a little surprising and disturbing. Let us first take a look at the industry as it exists today. In 

spite of all claims of industrial development, farming is still by far the province‘s most valuable 

business. About $4,500,000,000 of capital is used by farmers by way of investments. This is in the form 

of land, buildings, machinery and livestock, etc. The agricultural labour force consists of roughly 

135,000 people. These are owners and those employed directly in the industry. There are about 

65,000,000 acres of land in farms; of this some 45,000,000 are improved or cultivated. The livestock 

population is roughly 2,250,000 head of cattle, less than 500,000 of hogs, as well at 150,000 sheep. 

 

During the last 15 years there has been a significant change in the pattern of farming. The size of farms 

has grown from an average of 550 acres in 1950 to 780 acres in 1965. There has been an even greater 

change in diversification. In 1950 there were some 316,200 milk cows on farms. In 1965 this number is 

dropped to approximately 160,000. The number of all cattle, however, has increased during the same 

period from 1,200,000 to approximately 2,200,000. The number of hogs in 1950 stood slightly over 

500,000 while today it‘s down to approximately 425,000. The number of farms today stands at 

approximately 80,000 which represents a major reduction from an all-time high of something under 

120,000. 

 

Another very important factor relating to agriculture is the fact that many of our service, trade, and 

manufacturing industries in the province are based on the needs of farming. A very large part therefore 

of the whole economy is directly dependent on what happens on the farms, on the farming economy. 

 

For the second year in a row Saskatchewan has produced over $1,000,000,000 and the impact of this 

tremendous effort has been felt from cost to coast. It will continue to be felt as farmers spend throughout 

the coming year. In taxes to municipalities alone for general municipal purposes farmers paid in 1965 a 

total of some $109,000,000. Add to this the amount spent for clothing, food, fertilizers, chemicals, 

repairs, as well as machinery, cars and trucks, and it is easy to see why so many people in Saskatchewan 

depend either directly or indirectly on what goes on in farming. 

 

With an industry of this size and this importance it is very natural to look for what the Budget has by 

way of appropriations. I was very dismayed, Mr. Speaker, at what I found. Out of a total Budget of some 

$300,000,000, that could be allotted to Saskatchewan‘s most important industry is a meagre 3.84 



February 22, 1967 

 

574 

per cent of the total expenditure. Out of a 51-page speech the only reference to farmers and farming is 

found on page 31 where 18 lines apologetically mention the farmer. Again, Mr. Speaker, it must have 

been an interesting dialogue between the Treasurer and the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane). I am sure that the Minister must have complained at having to present a program that is 

entirely the same as the former CCF Government\s. I‘m sure that the Minister must have suggested 

some new programs that are distinctly Liberal. At this point the Treasurer must have asked what the 

Minister had in mind. The Minister probably replied very promptly. One of the major promises we made 

was to ‗stabilize and improve‘ farm income. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the Hon. Premier 

undoubtedly and very quickly replied, ―Forget it, that‘s way too expensive. Didn‘t we just get a report 

from the manpower survey? Didn‘t it say that farmers are dumb; that they have a very low IQ? They 

won‘t even remember that promise‖ But the Minister would reply, ―All our programs are CCF or 

Socialist; can‘t we have some of our own?‖ To which the Premier would reply, ―Oh, just build them a 

few sheep pastures. I‘ve told my farmers in Morse to go into sheep in a big way and I‘m sure they are 

going to listen to me. And what‘s more, we promised 80,000 new jobs the first four years we were in 

office. If the farmers go broke, so what, maybe the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) can find them a 

job.‖ At this point the Minister is doubtless saying ―Baa‖ but the Premier says, ―Go away, don‘t bother 

me, just blame everything on labour, that will get us the votes.‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, the Treasurer said in 

his initial remarks when he delivered his speech, and I quote: 

 

The Government, therefore, initially must make every effort to curtail unnecessary or unessential 

spending. It must squeeze and trim costs till it hurts. 

 

The treatment that agriculture got in this Budget surely bears out the Treasurer‘s statement. As far as 

farmers go the squeeze and trim have been on them for a long, long time, and it‘s my prediction, Mr. 

Speaker, that it will continue as long as we have Liberal Governments at Regina and Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — The Premier and the Liberal Government have talked about diversification. The farmers 

have had the most diversified operation of any industry in the country. The early farms were virtually a 

complete food factory in themselves. Hogs, sheep, chickens, beef, milk as well as every type of garden 

vegetable have been produced on our farms. All kinds of grain; wheat, oats, barley, flax, rapeseed, as 

well as every kind of grass variety have been grown by them. The farmers kept on producing on a 

diversified basis until many of them virtually went broke. Under Liberal policies the price of such 

commodities as eggs, butter, hogs, sheep, and most of these goods went so low that the farmers were 

forced to quit or go broke. I well remember, Mr. Speaker, a few short years ago the tremendous problem 

with butter surpluses. Butter was piled up in cold storage from one end of Canada to the other. Prices 

paid did not even cover the wear and tear on the cow. Farmers being the practical kind of people they 

are just quit milking cows. Eggs, the same story, prices so low the hens were ashamed to lay. Pork, again 

surpluses piling up, to where the Government of the day packed canned pork into boxes, and we had the 

spectacle of municipal councillors driving around the country doling out boxes of canned pork. 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

575 

Again the farmers just quit producing. This, Mr. Speaker, is the practical experience of farmers who 

tried to diversify. 

 

Let me say here and now that farmers will diversify and will produce the different kinds of food only if 

we have a Government that will do something realistic and practical about prices and markets. All the 

yelling and pleading will not convince farmers to diversify unless these basic needs are met. I therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, call on the Government to fulfil its election promise to ‗stabilize and improve farm 

income.‘ 

 

I call on the Minister to reinstitute the Agriculture Machinery Administration. I call on the Minister to 

set up a modernized Agricultural Representative Services Branch so that it will meet the needs of 

modern agriculture. I call on the Government to develop a program of rural housing, so that water and 

sewage installations will not go into homes that are inferior, old and of improper construction. I call on 

the Government to establish a realistic program of property taxation, that will recognize the inequities in 

the present property tax structure. I further, Mr. Speaker, call on the Government to provide sufficient 

funds to make possible the necessary research work into the development of suitable high yielding 

varieties of feed grains, wheat and other cereal crops. I recommend that the Government introduce a 

separate act that will be unrelated to the present Natural Products Marketing Act under which the 

marketing commission would be responsible directly to the Saskatchewan Legislature. I recommend that 

the Government extend the Crop Insurance Plan to make it universally available to all farmers of the 

province. I recommend that the Hog Quality Improvement Research Program be administered by the 

Animal Husbandry Branch of the University of Saskatchewan, and financed by the Provincial Treasury. 

These, Mr. Speaker, should be a minimum of programs that a go representing the largest industry in the 

province should be implementing. 

 

I turn now for a few moments to the matter of taxes and Liberal claims of tax reductions. Last year, Mr. 

Speaker, I put on the records some of the actual figures as they apply to the RM No. 271. I want this 

year to bring this record up-to-date. In 1964 Mr. Speaker, and I have the tax notices on my desk, the mill 

rate for municipal works stood at 26 mills; school mills, 29. In 1965 the municipal mill rate was 29 

mills, up 3 mills; school mill was 32, up 3 mills. In 1966 municipal tax remained at 29 mills but we had 

a new tax, one mill for the nursing home. The school tax was up to 34 mills, up 2 mills. This, Mr. 

Speaker, is the true tax picture in the province. Now, I‘m surely not one of the people that claim that 

services can be increased and taxes cut. It‘s rather obvious that this is one of the areas where Liberals are 

rather sensitive. The amount of time and propaganda that is spent on trying to convince the public is 

very good proof that they don‘t even believe their own story. To see how sensitive they are on this 

subject is very amusing. When normal propaganda methods fail other means are resorted to. This, Mr. 

Speaker, is the case in my constituency. Mr. Ross Barrie speaking at this nominating convention in 

Kamsack on Oct. 25 said this, as reported in the Kamsack Times of Nov. 3, 1966: 

 

With increased Provincial grants, it should have been possible for most municipalities to reduce 

taxes.‘ J. Ross Barrie said at a Liberal Convention banquet in Kamsack on Tuesday of last week. 

Mr. Barrie was the unanimous choice of the convention as Liberal 



February 22, 1967 

 

576 

standard bearer for Pelly. He said that unfortunately, especially in the Pelly seat, councils are 

dedicated Socialists and some Communists. They had the audacity to raise mill rates, in many 

cases when it was absolutely unnecessary. They were babied by the last Government and were 

determined to keep dark the amount of grants. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that Mr. Barrie is well known to the Premier and most Members of this 

House. I am sure too, that he is one of the candidates that the Premier approves of. I am equally sure that 

he speaks the feelings of all Liberals when he makes this kind of derogatory statement about the 

councils in the Pelly constituency. This, Mr. Speaker, tells the desperate ends that Members of the 

Liberal party are prepared to go to in order to accomplish its ends. It bewilders me, Mr. Speaker, to 

know how anyone can so blatantly accuse municipal councils in such a broad and embracing fashion. It 

would be very interesting to know the kind of a political blood test he has applied to reach this 

conclusion. My experiences with these men in the Pelly constituency are that they are very responsible, 

conscientious, and devoted to the welfare of their ratepayers. I, Mr. Speaker, would not have the 

audacity to accuse them of belonging to any particular political party. This would be an insult to their 

intelligence. This, Mr. Speaker, is just another incident of Liberal tactics and propaganda. Anything to 

catch a headline. Well it‘s becoming increasingly obvious that the day of Government by headline in 

Saskatchewan is drawing to a close. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — It‘s equally obvious this day cannot come too soon for the people of this province. 

 

I said I wanted to say something about roads and highways as they apply to my constituency. I was 

indeed pleased yesterday to hear the Minister of Municipal affairs (Mr. McIsaac) say that he has good 

intentions for the coming year. It remains to be seen how much of the program he is allowed to proceed 

with. I am glad however, that his intentions are good. But there is some measure of uncertainty in the 

amount of work that will be actually done. I draw attention to the statement contained in the Treasurer‘s 

remarks. The key to his statement are the words ―will consider financial assistance on the same basis for 

feeder or collector roads.‖ I draw your attention to the words ―will consider.‖ I strongly urge the 

Minister to proceed to implement this program without delay. A grid road program started by the CCF 

Government was a good one. A CCF Government in power would at this stage have had a feeder road 

program in operation. Instead of saying ―will consider‖ the program would have been ready and in 

action. 

 

The highway building program is another story that bears comment. In spite of all the huff, puff and fan-

fare, we in my constituency have not seen too much of it. After three years of Liberal road building, No. 

5 Highway to Canora is still unfinished. The inconveniences and hardship that this delay has caused are 

still with us. Every time it rains the road is impossible to travel. The balance of the old road is equally 

bad. Detours occasioned by the slow construction progress are putting a major strain on municipal roads 

that have to take the detour traffic. The condition of No. 8 Highway going south from Kamsack was 

deplorable. When a by-election was pending in the Pelly seat 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

577 

a very brave start at surveying was made. Besides a survey program, a very intensive propaganda 

program was started. As the prospects of the by-election dwindled out so did the interest and the action 

of building the road. And I urge the new Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) to look into the deplorable 

state of this road and try to do something about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larson: — I assure the new Minister that I will cooperate with him and do anything that I can to 

help bring this project about. I have received very many complaints about the condition of the highways 

to Madge Lake. Madge Lake is one of our prize summer resorts. The number of people that are attracted 

to this resort is very, very large and very important to the business section of the town of Kamsack. Last 

year, repair work was slow and just did not seem to catch union; until the tourist season was over. I urge 

the Minister to take positive steps to prevent the recurrence of this condition. The abandoned highway 

going south from Togo joining No. 10 continues to be a real controversy. The people of Togo claim that 

they were promised this road if a Liberal Government was elected and I now call upon the Government 

to make their position known to these people. Several delegations have visited the Government. If this is 

another Liberal promise that is broken these people are entitled to know. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some other factors in this Budget that I would like to spend some time on. I 

note that the Liberal election campaign is getting into gear. My son received in the mail the other day, 

with insufficient postage incidentally; it cost him eight cents to lift this marvellous document – the 

language that he used, Mr. Speaker, is certainly unparliamentary, and I would not use it in this House. 

One of the items that caught my eye under the programs for people was: ―A program for improving the 

lot of Saskatchewan Indian Citizens has been launched. Thousands are now in paying jobs.‖ 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Where? 

 

Mr. Larson: — A very notable statement, Mr. Speaker. I want to compare this to the Premier‘s 

speaking as reported in the Toronto Globe and mail: 

 

Indians breed like rabbits Thatcher says. Saskatchewan Premier, Ross Thatcher said Tuesday: 

Indians and Métis in the province are breeding faster than rabbits and his Government can‘t place 

enough in jobs to keep up with the birth rate. The Premier said that of the 50,000 Indians and 

Métis in Saskatchewan, a great portion are living on Federal social aid. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is very different to what the Liberal program promises. Now, I think that it‘s 

very obvious that I will not be supporting the motion, but will be voting for the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Howes (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to 



February 22, 1967 

 

578 

take part today and to speak in this Budget Debate in support of the motion before this House, I do so 

with pleasure, because it is a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to support a Budget such as this, just as it was to 

support the previous two Budgets submitted by the present Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Howes: — Before I commence my remarks however, Mr. Speaker, I would like to publicly 

congratulate the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) on his appointment. Knowing the Member as I 

do, I have no doubt that he will be a credit to his Department, the Government and his constituency, let 

alone the province. I would also like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to mention to the House that, in my 

opinion, the Prime Minister of this country, (Hon. Lester B. Pearson) realizing the contribution that the 

Member from Morse (Mr. Thatcher) has made to this province and to Canada, made a wise decision in 

appointing him to the Privy Council. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Howes: — There is no question that he will be a credit to the Privy Council just as he is to this 

province and that as the years go on, I have no doubt that all will agree that the title of Honourable 

which he now carries for life has been richly deserved and well and truly earned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Howes: — I do not like, Mr. Speaker, to comment too much on what other speakers have said in the 

Debate, since I feel that I would rather deal with matters in a more constructive manner. However, the 

Hon. Member from Regina West (Mr. A.E. Blakeney) and some others have made some statements that 

I think should be given a little further thought. I refer to the figures quoted on population change in this 

province in the last few years. Now, Mr. Speaker, I will be quite frank and say that I have not checked 

these figures, and I do not propose to endeavour to refute them with other statistics, but I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that when he speaks of population change and criticizes the Government for it, he should 

realize the Government cannot accept responsibility for some population control factors. 

 

I have here the figures on live births in the province for the years 1956-‘65 and I note that in 1960 we 

had 22,088 births; in 1961, 23,994; in 1962, 23,342; in 1963, 23,543; in 1964, 23,682; in 1965, the last 

year available to me, 20,494. Surely, Mr. Speaker, we cannot as a Government take responsibility for 

what is apparently the wide-spread use of the ―pill‖. In fact I would think probably that a fair share of 

our population is quite pleased at the results that are being achieved. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East): — What about the future of the youngster? 

 

Mr. Howes: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that all will realize that I take a considerable interest in 

municipal affairs, and I am delighted at the provisions in the Budget, especially those regarding the 

municipalities of our province. The provision of funds for the construction of feeder roads is something I 

am 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

579 

certain our rural municipalities will accept and be delighted to hear. Our municipalities, especially those 

that have completed their grid program, have for some time been worried about what was going to 

happen when this program was completed and the extensions to it were completed. They are now in a 

position to plan ahead and will not be faced with the drastic increases in mill rate, that would have 

occurred should grid road assistance have been withdrawn, as it would have been had this program not 

been announced. The program will not immediately show its benefits, but there is no question that in the 

course of time we will see a drastic up-grading of municipal feeder roads, just as we have seen with the 

main roads in our municipal road system. Of course, I think it will be agreed by all that these feeder 

roads will not have to build to quite the same standard as grid roads and they can take the form of stubs 

etc. This will make it possible, however, for more miles to be built and in the course of time all of our 

rural citizens, practically without exception, will have good all-weather roads. 

 

Another program that the Department, or the Municipal Road Assistance Authority, I should say, is now 

following and I have not heard mentioned yet in this House was the approval by the Municipal Road 

Assistance Authority of grid road extensions on a tentative basis. It will be realized that in some areas 

there are roads that serve as links between centres, and to all appearances should be in the grid road 

system but do not generate the traffic required by the Municipal Road Assistance Authority for full 

inclusion. I understand that the Authority during the past year has taken into the grid road system on a 

tentative basis approximately 784 miles in this category and it is their policy that the Road Assistance 

Authority will assist in the construction of these roads on the same basis as other grid roads in the 

municipality. But they will not be included in the maintenance and other programs until such time as the 

required number of vehicles per day is evident. There is no question in my mind, Sir, that with the Grid 

Road Program, the Feeder Road Program, and the Tentative Program, we will see a system of municipal 

roads in this province, second to none in North America, considering the various factors that have to be 

contended with. 

 

Municipalities will without doubt appreciate the increase in the equalization payment and I think more 

than anything the fact that this has been made unconditional is of prime importance. By making this 

payment unconditional the Government has shown that it feels the municipalities have come of age and 

that a better job can be done by local government bodies without too must paternalism on the part of 

senior government. And I would compare, Mr. Speaker, the equalization grant, under the previous 

Administration of $600,000 with strings attached, to the present grant proposed in this Budget of 

$2,400,000, a 400 per cent increase. The increase in the snow removal grant will be of benefit and there 

is absolutely no question that this will have to be looked at again in future years, although I firmly belief 

that the best and most permanent solution to the snow problem is the construction of high and properly 

shaped roads. I see my time is getting short, and I would like to say, Sir, that in considering the problems 

of municipalities a person must also look at the over-all taxation picture, and the fact that the 

contribution of the Provincial Government to education at the local level has gone from 44.7 per cent in 

the last year the previous Government was in, to 51.5 per cent at the present time. This is proof to our 

citizens that this Government intends to protect local government, and to assist it. I say, Sir, that I think, 



February 22, 1967 

 

580 

without the increases that have been made in the field of education and the increases that have been 

made in the monies allocated to our local municipal governments, the situation as far as local 

government is concerned would be extremely serious. Now, many things remain to be done in so far as 

our municipal system is concerned, but I think the Minister has it well in hand and I think that the 

municipalities also have and are realizing what needs to be done. Mr. Speaker, there‘s one question of 

future government policy that I think should that it is, but I would like to mention it at this time. It is the 

question of the inclusion of optometrist service under Medicare once the Federal Act states that 

refractions, etc. will be covered by Medicare if the services are provided by a qualified ophthalmologist, 

but if the same services are provided by an optometrist, the question of inclusion is one for the 

Provincial Government to make a decision on. I realize that the cost would be in the neighbourhood of 

$200,000 to $300,000, but since optometrists are well recognized and are doing 7 per cent of the work as 

well, no fairness would exist to people if they were not included. I hope the Government will see its way 

clear to take appropriate action when the time comes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I only wish to say I‘m going to support the motion, that you do leave 

the Chair, but not the amendment. In case some of the rumours we hear about an election around these 

halls are true, I‘d just like to say this to many of my good friends over there that I do appreciate what 

Members have done for me and especially the Member for Kinistino (Mr. A. Thibault) in pointing out 

the home of the next Member for that seat. 

 

Mr. F.K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, Members of this Legislature. Today, I must address my 

first remarks to the Junior Member from Saskatoon, (Mr. J. E. Brockelbank) who is unfortunately not in 

his seat at the present time. The Junior Member from Saskatoon again today used the normal NDP 

arithmetic in comparing the NDP seminar in Saskatoon with the Liberal meeting in Prince Albert. what 

he forgot to tell the radio audience was that the Liberal seminar in Prince Albert was for one 

constituency, but the NDP Youth Meeting in Saskatoon was for 59 constituencies. This is typical of the 

deceit and exaggeration used by our Socialist friends across the way. In Prince Albert some 400 young 

people attended the social in the evening. This response shows that we have no need to hold a provincial 

seminar. Just imagine 59 times 400, some 23,600 young people all in one place! 

 

Now again, the Junior Member from Saskatoon espouses consumer protection, yet in 20 years in office 

the NDP did little or nothing to protect the consumer. The present Liberal Government is now waiting 

for a report from the committee that was appointed last fall to bring their recommendations. and when 

these recommendations come in I assure the Members from across the way the Liberals will act and not 

talk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Friday, February 17, was a red-letter day in the history of Saskatchewan. Our astute 

Provincial Treasurer and Premier of this Province (Mr. Thatcher) in his Budget address outlined new 

horizons for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Other Provincial Governments are asking for huge tax increases. 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

581 

One only needs to read the newspapers to see what the other provinces are asking for. Yet here we are 

having a Budget without increases in taxes and we are going to increase the services. Premier Ross 

Thatcher in presenting that 1967 Budget with a record proposed expenditure of $300,000,000 with no 

new tax increases, assumes the people of the province that they have his first consideration. Highlights 

of the Budget are; three new programs proposing to give assistance for the bringing of domestic water to 

hamlets; for a new feeder grid road program as other Members have mentioned; and for the Opportunity 

Caravan presenting a new concept in youth guidance and in the counselling of youth. 

 

Major increased expenditures are, of course, for some of the very most important departments – Health, 

Education, and Highways. In addition, the Premier has given special consideration for higher library 

grants and increased pensions for retired civil servants. These are very commendable programs. 

 

Now again I‘d like to say a few words. The Member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney), the financial 

critic for the Opposition says it is a deficit budget in disguise. The Member from Regina West cannot 

help but be critical, because he has never seen a Budget like that proposed by the Premier of this 

Province. It is a Budget straight down the line, honest, forthright and no frigging around trying to 

mislead the public. Mr. Speaker, Premier Thatcher must be commended for his clear precise 

understanding of Saskatchewan‘s financial position and financial needs. all the people I have talked to 

like Premier Thatcher‘s honest and clear-cut analysis of the current and future financial problems of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) the Provincial Conservative Leader, sees the Budget as an 

election harbinger and well it could be, but this time the people of the province will know where they 

stand when they go into the election. The old NDP Government of the Province always brought a few 

minor tax cuts before an election and immediately after the election restored the tax cuts and added a 

few new ones. My friends in the Opposition were masters at confusing the public. 

 

It is easy to understand why definite efforts are being made by individuals and other power groups to 

malign and destroy the Premier‘s image in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 

people can well be proud of Premier Ross Thatcher‘s efforts to keep the people informed regarding 

Government policy. and people can look with pride at the progress that is being made under Premier 

Thatcher‘s leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to express the regrets and the sympathy of the people of the Nipawin 

constituency to the people of the Shellbrook constituency and to the people of Prince Albert on the 

passing away of the Hon. John Cuelenaere. The loss of a tried and trusted friend is a loss for the people 

of the Nipawin constituency. Saskatchewan has indeed lost a loyal citizen. 

 

I would also today like on behalf of the people of the Nipawin constituency to extend congratulations 

and best wishes to the newest member of the Cabinet, the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). 

I‘d like to say that we are indeed proud that he has taken this post as he is indeed a capable Member and 

should bring great honour to the position. 

 

Mr. Premier, as a representative of the Nipawin constituency 



February 22, 1967 

 

582 

it is with pride that I welcome this opportunity today to convey to you a few of the thoughts and remarks 

of the people of north-eastern Saskatchewan. I am well acquainted with a vast number of my 

constituents and I believe and hope they discuss our Government freely and honestly with me. 

 

The broad legislative program outlined in the Throne Speech will encourage industrial and agricultural 

expansion and development. It promises to the people increased opportunities for farmer, labourer and 

skilled worker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, congratulations are in order for the mover and seconder of the Address in Reply. Their 

remarks substantiate the determination of Premier Thatcher and his Government to forge ahead full 

speed with legislation which encourages stable and progressive government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the past two years Saskatchewan with a Liberal Government has exceeded all past 

records of achievement and development. Saskatchewan has advanced from having an under-privileged 

economy to a privileged economy. the average personal income in Saskatchewan is now the fourth 

highest in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government has accomplished a great deal in a short time. Our legislative program 

means another progressive year for our province. A program with priority for agriculture, industry and 

opportunity; industry and opportunity for the young people of our province. Mr. Speaker, our forefathers 

pioneered with dedication, devotion and enterprise to make Saskatchewan a land of opportunity, in 

which for twenty years under the previous Government, development was retarded. Today our sons and 

daughters have been rewarded for their contribution and their faith. 

 

It is the responsibility of our Government, a Liberal Government to continue to work to restore the 

ideals, the privileges and liberties that our people sometimes lost in the past 20 years. It is important that 

we do not become self-satisfied and complacent. We must continue to place full emphasis on working 

together for the complete development of our communities, our province and our country. 

 

Increasing population in our rapidly changing world presents new challenges, increased responsibilities, 

and new opportunities for the agricultural people of this province. And I can assure the Members of this 

House that the new Members of this Government fully realize the duties which they have to look after. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past year and a half, with the Hon. Mr. McFarlane, Minister of Agriculture and 

his Department, I can assure the Members of this Legislature and the people of this province that 

agriculture is receiving the full attention of very capable people, dedicated people, people who are 

accepting the added burdens and responsibilities to evolve and promote a modern and successful 

agriculture program. 

 

Perplexing local and regional and provincial problems receive the full attention and are being 

successfully resolved by this new Government under the successful leadership of our Premier, the Hon. 

Ross Thatcher. 

 

Now, I‘m not going to report any fictitious conversations as the Members in the Opposition do from 

time to time, but today I would like to report to this Legislature a conversation 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

583 

that I‘ve had with a man who is very interested in people, a man who has farmed and hunted in the 

Cumberland Delta. He is a man who is well informed about the different policies and he knows many 

problems of the rural and farming people. In fact, Mr. Speaker, he has an excellent understanding of the 

very basic needs of the province. I had this quite lengthy discussion with this man and I thought the 

Members of this Legislature would be interested in the general details of what he had to say. Now this 

man told me that he was voting for the Liberals in the next provincial election. He said he had been 

voting CCF but there is no longer a CCF party and he said he would be darned if he was going to vote 

for the NDP because it was a party supporting sometimes very irresponsible labour elements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he said labour should have a decent living wage but that labour actions had cost the 

farmers millions of dollars in revenue by the multitude of strikes at critical shipping periods. This 

resulted in the loss of badly needed markets, also with excessive demurrage charges and increasing 

storage charges reducing the net return to the farmers. Mr. Speaker, this man felt that Premier Thatcher 

had put new teeth in the Government and had produced good legislation last fall with the Essential 

Services Act. He believed that compulsory arbitration should be used in all cases of dispute. After all, he 

says, we are responsible people and in all cases of dispute intelligent people should be able to agree on 

fair working arrangements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Mr. ex-CCFer went on to say, ―You know, Mr. Radloff, I think Premier Thatcher and 

his Cabinet are doing a darn good job of running this country. They convinced the labour unions last fall 

that they meant business.‖ He said in fact, ―I have a nephew who works for the Government and he tells 

me that he has had a number of raises and is well paid for the work he does.‖ He also went on to say that 

he feels that most of the civil service employees are happy about the change of Administration and that 

it is only a few agitators who are continuing to cause trouble. 

 

Again, Mr. ex-CCFer went on to talk about lease land. He said under the previous Government he never 

had a chance to purchase his land and get on his feet. With the Liberal Government and the new 

purchase policy, he has bought his land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he said it made him and his wife feel wonderful to now own their own farm. He said, ―The 

part that hurts is that when I was raising my family and needed security, I did not have the security.‖ Mr. 

Speaker, he said he and Mother now had something to sell when they retired and he felt they would 

partially make up to their kids for what they had missed when they were young. Mr. Speaker, Mr. ex-

CCFer said he could not help but be all for this Liberal Government and for Premier Thatcher. He said 

the Government is really trying to help the people especially farmers. Purple gas legislation, he said, was 

a blessing to the farmer. And then there was the homeowner grant, and the reduction of the 5 per cent 

sales tax to 4 per cent; larger grants to school units and to the municipalities. Municipal grants for roads, 

snow ploughing and administration were all God-sends to the rural people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. ex-CCFer asked what I though the Farmers Union was up to trying to get the Premier 

to do away with the homeowner grant. I said I though the NDP were afraid to vote against the legislation 

so now they were trying to get the Farmers Union to carry the ball, that they wanted the Government to 

cancel this popular legislation. Mr. Speaker, Mr. ex-CCFer said 



February 22, 1967 

 

584 

that is what he thought and he hoped the SFU would not get away with this skulduggery. Mr. ex-CCFer 

also went on to tell me that he had hunted and logged the Sipanok Channel and the Cumberland Delta 

for years. He hopes the Government will make every effort to fully develop this immense area. He really 

wanted to unload some of his thoughts to me so I took them for what they were worth and so I just 

wanted to repeat them to you today. 

 

He said there is some of the best farm land in the world in this district and he cannot understand why 

some people are opposed to the proposed development. He said there is black soil in this area over 30 

feet deep. Mr. Speaker, as far as he was concerned there is still plenty of swamp, muskeg and waste land 

left for wild life. In fact he thinks wild animals do a lot better where they can irritate the farmer and get a 

little of good forage and grain food. The land, he said, was admirably suited for agriculture and should 

be made available to the young farmers to give them every opportunity to fully develop the potential of 

this great area. Mr. Speaker, Mr. ex-CCFer went on to say that ten sections of farm land will produce as 

much revenue as the whole Delta does at the present time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he said he had supported the CCF party in the past because he thought they were doing a 

fair job. but he sees now that they were trying to start a class struggle and disrupt our present society. 

Mr. ex-CCFer said he felt that the former Socialist Government opposed those who did not see eye to 

eye with their policies. He felt that they gave all preference to Socialist-minded people, or to people who 

would sell their vote for special consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. ex-CCFer felt the NDP party is now working towards the day when all people left in 

Saskatchewan will be dedicated to a Socialist program. He said he did not care if the Liberal 

Government did one single thing more, that the political atmosphere now encouraged enterprise and 

development rather than a dependency on social aid, government support and patronage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he said he was impressed with the job Premier Thatcher was doing. He said at one time he 

was doubtful of the Premier‘s capabilities. He said now his whole family agreed with him that the 

Premier is a real man of the people, a good administrator, and that Saskatchewan was most fortunate to 

have such a man at this time when the Province needs someone to get the economy moving and to help 

to keep the young people at home and straighten a lot of the problems out that the CCF had created. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. ex-CCFer has confidence that the Government will find ways and means to get the 

Nipawin dam, the Choiceland mine and the Carrot River road to The Pas completed. 

 

I told him there were many problems, but he said: ―Look, the CCF tried to get a pulp mill and it took the 

Liberals to get one started.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, this man went on to say: ―That man Thatcher will build a dam in Nipawin and have the 

Choiceland iron mine going before you know it.‖ He said, ―Mr. Thatcher knows how much this means 

to the people of Saskatchewan. Why, the mine will create thousands of jobs, besides saving the people a 

lot of money by manufacturing their own requirements.‖ 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

585 

Mr. Speaker, He said, ―Frank, you haven‘t got a worry in the world. Your Government has been in 

office for only a little over two years and look at what‘s already been accomplished.‖ He said, ―Miles 

and miles of new roads, new mines, new factories and hundreds of new jobs. I definitely believe that the 

Premier and his boys are doing a splendid job.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, this ex-CCFer went on to say: ―The CCF and NDP, as they are now called, fooled a lot of 

people for a long time but the voters have been taking a long look at what should be expected from a 

government and they like what they see in Liberal legislation.‖ He said he was particularly irked by the 

CCF Government‘s attempt to control and monopolize the lives of people. He said the NDP, as far as he 

is concerned, is a critical, bitter party, with nothing constructive to offer. In fact he want on to say he 

was dismayed to think that he was blind so long and supported such an outfit. 

 

Again Mr. ex-CCFer was very generous in his praise of the Hon. Doug. McFarlane (Minister of 

Agriculture), a man he said who really gets around the province. And, Mr. Speaker, I can substantiate 

his remarks because I know Doug has been out and around the province. In fact I doubt whether there 

are many agricultural areas in Saskatchewan that he has not visited several times. He has been out in the 

Delta and east of Carrot River about six times this year so I can surely say that Doug. has gotten around. 

and Mr. Speaker, there is seldom a paper that does not announce a number of meetings held each week, 

attended by the Minister, announcing new programs for the benefit of agriculture. 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — Which one? 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Oh, there are lots of them, more than you ever had, Toby. The farmer, Mr. ex-CCFer 

felt, is receiving tremendous help with fodder plants, fodder shelters, land clearing assistance, help for 

community pastures and other policies to encourage livestock production. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Toby‘s programs. 

 

Mr. Radloff: — This man said he had a comfortable feeling that Mr. McFarlane understands the 

farmers‘ problems and the agricultural needs of the province; that the Minister is resourceful and 

energetic in promoting the welfare of the farmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past few months I have talked to many people who in the past have supported 

the CCF, Social Credit and Conservative parties and many have expressed opinions similar to those 

which I have outlined and… 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Two more ex‘s. 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Don‘t worry, Toby, that‘s what a lot of people feel now. 

 

Mr. Nollet: — Ex-social Credit. 

 

Mr. Radloff: — All are interested in the expansion of industry and 



February 22, 1967 

 

586 

agriculture and opportunity for their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture is of prime importance to the people in north-eastern Saskatchewan, 

particularly in the availability of new land around Hudson Bay, east and north of Carrot River. Today I 

should say a few words about the Cumberland Delta, the agricultural frontier in Saskatchewan. This is 

an area of over a million acres and surveys indicate that some 700,000 acres are arable and excellent 

farm land. In the past Indian and Métis people have derived a major part of their livelihood from hunting 

and fishing throughout this area. This no longer holds true, Mr. Speaker. The demands of higher living 

standards for these people necessitate a more dependable source of income. 

 

Younger Indian and Métis no longer care for the long hours on the trap line and fishing. They yearn for 

all the benefits of the white man‘s way of life. They want to see these benefits, and the only way these 

benefits can be obtained for these people is through agricultural development. These opportunity must 

be made available to these people so they can have employment, rehabilitation, permanent 

establishment. This must be the important consideration in the plan for development of the Delta area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say at this time that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) and his Department 

are giving full consideration to all of the many varied aspects of developing this area. The Agriculture 

Department has regard for the opportunity and the establishment and the employment of some 3,000 

Indians and Métis people living in or adjacent to the area. We must also have consideration for the many 

farmers who will move into this district. This consideration must include credit requirements; measures 

necessary to achieve the ultimate desirable social and economic development of the area within a 

reasonable period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agricultural development has been hampered in the past by the constant threat of flooding, 

but the construction of the Gardiner Dam and the Squaw Rapids Dam has reduced this threat so 

thoroughly as to be almost negligible. With flood threat eliminated it is possible to fully evaluate the rich 

rewards encompassed in this land and its resources. 

 

Today an area of some two sections of typical Delta is being selected for an extensive study with multi-

purpose and development potential being considered. Cumberland Island and Farm Island are being 

prepared for an extensive cattle industry, to assist Indian families at Cumberland House and a number of 

units are already in operation and proving successful. Indian people are indeed happy with the 

Agriculture Department concerned, the arrangements and the plans that have been put forward for their 

welfare. 

 

There is some concern by ill-informed people that the Department officials are not sufficiently 

considering the recreational aspects of the hunting and fishing. This is not the case, Mr. Speaker, all 

aspects of forestry, fishing, wildlife, recreation and land use with the related economic ramifications are 

receiving broad study and consideration. 

 

Not only are the possible residents of the Saskatchewan Delta being considered but the residents of the 

province as a whole are included in evaluating the economic value and the productive potential of this 

untapped resource. All possibilities 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

587 

and eventualities must be considered. Subsidiary non-farming activities such as peat harvesting, wood 

product recovery, fur farming, commercial fishing and recreation outlets are receiving full consideration. 

 

One objective of the Department of Agriculture has been to keep local people and all the people of the 

province fully informed of their intentions, and planned activities relating to the development of the 

Delta area. Mr. Speaker, Delta brochures and information are available for the asking. 

 

Small farmers, youth, and Indian and Métis people are clamouring for opportunity, especially 

opportunity in agriculture. The new Liberal Government, the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

and the Department of Agriculture officials are making an all-out effort to meet the challenge, the 

challenge to wipe out rural poverty. 

 

The bitter old NDP are vainly trying to stir up animosity, hostility toward any forward-looking plans for 

agriculture. Mr. Speaker, NDP supporters and henchmen spare no effort to smear and ridicule successful 

efforts to help farmers and rural people. The people have been fooled in the past with old Socialist 

clichés and formulas that sound good but have not worked in the past and will not work in the future. 

They only prevent man from reaching his desired ultimate destiny and the noble pinnacles that he is 

capable of attaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech of this fourth session of the Legislature did in particular outline definite 

programs to assist agriculture and agricultural people to reach and maintain a more dominant part in 

growing and expanding Saskatchewan economy. Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan farmers are 

indeed happy with the continued progress during the past two and a half years. This Government is 

pushing forward with efforts to promote rapid, sound development and diversification of the agricultural 

industry through many different measures and methods. 

 

Again I should briefly mention a few of the methods that are being used, methods that were outlined by 

different speakers in Throne Speech debate so you‘re aware of what is taking place. Of note, of course, 

is the expansion and development of the community pastures to encourage the cattle and sheep industry. 

I can certainly say that this industry is being encouraged. We now have something like 7,000 sheep 

being allocated for pastures and I‘m sure this industry is going to grow with this encouragement. We 

have the assistance to encourage the growing and storage of fodder supplies and this is something that 

must be encouraged if we are going to maintain the industry. Other plans and efforts to develop and 

extend agricultural land I will deal with more fully later on. 

 

People are indeed happy with the construction of a Veterinary College and the opening of the Soil 

Testing Station in Saskatoon. Many have asked for the expansion of badly needed crop insurance 

programs and this Government is going ahead with the extension of this program. The extension of the 

telephone system in rural areas has been a badly needed service. Under the new arrangements, many 

people are going to be able to obtain this telephone service which the people really need. Again the 

people in Nipawin constituency are indeed very happy with the municipal and educational grants to 

local governments and to their school boards. This indeed will be of great assistance to the people 



February 22, 1967 

 

588 

of Saskatchewan. All agricultural programs bring increased benefits to farm people, but there are three 

measures which I will outline and which in particular are in the process of being initiated in the Nipawin 

constituency, measures which I will briefly outline for the benefit of the Members of this Legislature. 

 

In the Nipawin constituency we have the Smeaton pasture development now under way. On March 1, 

land development in the Smeaton pasture will be stated and will develop some 17,000 acres of land, 

5000 acres of land acquired by the Lands Branch. Over half of this total acreage will be developed for 

the community pasture under the Federal-Provincial ARDA program. It is hoped by the Department of 

Agriculture that this will be ready in the summer of 1969. This pasture will hold 17,000 cattle. 

 

Another item I would like to mention, the improvement of the under-developed lands which make up 

much of the total acreage of northern Saskatchewan. With the development of this land it will present a 

real opportunity for the farmers in the area to diversify their operation. Mr. Speaker, in addition to the 

programs to improve Crown lands leased to farmers, the Government has initiated a program to assist 

small farmers to clear their privately owned land. The cost of this program is shared with Federal 

Government through ARDA and is confined to the rural development area. Under this program I can say 

that some 2,651 farmers were authorized to clear 63,000 acres and to date, 1,158 farmers have cleared 

some 35,000 acres of land. 

 

This program will help farmers increase production in their unit and will also permit them to have 

extended grazing. Many acres of additional farm land in the Nipawin constituency have been cleared 

and encouraged by this program. also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention the Government policy to 

develop new lands for agriculture, a development which has continued at a rapid pace in 1966. there are 

some 12,657 acres cleared out and 19,227 acres broken at a cost of some $401,000. Most of this 

development of course has been done in the wooded areas from Meadow Lake to Carrot River as well as 

in the Park-land area. 

 

Of special importance, Mr. Speaker, are the three special areas now being developed in the Carrot River 

district, part of the Nipawin constituency. In one area, the Battle Heights area, special leases have been 

granted to develop about 5,400 acres of land for farming at no expense to the Government. At the 

expiration of these leases, the improved land will be made available to the farmers. In the Smoky Burn 

area, 22 quarter sections have been advertised for leasing, and are now in the process of being allocated 

to local farmers to enlarge their units. This land will be cleared and broken next summer, in 1967, or this 

year under the department‘s clearing and breaking program. 

 

And then of course you have the program that many people are talking about and that is the Cracking 

River project east of Carrot River, near the Cracking River. Some 36 sections of land were withdrawn 

from the provincial forest and in 1966 was to be developed for agriculture. Contracts have already been 

let to clear roadways and some 5,000 acres of land before spring, so that it can be broken in the summer 

under the department‘s clearing and breaking program. These 36 sections have been advertised as farm 

units and will be allocated according to the Government‘s allocation policy in time for the successful 

applicants to do some work on their new farms. 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

589 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Doug McFarlane is to be congratulated as well as the professional staff of the 

Agricultural Information Division for the extensive amount of information now being disseminated 

regarding ―This Business of Farming‖, scientific and technological information, new developments and 

new methods used in agriculture, new information on many subjects, fertilizers, herbicides, livestock 

management, farm management and farm improvement programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should at this time also compliment the Farm Management Division of the Agriculture 

Department. Farm management instruction and advisory services are now being provided for some 226 

farm management clubs involving over 4200 farmers. Last year over 5,000 analysis summary books 

were distributed. A significant break-through has been achieved in the past year in the use of the 

electronic computer to analyse farm account books. the charges have been set at $30 per farm plus $10 

for each separate enterprises. This service is unique in the prairie provinces. Mr. Speaker, in addition, 

considerable instruction is provided regarding special topics, such as farm credit, insurance and estate 

planning. 

 

Farmstead mexabitions have made a noteworthy contribution to providing an opportunity to agriculture 

people to see at first hand, new developments and new machinery and new equipment. Mr. Speaker, in 

the past year some 18,000 people have attended the Saskatoon and Regina mexabitions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I can only congratulate the Department on the Master Farm Family Awards 

introduced in 1965. It is a means of honouring farm families who have excelled and achieved notable 

success in farming, homemaking and citizenship. It is a competition presenting a real challenge for farm 

improvement. I am happy that the Aylsham farming community was honoured this year to have one of 

their most progressive farm families, the D. N. Jamieson family, win the award for northern 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Jamieson and his family are now visiting New Zealand and when they return, I‘m 

sure they will be able to give to the people of that rich farming district many new ideas on agriculture 

and the different conditions the people in New Zealand are working under. 

 

The Government‘s establishment of an Economic and Statistics Branch has strengthened the Department 

of Agriculture contribution to many programs involving crop insurance, advisory councils, university 

training courses, Federal assistance under ARDA, and various farm organizations. The Branch is 

providing an urgently needed service. In the last two years, the Crop Insurance Board has made some 

major changes which have become effective in 1966. The major change is the basis of determining the 

insurance coverage for all land in each township regardless of soil. This change has been welcomed and 

well received by farmers. The number of contracts in force has increased from 2,356 in 1964 to over 

7,000 contracts in 1966. North-eastern Saskatchewan farmers appreciate the extension of the Crop 

Insurance Program to their districts. I can say today, Mr. Speaker, that the participation percentage is 

readily increasing. Now, Mr. Speaker, from time to time in this House, I‘ve heard snide remarks at us 

from the Members of the Opposition regarding lease land allocations by the new Liberal Government. 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Cumberland): — A lot more! 



February 22, 1967 

 

590 

Mr. Radloff: — Members of the Opposition should hang their heads in shame when lease land is 

mentioned. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are fully aware of how the CCF-NDP Government 

used lease land to reward their followers in the years during their Administration. Yes, Members of the 

Opposition, Members of this Legislature, the people of Saskatchewan will well remember your callous, 

flagrant policy and attitude of a few years ago. Mr. Speaker, during the CCF regime, the 33 year lease 

was often not worth the paper it was written on. The people of my constituency can easily recall many 

lease cancellations, leases that were cancelled with justification. Nipawin constituency people vividly 

recall leases held by veterans of the Second Work War, leases which were cancelled and given to 

protégés of the CCF hierarchy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dark black history of CCF-NDP administration of lease land can only be improved. I 

can say without contradiction that the new Government is doing a honest good job in the administration 

of Government lands. I have talked to many lease-holders who say it will be a long time before they are 

taken in by the Socialists again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal Government and especially the Minister of Agriculture can be proud of their 

achievements and success and their efforts in the development of new lands. The Cracking River area 

alone will provide farm units for some 30 young farmers, an opportunity promised by the Liberal Party 

and delivered by the Liberal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many new measures outlined by the Government to bring increased benefits, improved 

living conditions and new opportunities to Saskatchewan people, young and old alike, will do much to 

make our Centennial Year an outstanding year of enjoyment and achievement. Mr. Speaker, the bells 

have pealed, the flame is lit on Parliament Hill, the Confederation train has begun its cross-country 

journey. Mr. Speaker, Canada, in short is launched on her Centennial Year of celebrations. 

Saskatchewan people promise to be worthy of this 100th birthday event. This year we can all take pride 

in the high respect our province and our Government enjoy in the councils of this country. Mr. Speaker, 

ours is not yet a land of bliss or perfect laws but we have an inheritance richer by far than those who 

have gone before us every knew. The biggest of many changes is the new material condition of 

Saskatchewan people, change from sometimes chaos, hardship and indifference to a condition of rising 

affluence with one of the highest standards of living in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we are a people industrious, aggressive, forward-thinking, of mixed ethnic 

composition, looking into a bright new future with promised increased successes and accomplishments. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind all Members of this Legislature that the Nipawin constituency is 

one of the oldest in Saskatchewan. Many of the early explorers paddled their way past the present sites 

of Nipawin, Squaw Rapids and Cumberland into the vast plains of the prairies. One of the earliest 

explorers built and maintained the first fort in Saskatchewan, three miles west of the present town site of 

Nipawin. Relics taken from the fort site date back to 1753 and are now in the Provincial Museum in 

Regina. Mr. Speaker, the first grains and vegetables grown in Saskatchewan were planted and harvested 

by the Francois-Findlay people, making the Nipawin area one of the oldest agricultural areas in the 

province. 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

591 

Mr. Speaker, in this Centennial Year, Canada is honouring the intrepid old explorers with a cross-

country canoe pageant starting at Rocky Mountain House on May 24, paddling down the Saskatchewan 

River through many water courses to arrive in Montreal, September 2. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

remind the Members of this Legislature that the Canoe Pageant will arrive at the beautiful Nipawin 

Regional Park on June 10, where a tremendous celebration is planned to mark the event. Mr. Speaker, 

the following day the Canoe Pageant will be at Squaw Rapids and June 12, the Pageant will arrive at 

Cumberland House with continued celebrations at the three points. Mr. Speaker, the historic settings, the 

varied beautiful scenery surrounded by a vast interesting diversified agriculture development, the many 

natural resources of fish, game, and wildlife, forest, lake, and river will present a background to the 

Canoe Pageant that will not be seen anywhere else in Canada. The Canoe Pageant through the Nipawin 

constituency well marks one of the major celebrations of the Centennial Year. 

 

I would hope that many of the people of Saskatchewan will avail themselves of the opportunity to visit 

north-eastern Saskatchewan and participate in this unusual event. Mr. Speaker, today, on behalf of the 

people of the Nipawin constituency, I extend a special invitation to one and all to make a special effort 

to participate in the celebrations on this occasion, June 10 to June 12. I would like to have you see the 

many accomplishments of an enthusiastic, friendly people. I would like you to acquaint yourselves with 

the opportunities that are available in the last frontier of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing my remarks I would like to relay to Premier Thatcher, the Cabinet Members, 

and Members of the Government, the thanks and appreciation of the people of the Nipawin constituency 

for the improved roads, the new and improved services, the grants for homeowners, municipalities and 

school boards. They know there are many problems to solve, but much has been done. The people of my 

constituency are grateful for each improvement. I would like to say to the Members of this Legislature 

that I cannot support the amendment but I will fully support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I know that you know we are in the Budget Debate. 

The Hon. Member who just sat down (Mr. Radloff) was apparently debating the Address in Reply to the 

Speech from the Throne. He mentioned it several times but that‘s a mere detail. I think it was a rather 

good job that the Premier wasn‘t in while the last two Members were speaking because even he 

probably wouldn‘t have recognized himself, or he certainly would have been feeling for his wings. 

 

I did enjoy the speeches of the two Members. They were actually, Mr. Speaker, when you analyse them, 

a compliment to the previous Government and a justification, even though it is unwillingly given, of the 

programs that were put into effect by that Government. I was amused when the Member for Nipawin 

(Mr. Radloff) was telling us about the Mr. X with whom he had the long conversation. He said this man 

had a lot of ideas to give away and it would appear, Mr. Speaker, that the Member for Nipawin went 

there with an empty vessel and was able to hold them all. But if it‘s so good, if the situation is like that, 

Mr. Speaker, throughout the province of Saskatchewan, well let‘s 



February 22, 1967 

 

592 

have an election this spring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I am one of the Members in this Legislature who have no doubt about 

the outcome of the election personally. I know I won‘t be here because I am not going to run and it is 

with some regret that I look forward to that situation, but time rolls on and this must be at some time. 

But I‘m willing and happy to see an election called any time, and I think the people of Saskatchewan, 

contrary to what the Hon. Member was telling us, are quite willing to make a change in the Government 

of this province. 

 

The Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) was criticized by my colleague, the Member for 

Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) who made his speech Monday. He criticized him in regard to NorCanAir 

and the fact that they have abandoned their repair depot at Prince Albert. The Minister has been saying 

since that time and it is so reported on the news today at noon that NorCanAir was only required to keep 

the repair base necessary to service their own planes. Now this, Mr. Speaker, is a bit of a stretch of the 

imagination because I have before me some extracts – first from the Debates of the Legislature of March 

22nd, 1965. The Minister in announcing the sale of Saskair said: 

 

The purchaser is bound to maintain all existing services presently provided by Saskair, namely the 

existing air base and repair maintenance shop at Prince Albert. In return the Government has 

undertaken to contract services with a minimum of $275,000 to a maximum of $400,000 annually. 

 

Now those were the words of the Minister but there are also words in the Agreement. Clause 18 of the 

Agreement reads: 

 

The purchaser hereby agrees with the vendor and as a separate covenant with the Crown in the 

right of Saskatchewan as follows: To maintain and operate the existing repair and maintenance 

shop at Prince Albert continuously until the 1st day of March, 1975. 

 

Now when you let 20 or 30 mechanics or tradesmen go, you‘re just not maintaining the present existing 

repair depot. But if that wasn‘t enough, another clause following that says: 

 

continuously until the 1st day of march 1975 to continue the present operations of the vendor; to 

maintain the four permanent bases mentioned in the recital and subject to the foregoing; to 

preserve all existing air services unless any cessation or reduction thereof be consented to by the 

Executive Council for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That is pretty clear and pretty plain. Then this clause: 

 

Provincial guarantees of business shall no longer be of any effect if there shall be a breach of the 

purchaser‘s covenant contained in Clause 18 hereof. 

 

And again NorCanAir has to obtain Saskair‘s consent to remove assets from Saskatchewan and if it does 

so with consent, all monies owing become payable immediately. 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

593 

Now to those of us who are watching this scene it is quite evident that NorCanAir has not lived up to its 

agreement. I have no doubt that, when they closed down operations of the shop in Prince Albert, they 

took a lot of assets out of the province or disposed of them. But apparently the Government thinks it‘s 

alright to let them get away with this. 

 

Now I want to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) on making the best case out of a 

poor one in his Budget Speech. I wasn‘t here to listen to him and though I have a copy of his speech, I 

haven‘t had a chance to read it. Mr. Speaker, I am pretty well up-to-date on it because I listened to the 

one last year and I read the one last year. From the little I looked into this there is little change in the 

style, some change in degree and that is about all the change. I certainly do not to congratulate my 

colleague, the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) for doing a very excellent job on Monday of showing up 

the weak points in this Budget which is brought up to us. When my Hon. friends opposite this afternoon 

stood up and talked to us about no increase in taxes, they must have had their tongues in their cheeks. I 

hope they didn‘t bite it very hard because, when you actually take $3,000,000 out of the Power 

Corporation profits, what else is that but a hidden tax on the users of power and gas throughout the 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — So you just can‘t get away with this story about no increase in taxes. If 

we look at the total amount to be collected in taxes – I am sorry I didn‘t have the chance to get these 

figures – but the taxes that the Government proposes to collect in the coming year will be about twice as 

much as the CCF Government in this last complete year in office in the year ending in the spring of 

1964. Now you can talk about rates, you can talk about percentages, you can talk about whatever you 

like, but it isn‘t percentages that the people pay in taxes, it‘s dollars and cents in taxes. So let it be 

known that when the Hon. Members talk about collecting less taxes – and this was their big program - 

the people of Saskatchewan are not paying much attention to them in that respect. 

 

I want to congratulate the six recently announced legislative secretaries too. And in the words of Caesar, 

I hope they are all honourable men and that their service as legislative secretaries will be to the province 

of Saskatchewan and not to the Liberal or any other political party on account of the extra pay they get. 

You know as the Government we had 15 Cabinet Ministers. Now there are 12 whole Ministers and six 

half Ministers. but one of the things that the Liberal party was going to do, was to educe the number of 

Ministers, cut down the cost, but instead of that it has gone up and certainly the expense allowances for 

the Ministers and the Secretaries is a great deal higher than it was previously too. Not only the 

legislative secretaries but there are special assistants to the special assistants. I am wondering if it is 

because of all of these special assistants running to and fro, probably going to the Premier‘s office to get 

a cold drink out of the refrigerator and then going some place else that there was so much wear and tear 

on the floors that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) decided he had to put down new floors. 

But that is just by the way. 

 

Before I get into the meat of what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to offer my congratulations to you. 

I know you have a difficult job; I know that we are not the best behaved children 



February 22, 1967 

 

594 

at all times and you have many problems. I can sincerely congratulate you for the way you handle these 

situations. Sometimes I don‘t agree with you, sometimes I could take back to you but I try to hold my 

tongue. But you do deserve compliments and congratulations for very sincerely trying to do a good job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — And while I am on the matter of compliments I also want to express 

compliments which will be supported unanimously to the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. We have in 

Saskatchewan been extremely fortunate in the Clerks we have had to serve us since I have been in this 

House. George Stephen was a wonderful Clerk to work with. He knew his parliamentary procedure very 

well indeed. our present Clerk, Mr. Koester, is a worthy successor to him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — And our substitute, Mr. Bradshaw, that we had last year was also very 

excellent. The arrangements in the Chamber, the service given by the pages is all very good indeed and 

they deserve the compliments and appreciation of the Members. 

 

Now, to get down to some more serious affairs, I would like again to mention some of the things the 

Premier said when he was outside the province. Members may say, don‘t repeat. I think these things 

have to be repeated, and the Premier in his speech in San Francisco – and this is published in the 

Vancouver Sun – in talking about the Crown corporations said: ―Well, of course in the over-all picture 

there were no profits, rather there were colossal losses.‖ Of course it is public information that up to 

1964, after deducting the losses of some of the corporations, there was still about $15,000,000 of net 

profits. And for anybody to spread stories about the province like this, so false; this I think should be 

discouraged, to put it very, very mildly indeed. But of course some of our Liberal politicians get a bit 

over-enthusiastic at times and some of the Liberal press. I‘ve got a very interesting editorial here that 

was taken out of the Star Phoenix, June 21, 1948, 20 years ago, Mr. Speaker, and it is about the new 

Sodium Sulphate plant at Chaplin, and the Star Phoenix said: 

 

If the Chaplin Plant was a private venture, the Province would make about $175,000 a year in 

royalties out of a production of 150,000 tons. It could have done this without risking a nickel of the 

taxpayers‘ money. The Chaplin plant will not make enough to take a cent off anyone‘s taxes in 

Saskatchewan, nor add a nickel to anyone‘s old age pension. 

 

This was the prediction of the Star Phoenix in regard to the Chaplin plant in 1948. Well everybody 

knows it has been a grand success and has made more than $2,000,000 and now it must be close to 

$3,000,000 in profits from this one relatively small plant. 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — $5,500,000. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Is it $5,500,000? I haven‘t looked up my figures recently. 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

595 

But I don‘t think this kind of misrepresentation of the facts gets us any place. I think we can make a 

contribution to the Province of Saskatchewan if we will be rather careful to stay pretty close to the truth. 

 

The Premier on that trip said too, that taxes per capita in Saskatchewan were substantially out of line 

with our sister provinces. Well, let‘s take a look at what per capita taxes actually were at that time. In 

1961-62, this was before the coming of medicare, because this was an extra service that was not given in 

any other province, and if you are going to make a comparison of taxes, I think a comparison of services 

must be made in all fairness. But in 1961-62 Saskatchewan occupied not first place in high per capita 

taxes in Canada but fourth place. That‘s a long piece from first place and you can‘t say that at that time 

Saskatchewan was out of line. Ahead of Saskatchewan were British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec in 

per capita tax rate. That‘s on a basis of actual dollars of taxes. 

 

Now, in the next year, 1962-63 on the basis of per capita taxes as a per cent of personal income, (this is 

important too, that taxes be related to personal income, because if the per capita tax is low and the 

personal income is very low the situation may be worse than if the tax is high and the income is a good 

deal higher), the per capita taxes were fifth place in Saskatchewan, right down near the middle of all the 

provinces, not at the top; not the highest. It was Prince Edward island who had the honour to occupy the 

top space that year. Quebec was number two, British Columbia was number three, and Ontario was 

number four; Saskatchewan fifth as a percentage of personal income being taken for per capita taxes. 

And if we come to 1964-65, (and this is the last year for which we can get information and the first year 

of Liberal Government) we find that Saskatchewan occupied the fourth place, still in exactly the same 

place as it was a number of years before. So when we are given the song and dance about the tax 

question in the Province of Saskatchewan, that too has to be taken with a very, very large grain of salt. 

 

Then he is reported to have said also that the state debt, (why he doesn‘t want to call it a province I don‘t 

know, because it isn‘t yet one of the States of the American Union) went from $150,000,000 to 

$600,000,000. Well, if ever there was a question of trying to compare oranges and applies, this is it. The 

fact of the matter is that the net debt in 1944 when we took over was about $160,000,000 not 

$150,000,000 and this was net debt. Of course he didn‘t tell them that and the figure he quotes for the 

end of the period, $600,000,000 isn‘t net debt, it‘s gross debt, and by that time the net debt had 

disappeared completely, and instead there were net assets. Now it may not be telling a deliberate lie to 

say that the state debt went from $150,000,000 to $600,000,000 or maybe not a very black one, but 

certainly it is misleading people and not giving them the correct picture of the situation. You know, if 

the Premier was a small boy and his Mother was old-fashioned, after one of these trips he would sure get 

his mouth washed out with soap as well as getting spanked. I hope that he will learn to quite telling these 

fantastic nasty stories about the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, in this Debate and all over the country we have heard Liberal speakers praise the many 

Government programs. As I said at the beginning of my talk, this is really a compliment to the former 

Government because practically all of the good programs 



February 22, 1967 

 

596 

that the Government is carrying on today were initiated by the CCF Government. Now, of course, Mr. 

Speaker, the Government says that even though there‘s been no change in the programs at all, just that 

wonderful touch apparently in their opinion, has made these programs better. We could go over a long 

list of them and talk about how good crop insurance is. Well we initiated crop insurance; we hammered 

out the first tracks in regard to crop insurance and got it under way. It would be pretty terrible, a horrible 

Government and a pretty stupid Government if it hadn‘t gone ahead with a good program like that and 

developed it further. And I‘m glad to know that it has done it. I always get amused when the Minister of 

Cooperation (Mr. Coderre) talks about the cooperatives in the north. We know as everybody knows that 

the cooperatives in the north, this program of Assistance for Cooperatives in the north was initiated by 

the former Government. At Ile-a-La-Crosse and at Cumberland House, the Fish Marketing Program, the 

Fur Marketing program, the construction of hospitals where there never were hospitals before, Buffalo 

narrows, Sandy Bay, Stoney Rapids, Uranium City. 

 

And when I‘m talking about hospitals I could take about southern Saskatchewan too. We had probably 

next to, if not exactly, the poorest set-up of hospitals in Canada in 1944. We encouraged union hospitals; 

we started giving grants to assist them to build hospitals, and then for shame, the Government at Ottawa 

finally came in with a $1,000 per bed grant and later they increased it to $2,000. the program of 

construction and development of hospitals all the way from the one, the little one at Stoney Rapids to the 

University Hospital is a CCF program. 

 

In education, you know one of the first things we had to do was to pay back salaries of teachers in the 

Province of Saskatchewan that a Liberal Government had failed to provide for. This wasn‘t at the end of 

the depression, it was in 1944. There was a considerable number of teachers who hadn‘t at that time 

been paid for the work they had done many years before. 

 

The Liberals in the Province of Saskatchewan, the great majority of them did everything they could to 

prevent and to make difficult the establishment of the larger school unit administration and they now 

have the nerve to stand up and brag about the education system in Saskatchewan and what they are 

doing for it. We had to take a run-down, out of date educational system and rebuild it from start to 

finish. Pupil transportation was introduced and developed all over the Province of Saskatchewan. The 

one room rural school with little or no equipment has almost passed out of the picture now; there are 

very few of them in operation at the present time, so that children no matter whether they live in the 

country or in the city, do enjoy to a very great extent, equal educational opportunity. The standards for 

teachers were increased and the salaries were increased and if ever anything needed to be done, that 

certainly needed to be done. And we can be very proud in this party as Members of this party, of what 

we have accomplished in education. And, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members opposite can be also very 

proud of this program. I don‘t ask them to be proud of it because we did it, but because Saskatchewan 

did it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — But don‘t go telling stories about it and throwing mud on 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

597 

it. Another program which has been a wonderful success in the province of Saskatchewan, and my hon. 

friends are bragging about it as if they thought about it in the first place, is the Grid Road Program. This 

only got laughter from the Liberals when we introduced it in the Legislature about 12 years ago. This 

was the reception it got. They said it wouldn‘t work. It did work and now we find all over the country, 

all over Saskatchewan as a result of this program, gravelled roads, roads that previously were usable 

only in very good or dry weather or in the winter time when nature had made them solid. 

 

We started the principle of equalization grants to municipalities. Equalization grants to schools was 

actually started by the previous Liberal Government before that. And we got criticized for starting the 

equalization to municipalities too. Sure, it wasn‘t a very big grant, costs were a great deal less then, but 

it would be a pretty ineffective, stupid and short-sighted government that would have failed to go ahead 

and develop that plan. I‘m glad the Government has put more money into this which is absolutely no 

more than what should have been done and what any government would have done if it were a decent 

government at all. The only compliment that I can give my hon. friends is that in a lot of cases they had 

sense enough to carry on the good program s that we started. We talk about our highway program. 

Saskatchewan didn‘t even have very many gravelled highways. My constituency didn‘t have a foot of 

gravel except one part where the soil was gravel and they couldn‘t build a road without having it gravel. 

 

A great deal of credit is due to our original Minister of Highways, J. T. Douglas. He actually got 

Saskatchewan highways out of the mud. Before that it wasn‘t gravel, it was mud, and he got a good start 

on hard-surfacing and dust-free as well. And again, any good government couldn‘t do anything but carry 

this on and improve this program, but this was a program that we started, and believe me, there just 

wasn‘t a highway program that you could find before that time. 

 

Probably the greatest accomplishment of all was power. We had in Saskatchewan a small Power 

Commission which had made no money, which had an accumulated deficit in 1944 and which had a few 

isolated power stations and isolated lines. We had also two or three other companies operating. In a 

country the size of Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, and with the population as sparse as it is, you 

could not afford any other but an efficient system to take power to the people in this area because of the 

great expense in two ways: first of all, the long distance to transmit and deliver the power, and second, 

the generation of the power, because we had not, as some other provinces have, easily developed hydro 

sources of power. Our power, in the early days had to be developed by internal combustion engines or 

steam engines fired by oil or coal or gas, and this was expensive. We had to build up a system to get 

enough volume, enough capacity to consume power before you could think of building a hydro plant in 

the Province of Saskatchewan, because our hydro plants are rather expensive due to the terrain of our 

country. But we did get our lines all over the Province of Saskatchewan; we did get power lines within 

the reach of at least 90 per cent of the farming population of the Province of Saskatchewan. We reduced 

the rates several times too. Then with the coming of natural gas about 10 or 12 years ago we stated the 

program of taking gas to as many people as possible in the Province of Saskatchewan. Now we could 

have said, let private industry do this and private industry would have been very happy to take it to 

Saskatoon and 



February 22, 1967 

 

598 

to Regina, and Moose Jaw and a few other places where there was a good market and good profit, but to 

get natural gas to Arborfield, to Nipawin, to all of the other small placed located far out from the supply 

under any system of private ownership would have been hopeless. And you may talk about Socialism, 

but it is only the principles of Socialism that made it possible to take natural gas and power to all of the 

people throughout the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Some Hon. Member: — What about Alberta? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Well there‘s a great del of difference in Alberta. 

 

Hon D. G. Steuart (Minister of Natural Resources): — Oh, yes! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Yes, and if the Hon. Minister will listen I‘ll tell it to him; he wants to 

know. coming down out of the Rockies in a great many places are mountain streams scattered all the 

way from the south to the north in the Province of Alberta, with ideal power sites on them, so that first 

of all you can develop relatively small and cheap hydro plants and cheap fuel. And the fact that these are 

scattered all up the province gave an advantage, but even so the farmer in Alberta had to pay more than 

the farmer in Saskatchewan to get power; much more you see. It didn‘t work as well there as it did here. 

Now, in Manitoba, they had the advantages in Manitoba of two things, one… 

 

Mr. Steuart: — A Liberal Government. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I was going to speak of advantages that are sure, not those that are 

questionable. They had first of all, good hydro sites not too far from the huge city of Winnipeg where 

they had half or better than half of the population of Manitoba. Another advantage they had, even that 

Liberal Government in Manitoba had sense enough to adopt a Socialist principle for this development 

and their rural development of power was, because of public ownership, because of Socialism and these 

other fortunate situations. You see, my honourable friends shouldn‘t be ashamed of the bits of Socialism 

which they have. Be proud of them. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — …makes him work better. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Well that‘s alright if you can make them work better; all to the good. 

I‘m going to suggest right now one place where he can make them work better and this is in the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. It, this year, if I don‘t miss my guess, will have some place between 

$10,000,000 and $5,000,000 profits; it will be in that area. This will be the highest profit that we have 

ever had from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Wonderful! And they didn‘t raise the rates but 

what you should do is reduce the rates. We haven‘t had a reduction in power rates since we had a CCF 

Government. That‘s getting pretty serious, and the Hon. Minister should think about that. How long can 

you go? I‘d say you had better kick through with a reduction in power rates at least, not gas, that will 

mean $5,000,000 or $6,000,000 or maybe $8,000,000 to the people of Saskatchewan, to give it to them 

down near cost. This theory of making the customers of 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

599 

today pay for the power generation facilities and transmission facilities that will be used 50 years, 100 

years from now is a very unfair and unjust system. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What about the highways? You said… 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — No I didn‘t. No I didn‘t but what I say is wrong in regard to the 

borrowing of money for highways is trying to kid us into believing you have a balanced budget. you‘ve 

got a deficit because you‘re spending too much on highways and you have to borrow. Why didn‘t you 

honestly say it instead of trying to cover it up? And then to add insult to injury, stealing that $3,000,000 

out of the Power Corporation profits and putting them into Revenue. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — We‘re just taking it from the big companies and giving it back to the small. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Well, I think my honourable friend from Prince Albert, (Mr. Steuart) is a 

very interesting cap but he‘s really quite hopeless. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I don‘t think I‘ll ever be able to convert him, but you know, Mr. 

Speaker, it‘s a very good exercise to always keep trying, and I will. 

 

Well, I could run over a whole list of them; the great Telephone expansion that took place in this 

province while we had a CCF Government, and this ‗phone system spread all over the province; we got 

the microwave through the province, all this sort of thing. We started the Student Aid Program, the 

scholarships for the grade 12 students; the bursaries; the loans; all of these things. This is all a Socialist 

program adopted by my Liberal friends who scream about Socialism. We provided free treatment of 

patients suffering from mental illness, free treatment of patients suffering from cancer. These were 

programs that were started by us, and in the whole field of public health. My honourable friends like to 

take about the things they‘re doing now. I say anything they‘re doing now in this field that‘s good, okay, 

fine. We had probably 10 or 11 public health nurses in the Province of Saskatchewan employed by the 

Provincial Government prior to 1944. What a public health service that was! We organized the health 

region, gave them financial assistance, very substantial financial assistance. They were able to put into 

effect, programs of immunization, sanitary work, school nursing and other nursing. And in one health 

region, they put in complete health services, Health Region No. 1, in the Swift current area. A year or 

two later we came along with the province-wide hospitalisation plan. There were no Liberals that helped 

us to put that plan into effect or make it popular. Not at all. All they did was to find fault with it. And 

then I don‘t need to tell the story of Medicare, when the Liberal Members of the Legislature went to 

meetings to stir up trouble and to make trouble and make it as difficult as possible to bring this in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 22, 1967 

 

600 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I hope the Liberal Government as long as it is in office – and I hope 

that‘s not too long, but as long as it is in office, will continue these good programs and if it can to 

improve them. 

 

In welfare we took the whole question of welfare out of the field, which was disgraceful, because what it 

meant in those days, the person who needed assistance had to go to a relief officer or before a municipal 

council, in public, and suffer all the indignities that were heaped upon him. We changed that, and 

provided for confidential applications for appeal boards. We did a great deal which I won‘t specify in 

the field of child care. 

 

Most of all, probably my honourable friends talk about what they are doing for the Indian and Métis 

people of the province. We took schools to these people years ago. Education was one of the first 

programs, schools all throughout the North. There were no schools worthy of the name in northern 

Saskatchewan. Two or three boarding schools which the Indian children were sent to by the Department 

of Indian Affairs. Hospitals throughout the north, cooperatives, the fish marketing and the Government 

trading, and the trapping and the fishing. Before that people who lived outside went in and took the fur 

and got out. Some of them went in and did fishing on the lakes and got out. We brought in new 

programs to reserve for the people in the north these resources, so that only a local resident, a bonafide 

resident cold have a trap line, could be part of the fur business and only a local resident could get a 

licence to do commercial fishing. We have no reason to be at all ashamed of what we have done in that 

regard. We got power throughout the province, so that it could then be taken to some of the reserves. 

The program was started, now for goodness sake, get on with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — In the North, roads, portages, airfields and air service, a regular air 

service was established in northern Saskatchewan, and lumbering in the North for local needs. We 

bought saw-mills that could be put into a relatively small plane, had them taken to different settlements 

where they cut lumber so that they could have floors in their log shacks, instead of having only an earth 

floor. This is where we started programs like this for the improvement of the living standards of the 

people in the north. And I hope that those programs, good programs, will be continued. 

 

In the field of agriculture – there was practically no agricultural representative service when we took 

over but a fully developed program at the end. My colleague here, (Mr. Nollet) did a great deal in the 

supplying of chemicals for killing of grasshoppers, for weed control, and so forth, at cost prices to the 

farmers. The 4H Clubs had their great period of growth during that term of office. They didn‘t grow by 

accident; they grew by design because the Agricultural Representative service was working on this 

project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — My friend from Nipawin (Mr. Radloff) talked about community 

pastures. Well, of course we have to give credit, not to this Government, but to the Federal Government, 

the PFRA for actually starting them. But as a Provincial affair it was the CCF 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

601 

Government that started the community pastures, developed them all over the Province of Saskatchewan 

and at that time, developed them without any help from a Federal program, when we put them into 

effect. So again, this was started by our Government. The clearing of Crown lands; in the good old days 

the system was to let the settler go in, take his homestead, and look after his own clearing. Later some of 

the idea was that this land in the raw state should be sold. It could then only be purchased by people who 

had not only money to pay for it, but had the money to clear it and improve it and make it worthwhile 

staying on. We started the program of clearing farm lands, of building roads. Sure, there were some 

mistakes and problems that arose in this program, but it is always true that people who do things, do 

make mistakes. The people who do nothing, make very few mistakes, except that one big mistake, that‘s 

all. The Agricultural Machinery Administration Program, which the Liberal Government has scrapped, 

was of value to the farmers, and I am very sorry it has done that. I wish it would represented-establish it. 

Irrigation, the work done again by the Department of Agriculture over those years in many small areas 

for irrigation, has been of great help. The Farm Sewer and Water Program; you couldn‘t do anything 

about this until after you had given power to most of the farms. But after getting power to most of the 

farms it was a practical thing to put in the Farm Sewer and Water Program. 

 

Before I leave this question of agriculture, I want to bring to the attention of the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. McFarlane) the possibility of development of what is called in my constituency, the Mistatim Bjork 

Lake Swamp. This is a fairly large swamp of about twenty five to thirty five thousand acres lying north 

of Bjork Lake, south of Mistatim and Peesane. A lot of it is covered by moss, no forest growth on it of 

any value. The local people are very interested in seeing some study make of this. It should be studied to 

see what can be done. Remember there are roads and power all around this. It isn‘t like going into a new 

area where you have to build completely afresh. This is accessible to the present facilities. But I would 

recommend a thorough study of this by land experts, by engineers and surveyors, to tell us what the 

possibility of some improvement is, not necessarily to have it all drained; but certainly a large part of the 

fringes of the area could be drained and we could have some wet land left in the middle of it. I could go 

on, Mr. Speaker, talking about other programs and I do want to mention – I have notes on urban areas – 

on Provincial finances. I would like to deal with that at some other time. Industries developments; it was 

in this twenty years that there was a great change from the pure agriculture economy to an industrial 

economy. But I want to mention for a minute or two the question of forestry. 

 

Forests are a resource which we have, or should have forever if we manage them right. They are a 

renewable resource. We established a program of forest inventory to know what we had, we established 

a controlled cut so that we wouldn‘t be rid of our forests in a few years. And in the Hudson Bay region 

the allowable cut of spruce timber there if I remember right is around twenty four or twenty five million 

board feet a year. For the last few years they were getting down to that. You see at the end of the war 

there was a very high cut, and if we had kept on at that high rate of cut, we would have had no forests 

left before now. But I note that last year, the year ending March 31, 1965, the cut of white spruce saw-

timber was twenty six million. This last year ending March 31, 1966, the cut in the Hudson Bay region 

was fifty two million, just double that which it was the year before. Now, they say that the Simpson Mill 

at Hudson Bay 



February 22, 1967 

 

602 

will handle fifty five million board feet a year. Now if you add this on to the regular cut you are going to 

get up to seventy five million. Now it is true that the Simpson Mill, which can use small logs, will get 

some additional cut, by using small trees that wouldn‘t grow to be big ones. Otherwise they would be 

wasted. But they will not get enough of that material to make the difference between a sustained yield-

cut of twenty five to thirty million board feet and seventy five board feet. The people in my constituency 

are very much disturbed with this situation. I might mention, also, that the Simpson Timber Company 

has been a pretty tough outfit to work for. Some of the boys up there thought the Timber Board was kind 

of tough, but they really found out what tough was when they got working for Simpson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Truckers have gone broke on trying to operate sub-contracting for the 

Company. There is some considerable doubt if this whole project is really on too sound a foundation. 

Now it is an industry that, certainly the people in that area value, but I do have some doubts about its 

sound foundation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I would like to make one request of the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Thatcher) and of the Government, and this was previously mentioned in this House this session; that is 

the importance of seeing to it that the provincial financial institutions, that is the trust companies and 

financial institutions in this province, who are organized under provincial laws be made to get the 

Federal insurance for depositors. You know there have been some very bad failures in Eastern Canada 

of financial institutions. As a result the Federal Government, a Liberal Government, passed an act to 

provide for guarantees or insurance for deposits in these institutions. The Act provides that all Federal 

institutions have to be in it, that other financial institutions can come in and that any province could 

require that all its financial institutions go into it and get that protection. And before we have any crash 

here, and I hope we never do, I think that should be attended to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Now, Mr. Speaker, the budget doesn‘t have in it very much in the way 

of new programs. What good there is in it, is carrying out the programs that have been established in the 

past. But I can‘t support a Budget which tried to fool the people of the province into believing they have 

a balanced budget, by the methods that have been used and as I have mentioned here this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — I shall support the amendment but I cannot support the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the Budget 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

603 

Debate I want to inform you at the outset, there isn‘t enough time this afternoon to deal with the many 

aspects of the Budget that I wish to deal with, as well as the many statements made by Members 

opposite, that I certainly want to deal with. And because of the statements made by the Member for 

Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) who isn‘t in his seat this afternoon, I want him to be in his seat when I 

reply to his charges tomorrow. He said progress towards diversification was grinding to a halt. He was 

referring to agriculture and farms in Saskatchewan. He made the bland and absolutely false statement, 

and a man in his position should know better, that all production and marketing of livestock and 

agriculture products in Saskatchewan is down, that livestock marketings are down, that income from 

livestock products is down. I certainly want to deal with that tomorrow. And because the Members 

opposite have said that there have been no new programs instituted by this Government since we took 

office, I want to prove to you, Mr. Speaker, and to Members of this Legislature and to the people of 

Saskatchewan that one of the first things this Government did when it formed the Government back in 

1964, was to give the farmers of our province who were denied the security of Crown lands, security of 

private ownership of those lands for the first time in history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — That being the case, Mr. Speaker, I want to inform you now that to date the effect 

of this change in policy, by taking politics out of Crown lands and by giving the farmers of this province 

the opportunity to own Crown lands, as of today, 351,911 acres of cultivation lease lands have been sold 

to farmers. Added to that, agreements for the purchase of 142,202 acres of grazing lease lands have been 

made with farmers of this province now have security of tenure and needn‘t fear any Socialist 

Government in this year, next year, or for the next twenty years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The Member for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) is doing a lot of screaming. I don‘t know 

whether the twenty five hundred and fifty two acres he held under a Crown lease are individually owned 

or not. He, at one time, as a Member of this Legislature and as a Minister of the Crown, responsible for 

the administering of these Crown lands, sat on top of sixteen quarter sections of Crown land in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nollet (Cutknife): — Oh, big boy… 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — This is the reason why we have taken the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to give the 

farmers of this province, who are entitled to this security, the type of protection we have. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Pretty dirty; a pretty dirty blow. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Pretty dirty? A candidate for your party has been making statements in the press 

indicating that a son or a member 



February 22, 1967 

 

604 

of a family of somebody on this side of the House got Crown lands. If you want, Mr. Member for The 

Battlefords, (Mr. Kramer) I‘ll give you a list of just about every Member sitting on that side of the 

House, who either for some member of their family or somebody connected with them, got Crown lands 

during the last twenty years. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I would like to ask a question. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order. If the Member is going to permit a question, he‘ll take his seat, and if he 

doesn‘t take his seat, he can‘t ask a question. Now, will the Member for…Order! Now, will the Member 

permit a question? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Sure. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — When did the Hon. Member for Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) or his family receive that lease 

in the first place, Mr. Minister of Agriculture? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I would have to look up the records if the records are available. What I said was he 

was probably an MLA or a Minister of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it was in the family for the last thirty five years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order, order! Now we aren‘t going to have a disorderly debate. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I said… 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! Now the interjections from the Member for The Battlefords are 

absolutely uncalled for and I hope you will maintain order. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I listened with interest to some of the remarks made by the Member for Pelly (Mr. 

Larson) this afternoon when he discussed the situation of the farmers in this province. It was quite 

significant to hear these remarks come from a new Member when one of his first actions in this House 

was to stand up in his place and deny the farmers in his area as well as the farmers in the rest of the 

province, access to tax-free gasoline for their farm trucks. Certainly he comes from an area of the 

province where there are many smaller farmers, and certainly this was one measure that in no small way 

meant a great deal to the farmers in that particular part of the province. He spoke a great deal about the 

decrease in the number of milk cows and the dairy business in the province. I just want to inform him 

that the highest butter production in the history of Saskatchewan was in the year 1944 and from that year 

on the butter production in this province decreased to the point where we have the lowest production in 

the history of the province. And to overcome that, 



February 22, 1967 

 

 

605 

Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you tomorrow, when I resume the Debate, the measures that this 

Government has taken to lead us to a greater diversification of our agriculture industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I want to point out to you that in addition to the selling of Crown lands to private 

individuals which is a new policy brought about by this Government, several new program s have been 

started. The new Veterinary Lab. in Saskatchewan, a new policy under this Government; a Soil-Testing 

Lab. which has done more for the province‘s farmers than any other think that was done by the former 

Government; a Feed-Testing Lab. which will be set up; a Fodder Shelter program inaugurated by this 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Private Irrigation program inaugurated by this Government; Forage program for 

private lands, inaugurated by this Government; Elite Swine Herd program, inaugurated by this 

Government; Ewe lamb Purchase Policy, to get the sheep industry back on its feet; community pastures 

for sheep producers in this province, a new program of this Government; clearing of private lands, 

another new program inaugurated by this Government; installation of sewer and water in hamlets by the 

Family Farm Improvement Board under the Department of Agriculture, another new program started by 

this Government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Funny man. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, there are many more but I beg leave to adjourn the Debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o‘clock p.m. 


