



















































Hansard: March 23, 1967


1436 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

34th Day 

 

March 23, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

MR. G.G. LEITH (Elrose) moved second reading of Bill No. 90 — An Act to amend The Medical 

Profession Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce this Bill to amend The Medical Profession Act and 

I wish to say just a very few words about the purpose of the proposed amendments. 

 

The College of Physicians and Surgeons has proposed the amendments to The Medical Profession Act 

contained in this Bill. Some of these amendments are intended to safe-guard the quality of medical care 

being provided in this province. All the other amendments are related to administrative procedures 

already provided for in the Act. 

 

The Bill provides for the establishment of an Educational Register for the registration of hospital interns 

in residence. The supervision of physicians who have been appointed as hospital interns or residents, is 

generally recognized as an appropriate responsibility of the College. But to date there has been no 

statutory authority for the College to assume this responsibility. The Bill revises the basis for registering 

physicians from Great Britain and the Republic of Ireland. This change has been recommended in the 

interest of maintaining good standards. The change will not materially affect the supply of physicians in 

the province either at this time or at any time in the future. 

 

You will note, Mr. Speaker, that Section 53 is being repealed by this Bill and a new provision is being 

substituted respecting a physician who may be mentally ill. It is considered advisable that definite 

provisions be enacted in this regard, so that the duties of the Council and its mental health committee 

and the position of the physician will be clearly understood. The other proposed amendments are 

concerned with proceedings of the Discipline Committee and the other committees appointed by the 

Council. They represent measure to improve the administrative efficiency of these committees. I 

understand, Mr. Speaker, that officials of the College have studied these provisions of the Act 

extensively and that these remaining amendments are proposed as a result of this study. 

 

I therefore move that this Bill No. 90 now be read a second time. 

 

MR. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave at this time, to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 



 

March 23, 1967 

 

 

1437 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE: SITTINGS 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I move and seconded by 

Mr. Cameron (Minister of Natural Resources): 

 

that when this House adjourns on Thursday, March 23, 1967, it do stand adjourned until 

Monday, March 27, 1967. 

 

MR. J.H. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Just a matter of a question. Did the Government say what its 

intentions are with regard to today? Do we sit until 10:00 o'clock or do we adjourn at 5:30 o'clock? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, there was a suggestion by some of our Members that I was going to 

discuss it with the Members opposite when we get into Committee of Supply or Committee of the 

Whole, that we stop the clock maybe at 5:00 or 5:30 and carry on until 6:30 and then adjourn. If we 

agree then we will make the arrangements later on. Normally it was expected that we sit through until 

10:00 o'clock. 

 

Motion was agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of 

Public Health) that Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder, could we have this Bill stand. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well you can't ask for it to stand, you can ask to adjourn the debate. That's the 

correct procedure. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I received the report of the Medical Insurance Commission just 

yesterday. There are a number of things that are in this Bill that I would like to discuss and I would like 

to beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o'clock p.m. 

 

 


