



















































Hansard: March 13, 1967


 

 

1264 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Session 

26th Day 

 

Monday, March 13, 1967 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. H.D. LINK (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and the Members 

of this House, a fine group of students from Pleasant Hill School in Saskatoon. They are grade seven 

students and they are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Luciuk. They are seated in the Speaker's 

gallery, and I am sure we all wish them a pleasant day in the capital city and in this Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity of 

introducing to you a group of fine students who are seated in the east gallery. They are from Douglas 

Park School. Douglas Park School is very close to me, both my youngsters are attending Douglas Park; 

unfortunately at the moment they are not in the group. I would like to on your behalf and on behalf of 

the Members of the Legislature extend to them a warm welcome for this afternoon and wish them a 

happy and an education stay here with us today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would ask the indulgence of the House in order to introduce to you a fine group 

of students from the Separate School at Stockholm, Saskatchewan. They are under the able direction of 

Sister Blanda and Sister Ernestine of the Order of Sisters of Social Service. I am sure all Members of the 

House will wish to join with me in extending to them a very warm welcome to the Legislature of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and also to wish them a safe journey home. May I also say that we are 

extremely proud of the fact that at Stockholm we have the original mother house of the Sisters of Social 

Service. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. G.J. Trapp that Bill 

No. 28 — An Act to amend the School Grants Act be now read the second time. 

 

MR. R.A. WALKER (Hanley): — Your Honor will recall that the Minister very kindly agreed to 

provide the House with information as to how this Bill would apply. If I may say on a point of order at 

this time, the information hasn't come yet and I am sure the Minister won't oppose a further standing of 

the Bill. 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): — I'm sorry but Mr. Les Barrett 



 

March 13, 1967 

 

 

 

1265 

has been taken to hospital. I think it will be here tomorrow; in fact it will be here this afternoon 

sometime I think. But he was taken to hospital and he wasn't able to prepare all the material. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. D.G. Steuart that Bill 

No. 59 — An Act to amend the Forest Act be now read the second time. 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, the reason that I adjourned the debate on this 

particular Bill was because, when the Bill was amended previously, it was stated in this House that there 

were some 65 or 75,000,000 board feet of lumber in the Vermette and Cummins Lake area and that it 

would be necessary to construct a road to this area in order to get this lumber out. I asked a question as 

to what the expected cost of such a road would be. It was estimated that the road would cost about 

$2,000,000 from Canoe Lake to this general area. I wasn't satisfied with the answer I received in view of 

the information that was given to the House previously. I simply asked the estimated board feet of 

lumber expected from this area. By this I meant lumber, saw lumber, merchantable lumber that would 

be, I assume, processed by the Primrose Forest Products Company. Now I was looking over some forest 

inventories for that same general area and I find that the answer I got which was for the same general 

area stated that there were 8,000,000,000 board feet of soft woods and hard woods, four inches, diameter 

breast high, and also an estimated five to six billion board feet, eight inches, again diameter breast high. 

That isn't the kind of an answer I wanted. Everyone knows that there wasn't that much lumber in that 

particular area. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — On a point of order, could the Hon. 

Member relate what he's talking about has to do with the Bill that is before this House which is an Act to 

amend the Forest Act. All we are doing in this Act is to take a few little sections out and put them into 

agriculture. It has nothing to do with the Primrose or anything else. 

 

MR. NOLLET: — I based my privilege to speak, Mr. Speaker, on the fact that when this Act was 

opened previously it was for the same general purpose to place land in or out of the forest area. The 

Minister at that time gave us figures as to the amount of timber that was located in the Vermette and 

Cummins Lake area and he indicated that there was a tremendous amount of mature rotting timber in 

that area. That's the reason I am referring to it and I think I'm in order to speak about these matters when 

The Forestry Act is up for amendment. Certainly the Minister previously spoke in these terms and since 

I asked a question that I wanted specifically from the Minister: how many board feet of timber are 

available to the Primrose Product Company in the event that they began to take the timber out of this 

area. And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, that I want to raise at this moment is that according to the forest 

inventory taken in 1956, which was the final report, there was only 2.4 per cent of mature timber in that 

area of which three-quarters of the over-mature was poplar or of low commercial value. I am raising a 

question as to how much timber was actually in that area that could be of commercial value. I wish the 

Minister would be more specific instead of peddling a lot of nonsense about 8,000,000,000 or 

 



 

March 13, 1967 

 

 

1266 

some 9,000,000,000 board feet of timber, four inches in diameter, breast high, eight inches in diameter, 

breast high. This is not lumber timber. I would like to know how much actual commercial timber is 

available there for lumbering purposes. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The mover of the motion is about to close the debate, if anybody wishes to speak 

he must do so now. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I want to close the debate because I presume what the Member is talking about is 

either senile or I don’t know whether he is talking about some question . . . 

 

MR. NOLLET: — I'm tired of this kind of language; I have had about enough of this from the Minister 

opposite. I am much more potent than he is in many regards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I take back that remark, and he probably is. But obviously he asked a question and 

he didn't like the answer, but I suggest he ask another question. I don't know what it's got to do with the 

Bill on the amendment before this House. We took some parcels of land, some very small parcels of 

land out of the forest reserve and turned them over to agriculture, and took some of the agricultural land 

that has proven not too good for agriculture and put it back into forest land. These are the results of 

recommendations from the Land Use Committee that has been in operation for many years. There is one 

other amendment to this; that we take an area of land out of the forest area and set it aside for the 

location of the pulp mill at Prince Albert. This is all these amendments purport to do. And as for the 

ramblings of the potent Minister from Cutknife, if he re-asks the question when the estimates come up, 

certainly we will do our best to answer it. We have nothing to hide about the tremendous industrial 

development that is taking place in the timber industry in northern Saskatchewan and are pleased to give 

the Members opposite all the information they want. In connection with this Bill, the Hon. Member from 

Kelsey (Mr. Brockelbank) asked if we could make some maps available, and as I say the amount we are 

changing is very minor and we have made two maps, one of which I would like to keep and one which I 

would like to pass over to the Member for Kelsey. We only have one available. We have gone to quite a 

bit of work and we could get more. You can have this one; you'll see that there is not a great deal of 

change contemplated in this Bill. I would hope that the Members would support this Bill. 

 

MR. NOLLET: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask before the Member takes his seat, could we have an 

up-to-date forest inventory for that particular area made available to us. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I'm not sure what all is involved, Mr. Speaker. I am certainly prepared to give him 

all the information we have. Now whether we have this up to date or not — I don’t want to give a 

commitment now in case this would mean that we would have to go out and hire a bunch of people to do 

this — but we will certainly give you all the information we have available. 

 



 

March 13, 1967 

 

 

 

1267 

Motion agreed to and Bill read the second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:30 o'clock p.m. 


