



















































Hansard: February 10, 1967


180 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

7th Day 

 

Friday, February 10, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, through you, sir, and on behalf of all Members of the 

House, I would like to welcome to the Assembly this afternoon, 40 students — grade eleven students from 

Martin Collegiate in northwest Regina, who are located in the east and in the west galleries. These five 

classrooms of young adults are here to study democratic government and are accompanied by their teachers, 

Joe Megaw and Fred Steininger. All Members join me, I‟m sure, in expressing the wish that their stay with 

us will be pleasant and informative. 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw attention to a very fine group of 

students from the Lestock High School, who are seated in the Speaker‟s gallery. There are 27 grade 11 and 

12 students. They are accompanied by their principal, Mr. W.S. Cybulski who has been principal of the 

school for 25 years, and has made a fine contribution to education. They are also accompanied by Mr. 

Dolter, a high school teacher. Mr. C.J. Woytos who expected to be here today had to stay at home because of 

illness. We are very sorry to hear this. They are accompanied also by their bus driver, Mr. Tony Yanulik, 

who I am told is an outstanding bus driver. I hope they enjoy their trip and their visit to the House today. A 

very safe journey home to the people from Lestock. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.G. MacLENNAN (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to your attention and to 

welcome on your behalf, and on behalf of all the Members, a group of 3 grade 12 students from the William 

Derby High School at Strasbourg. They are seated in the west gallery and are accompanied by their teachers, 

Mr. Fuller and Mr. Woods, along with their drivers, Mr. Munholland and Mr. Smith, and I know that all 

Members here wish them a very pleasant visit. 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — I have already welcome 26 students from the Eyebrow High 

School in my office, sitting in the west gallery, but I know Hon. Members also wish them the very best while 

they are in the Legislative Buildings. 

 

CENTENNIAL GREETINGS FROM STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before the Orders of the Day, I have here a 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

181 

communication from the Fortieth Legislative Assembly of the State of North Dakota begun and held in the 

Capitol City of Bismark, North Dakota, on Tuesday, the 3rd day of January, 1967, as follows: 

 

HOUSE CONCURRENT RESOLUTION “T” 

 

A concurrent resolution commending the great nation of Canada for her one hundred years of 

progress in this her Centennial Year 1967. 

 

WHEREAS, on July 1, 1867, the new nation of Canada was formed; and 

 

WHEREAS, Canada and the United States share the longest undefended border in the world, a 

border marked not by armaments but by a beautiful Peace Garden which is located between the two 

countries and lies in Manitoba, one of the provinces of Canada, and North Dakota, one of the states 

of the United States, and 

 

WHEREAS, this border is also shared by the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and the state of 

North Dakota; and 

 

WHEREAS, the citizens of North Dakota take much pride in friendly association with the citizens of 

these two great border provinces and the great nation of which they are a part; and 

 

WHEREAS, Canada in 1967 celebrates her Centennial Year with an International Exhibition — 

EXPO ‟67 — in her historic city of Montreal and with many other important events through her 

nation; 

 

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE 

STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA, THE SENATE CONCURRING THEREIN: 

 

That Canada, as a nation, and her citizens, as a people, be commended for their great progress in all 

fields of human endeavor and for the high honor, respect, and esteem in which they are held by their 

neighbors, the citizens of the state of North Dakota. 

 

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that this resolution be printed in the journal and that a properly 

enrolled copy be sent by the Secretary of State to: 

 

The Hon. Lester B. Pearson, Prime Minister of Canada. 

The Hon. Dufferin Roblin, Premier of the Province of Manitoba. 

The Hon. W.R. Thatcher, Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

The Legislative Assembly, Province of Manitoba. 

The Legislative Assembly, Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Signed by: Speaker of the House, Chief Clerk of the House, President of the Senate, and Secretary of the 

Senate. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

182 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — I should like to move, seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That this Legislature acknowledges with deep appreciation the receipt of a Concurrent Resolution of 

the Fortieth Legislative Assembly of the State of North Dakota recognizing the occasion of the 

Centennial of the Confederation of Canada and observing the very friendly association which has 

always existed between the citizens of the great State of North Dakota and the people of the Province 

of Saskatchewan who share with pride a portion of a common and undefended border between the 

United States of America and Canada. 

 

The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Session assembled returns herewith its sincere thanks 

to the House of Representatives and Senate of the State of North Dakota for this expression of 

friendship and good will which is deeply appreciated and heartily reciprocated by the people of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and expresses the wish that Divine Providence may continue to guide and 

bless the people of North Dakota. 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I briefly associate myself with the 

resolution as seconder and the words of the Premier, in moving the resolution. This is one of those occasions 

that carries with it both assurances and possibilities of assurances. Getting a resolution like this from the 

governing bodies of a state of the United States assures us that they have forgiven us for defeating them in 

the war of 1812-14 and our response to it gives us a chance to assure them that we don‟t intend to repeat the 

process, at least in the near future. Quite seriously, as the Premier has said, they are people with whom we 

have shared much. Their state like ours has provide homes for many people who come from other parts of 

our respective nations and of the world indeed, who have shared the general area, known as the Great Plains 

Region. Certainly it has been an area of progress and an area which has contributed much to both our 

nations. We, too, respect and appreciate very much the thoughtfulness of the state of North Dakota in 

making this message available to our Legislature and our respective governments. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — May I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) by leave of 

this Assembly: 

 

That the Resolution just passed be communicated to the 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

183 

Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Chairman of the Senate of North Dakota by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

QUESTIONS RE: BID PRICES FOR EARTH EXCAVATION 

 

MR. C.G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct 

a question to the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) with regard to a written answer I received yesterday to 

question No. 16 on the Order Paper. The question was concerning bid prices for earth excavation during 

1966. The answer dealt with estimate tender quantities of contracts awarded between April 1, 1967 and 

December 31, 1967. I would like to ask the Minister first, if the bid prices given are as accurate as the dates, 

and second, in view of the apparent inaccuracy, may I expect a corrected answer to be tabled next week? 

 

HON. D. BOLDT (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll have to check with my staff and I‟ll make 

sure that the correct answers are delivered on Monday next. 

 

QUESTION RE: FIRING OF EMPLOYEES 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Cumberland): — Before the Orders of the Day. I would like to direct a 

question to the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) or to the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre). 

According to a report of yesterday‟s date in the Star Phoenix, one Robert Bishop, President of the Métis 

Friendship Centre of Prince Albert, was fired from a job in the Prince Albert pulp mill in my constituency 

and apparently five other workers it was alleged will be fired. I would like to now if the Ministers are aware 

of the press report and also if they are doing anything about it? 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, speaking for myself, I would like the Hon. 

Member that read the report this morning to know that we do not investigate from the basis of press reports, 

but if the Hon. Member or anyone else wishes to make a complaint in a normal manner to me or to any 

member in my department that a law of the Province of Saskatchewan has been violated we‟ll be glad to 

look into it. 

 

MISQUOTE IN LEADER POST 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker I would like to draw attention to the quote in the 

Leader Post from my speech yesterday. It reports me as having said that 360 companies left this province 

since 1964. What I said was that the October 7th Gazette listed 360 in that one issue. There are far more than 

that since 1964, but I was dealing with the one report, not the total since 1964. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

184 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Hooker 

(Notukeu-Willowbunch) for an Address In Reply, and the amendment thereto by Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Biggar). 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, as part of my concern for high standards of 

education in this province, I am personally especially interested in the calibre of the teachers we have in our 

school system. It is with pride that I say here and now, as I have stated on may previous occasions, “The 

teachers of Saskatchewan are among the best qualified and the most dedicated teachers in all Canada.” It was 

particularly distasteful to me, therefore, when an unscrupulous Moose Jaw local politician attempted to use 

for political gain the resignation of one of our most respected educators. Using outright distortion of fact and 

having no regard for the truth, this civic official jeopardized the reputation and integrity of a man I hold in 

high regard, both as a person and as an educator. I refer to Principal R.J. Reynolds, who recently left the 

Saskatchewan Technical Institute under the friendliest circumstances and with the full understanding and 

blessing of the Department of Education. Let me briefly read from a report in the Leader Post of February 2, 

1967 concerning a meeting of the Regina Northwest CCF Association. I read in part: 

 

Mayor Lewry said R.J. Reynolds, former principal of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose 

Jaw, had resigned in disgust over the Provincial Government‟s ineptitude in handling technical 

training facilities. 

 

Now this unscrupulous CCF candidate sent Mr. Reynolds a clipping from the Moose Jaw Times Herald 

which reported the comments he made to the Regina Northwest CCF Association. I want to read to this 

House Mr. Reynolds‟ reply under date of February 6, 1967, copy of which Mr. Reynolds sent to the 

Department of Education. And I read Mr. Reynolds‟ letter: 

 

Mr. L.H. Lewry 

City Hall 

Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan 

 

I have received from you the clipping from the Times-Herald of February 1st, 1967. I appreciate 

receiving it but strongly resent what you have said about me. What is your basis for your statement 

that I had „resigned in disgust‟? I did not leave Saskatchewan with feelings of disgust. I left with a 

feeling of pride that I had played some small part in bringing STI to its present size and state of 

excellence. 

 

Yours very truly, 

R.J. Reynolds 

Moose Jaw. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

185 

MR. TRAPP: — Mr. Speaker this sniffling in the gutter for an issue is a most reprehensible act. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TRAPP: — This NDP candidate believes that if you throw enough mud some will stick. That boy from 

Moose Jaw must be mighty muddy by now. 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Let‟s have the report. 

 

MR. TRAPP: — Mr. Speaker, I left off yesterday pointing out to the Hon. Member from Arm River (Mr. 

Pederson) that the Tory government in Ontario last year increased taxes by $200,000,000 and the Tory 

government in Manitoba by $40,000,000. I‟m sure he‟s pleased that he is living at this time in Saskatchewan. 

I had also pointed out that it is our intention to set up a school for training agricultural workers, and I further 

stated that Weyburn looks a very likely location for such a school for Southern Saskatchewan. 

 

I note with pride the establishment of a Centre for Fine Arts in the Qu‟Appelle Valley. I know of no better 

place for this centre than in the Touchwood constituency, and in the beautiful Qu‟Appelle Valley which 

makes an ideal site for a school of fine arts. I am certain that the people of the area will welcome this new 

addition. 

 

I also want to commend the Government for its new policy of giving assistance in the policing of towns by 

providing the services of the RCMP. This is more than welcome news to many centres in Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday I stated that I would deal with some figures which the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) 

conveniently left out when he spoke on the Throne Speech. I want to speak for a moment on scholarship 

awards. 

 

In 1963-64, the Provincial Government, then the CCF, made 628 awards, totalling $320,500. In 1966-67, the 

Provincial Government, the present Government, made 808 awards, totalling $480,600. We made 180 more 

awards and gave $160,100 more in money. Surely this should silence our friends on this issue once and for 

all. 

 

Turning to student loans. In 1963-64, the previous Government granted 1,422 student loans, totally 

$547,752. In 1966-67 our Government granted loans to 5,818 students with the cooperation of the Federal 

Government and a total sum of $4,429,859. We have granted — and I say with the cooperation of the 

Federal Government — four times as many student loans and eight times as much money was made 

available. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

186 

 

In turning to enrolment at the technical institutes at Moose Jaw and Saskatoon, in 1963-64, there were 1,383 

students at Moose Jaw and 920 students at Saskatoon, making a total of 2,303 in the two institutions. In 

1965-66, the last full year of which we have records, there were 2,072 students at Moose Jaw and 1,238 

students enrolled at Saskatoon, making a total of 3,310 students, an increase of 1,007. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TRAPP: — But this is not the complete picture. When the complete records for 1966-67 are available, 

the enrolment will be much higher than last year. For the present year we must add our 200 trainees at 

Weyburn, with more to come in the months ahead. I would conservatively estimate that we will 

accommodate more than 3,810 students this year, which will be 1,507 more than the CCF ever 

accommodated. 

 

In turning to in-plant training, I want at this time to mention the In-Plant Training Program, which was first 

implemented in 1965 and in that year totalled 923 trainees. In-Plant training in that year were 235. Training 

in cooperation with industry, 338; industrial and business management, 350, making a total of 923. 

 

During the 1966-67 fiscal year, there were in-plant training, 850; training in cooperation with industry, 300; 

industrial and business management training, 300, a total of 1,530 students or trainees. Add to this the 923 in 

the previous year, we get a total of 2,453 students trained in this program since 1965. This, Mr. Speaker, is 

what I meant when I said “the Opposition could not explain away the solid progress made by the present 

government in the field of training.” 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Give us a copy. 

 

MR. TRAPP: — I would also like to mention up-grading programs which have been carried out in 

cooperation with the Federal Government. Last year we had an up-grading program at Broadview, and I am 

convinced it was a great success. This year we have had such programs in Lestock, Punnichy, and North 

Battleford. I am most pleased to these programs carried to the rural areas, and I hope to see them enlarged 

and extended. With the inauguration of the Opportunity Caravan, I can foresee that we will go right to the 

people who need help and guidance with employment. I am certain these are programs that will be greatly 

appreciated by rural people and by young and old alike. 

 

I have noted that there has been a noticeable quieting on the of the Opposition regarding school grants. It 

might do well for us to recite a few figures to refresh our minds. The previous Government in 1963-64 gave 

a total in school grants of $33,848,424, in operating grants. The present Government in 1966-67 gave a total 

of $51,010,000 in operating grants. In 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

187 

other words, we have provided $17,161,576 more in operating grants than the CCF did in their last full year 

in office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TRAPP: — Let us look at the school grant picture on a per pupil basis. In 1963-64, the average grant 

per pupil was $166. In 1966-67, the average grant per pupil as $217, an increase of grant per pupil of $51 per 

student. It is common for Members of the CCF Opposition to refer to school grants as being insufficient, 

inadequate or not equal, not enough. None of them has ever spelled out what they would term as sufficient or 

adequate, but I do know this that, whatever interpretations they may give now to these terms, the hard cold 

fact will remain that we have greatly increased grants to school boards since we have come into office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TRAPP: — I would like now to refer to the university picture. First let us look at enrolments. In 

1963-64, the enrolment of full-time students on degree programs was 7,570. In 1966-67, it was 11,417, an 

increase of 3,847. Turning to the grants to the university, in 1973-64, the total grants to the university were 

$10,600,000; in 1966-67, grants estimated to be $12,672,000. And the forecast for the coming year will be in 

the neighborhood of $38,000,000. Surely this is an impressive record of aid to university education? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TRAPP: — Remember that the average grant to the university by the CCF during their 20 years in 

office was less than $3,000,000 a year. 

 

Turning to technical and vocational education, I want to say that I am proud of the record in the field of 

technical and vocational high schools. I want to remind this House and the public that when we took over the 

Government two years and nine months ago, the previous Government had done a lot of talking about 

technical and vocational high schools, especially just around election time, but the truth of the matter is that 

they had not written one word of the program for such schools. How can you proceed to build such schools 

before you have a program? Before you know what the school is to be used for? It would be utter nonsense 

to attempt to build schools when you did not know what the buildings would be used for. Well, since then, 

we have taken over. We have a program for these schools and two of the schools are already in use, one in 

Yorkton and one in Regina. I want to pay a special tribute to the Department of Education staff for the 

tremendous effort they have put forth to makes this possible in such a short period of time. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

188 

 

MR. D.W. MICHAYLUK (Redberry): — You hit it right, George. 

 

MR. TRAPP: — Besides the two comprehensive schools in Regina and Yorkton which are in use, six other 

comprehensive high school projects have been approved: Lloydminster, Melfort, Swift Current, Saskatoon 

(two projects) and North Battleford. A number of other projects are in various sages of planning: Prince 

Albert, Regina (three projects), Weyburn, Melville, Nipawin, and Estevan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 1961 Dominion Bureau of Statistics Census Data show that only 15 per cent of the students 

who enter grade two complete grade twelve. What happens to the rest of these students? The great majority 

are thrown on the labor market with no skill to sell in the market place. Surely, there are unemployed people 

still in Saskatchewan, and at the same time there are hundreds of vacant jobs. After 20 years of CCF 

government this is what you would expect. The CCF failed the great majority of our young people. 

 

Who are these young people who have been thrown out on the labor market without a specific skill? They 

are out own children. There is nothing wrong with them. As a teacher I know academic programs. We must 

provide a program that will meet the very needs and ability of the various kinds of students. Our schools 

must be for students. They must be for the needs of all students. This is our program for the young people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In closing, may I say thanks to all those groups who have helped us to inaugurate our Driver Training 

Program for the school system., but I see that my time is over. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. MITCHELL (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to take part in the debate on the 

Speech from the Throne. At this time I would like to offer my congratulations to the mover of the motion, 

the Hon. Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) and the seconder of the motion the Hon. Member 

from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), on their fine presentation. 

 

I also take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate our must recently appointed Cabinet Minister, the 

Minister of Welfare, the Hon. Mr. MacDonald. I am sure my colleagues join with me in wishing him every 

success in his Department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past year it has been my privilege to serve as the representative in this Legislature of 

the people of Bengough constituency. I have found the work most interesting and rewarding, and here I 

would like to thank the people of the constituency for their cooperation and assistance in the past year. Also 

my sincere thanks to all Members of the Government and their assistants who have so willingly aided me in 

my 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

189 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker , as Bengough constituency, which I represent, is mainly agricultural, I would like to speak for a 

few minutes on some of the agricultural policies which have been introduced since the presentGovernment 

took office. 

 

The Department of Agriculture has brought forth a number of programs which are upgrading and revitalizing 

to our agricultural industry. Of major importance to the grain growers of our province was the establishing of 

a soil testing laboratory at the University of Saskatoon. It has been recognized that the proper and most 

efficient use of chemical fertilizer can only be determined by proper soil analysis. The tremendous increase 

in the use of chemical fertilizer in the past few years demonstrates the value to Saskatchewan agriculture of 

this soil testing laboratory. Also as proof of this fact is the great number of soil samples submitted by our 

farmers since the inception of the program. Until it becomes self-supporting the deficits incurred by the 

laboratory will be met by the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction to the Lands Branch of the point system, for the allocation of Crown land 

leases has proven a much more satisfactory method of allocating this land than that formerly used. Appeals 

against these tentative allocations may be made to an independent Appeal Board, consisting of four members 

appointed from persons recommended by our established farm organizations. 

 

The sale of Crown lands has also been a popular program both grazing and cultivating leases. To date a total 

of 2241 contracts have been completed which total over 480,000 acres and an additional several hundred 

applications have been approved. 

 

Perhaps the newest program instituted by the Department of Agriculture is to encourage the conversion of 

cultivated marginal land to forage production. This program is to assist farmers to convert marginal, sandy, 

or strong rolling cultivated land from grain to forage production. Assistance is paid at the rate of $2.50 per 

acres for all acreages over the first 15 acres to a maximum payment of $150 per applicant. For classification 

purposes marginal land is considered to be land with a soil rating of 43 points or less as set out by the most 

recent soil rating of the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past three years the Family Farm Improvement Branch of the Department of Agriculture 

has instituted several new programs of much benefit to our farmers. Among these is the Farmstead 

Mexabitions of Regina and Saskatoon. This program is designed to encourage the farmer in such projects as 

farmstead planning, diversification, and the use of labor and cost-reducing equipment. The cost of these 

mexabitions is partially met by commercial firms exhibiting their products. In the first two years of this 

program 18,000 people have attended. The keen interest shown by farmers within this period would 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

190 

 

indicate that this program will greatly increase in popularity in the near future. 

 

In the last three years the Farm Water and Sewage Program has provided materials for approximately 6,000 

farms per year and given technical advice to many more. It is estimated that approximately one third of all 

farm dwellings in the province now have a partial or complete water and sewage system. Grants totalling 

approximately $325,000 have been paid out. This program, it is hoped will encourage an increase in the 

production of swing, cattle and sheep. There is also an increase in the interest shown by our hamlets and 

smaller villages in this water and sewage program. Approximately thirty systems were installed this past year 

in small centres. In our constituency of Bengough many farms and several towns and villages including the 

towns of Big Beaver and Crane Valley have taken advantage of the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new programs under the Animal industry Branch of the Department are designed to encourage 

expansion of livestock production. Grants to veterinary service districts in the last three years has amounted 

to $238,000. The ROP Bull Test Station and the new Beef Cattle Feedlot Research have had almost 

$160,000 in capital grants, and over $32,000 in operating grants. The Elite Swine Herd policy has received 

$5,400. The Ewe Lamb Purchase policy received $31,000 and the freight assistance on Breeding Ewes 

Program $4,500. Also the Mastitis Control policy received almost $11,000. The Rabies Losses 

Compensation policy paid out $5,100 in this past year. The money paid out for this rabies program not only 

compensates farmers for their losses, but it is hoped it will encourage a more complete report on outbreaks 

of this dreaded disease. 

 

The Department has been outstanding in its development of record of performance programs for both beef 

and dairy cattle, thus assisting cattle producers to become more competitive on the Canadian markets, and 

also increasing Saskatchewan‟s reputation in the production of outstanding purebred and commercial stock. 

We are now one of the leading provinces, if not the leading province, in Canada in the ROP beef program. 

This year we have added 14 new herds to our ROP beef program with over 1,000 additional calves on test. In 

addition, our central ROP bull test station at the University at Saskatoon is again at full capacity. 

 

The Department of Agriculture brand inspection branch has now implemented the first system in Canada of 

processing livestock shipping manifest electronically. This permits a speedier and more thorough search of 

manifests anywhere in the province. This should also eliminate rustling and all for the small fee of 20 cents 

for brand inspection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Saskatchewan are increasingly becoming aware of the benefit of the Crop 

Insurance Program. It is a program with a substantial subsidy from the Provincial and Federal Governments, 

to enable the farmers to use the good years 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

191 

to carry them over the poor ones. It provides the farmer with one of the soundest means of protection from 

the hazards of nature. 

 

In the spring of 1966 Saskatchewan entered into a reinsurance agreement with the Federal Government. This 

agreement provides for the sharing of financial responsibility if crop loss payments exceed premiums from 

the farmers. The major portion of financial responsibilities is now assumed by the Federal Government. The 

Crop Insurance Board has made some major changes in the plan which became effective in 1966, the most 

noticeable change being the basis of determining the insurance coverage in bushels per acres. Formerly, there 

was one coverage for all the land in one township, regardless of the soil type. Now the coverage is based on 

the productivity rating of the soil. This change has been reflected in the increase of farmer participation this 

past year. In 1964 there were 2,356 contracts with a total coverage of $4,100,000. In 1966 there were 7,006 

contracts with a total insurance coverage of $12,125,000. 

 

The Federal Government has been contributing 20 per cent of the premium to make the plan actuarially 

sound. In addition the province and the Federal Government each pays 30 per cent of all administration cost. 

The premium to the farmer does not include anything to cover the administration costs. In 1967, the Federal 

Government is increasing its share of the premium to 25 per cent. The additional 5 per cent will be passed on 

to the farmer in reduced premiums to be paid. 

 

The Master Farm Family Award, Mr. Speaker, was introduced for the first time in 1965 as a means of 

honoring farm families who have excelled and achieved notable success in farming, homemaking, and 

citizenship. 

 

Regional winners for the northern and southern parts of our province receive an award of $1,000 each, and a 

return passage to a maximum of $1,000 for husband and wife, for an agricultural tour to a country of the 

winner‟s choice. The farm families winning second place in the regional competition are awarded a suitably 

engraved silver tray. The nominee for the award in each of the thirty-nine agricultural representatives‟ 

districts is awarded an engraved plaque. 

 

I recently had the privilege of being present at the reception honoring Mr. And Mrs. Orin Travland of 

Coronach in the constituency of Bengough, during which the Hon. Doug McFarlane presented Mr. And Mrs. 

Travland with a silver tray, as second place winners for the southern Saskatchewan Master Farm Family 

achievement and wish them every success in their endeavors to attain the major award in 1967. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while my foregoing remarks have been confined to matters relating to the Department of 

Agriculture, our farmers have received direct benefit from other departments which also have introduced 

new programs in this past three years. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

192 

 

The use of purple gas in farm trucks, although severely criticized by the Opposition, has proven to be a very 

popular program with our farmers. The elimination of constant road checks by highway patrols has saved the 

farmers valuable time, especially during busy seeding and harvesting seasons, to say nothing of the original 

purpose of the program in tax-saving dollars. It is estimated $8,000,000 in the past two years has been saved 

by our farmers due to this legislation. 

 

In the field of homeowner grants, our agricultural areas have benefitted through participation in this 

legislation. The total tax-saving in our province through this program is bout $9,000,000. This is of great 

assistance, particularly to our farmers of smaller holdings. 

 

The new program of our Department of Telephones in the expansion of telephone service to rural areas, not 

served by existing telephone systems, will be of immense value to those farmers who have never enjoyed 

these privileges. This, I feel, to be a very important program. 

 

In the Department of Municipal Affairs, the Equalization Payments Policy to our municipalities introduced 

in 1966 has proven to be a vast improvement over the previous haphazard method of provincial grant 

distribution. This has brought a new lease on life to our lower assessed rural municipalities. The grid road 

maintenance grants, and the snow removal grants of the Department have also been of immeasurable 

assistance to our rural population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province on the whole has benefitted from the new Saskatchewan Assistance Plan which 

was established in April of 1966. This is a streamlining program of the Department of Welfare, wherein all 

phases of the welfare program have been covered under one plan. Assistance to those in need has been 

increased by 6 per cent as well as reducing welfare costs to local governments; there has also been 

improvement in medical services to the needy. In my own constituency of Bengough, under the Department 

of Welfare, I am pleased to say the plans have been laid for an early spring start in the construction of a 

special care home in the town of Bengough. There is a great need for homes of this type throughout our 

province and I can assure you the residents of Bengough and surrounding district will appreciate the service 

of this home. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, in the town of Coronach, in the southern extremity of our constituency, close to the 

American border, with a population of 450 people, we have a senior citizens home now in the process of 

construction. This home was started in November and is expected to be in operation by late spring or early 

summer. 

 

The town of Assiniboia, the largest centre in our constituency has just completed a fully modern 42-bed 

hospital. This hospital has just recently been occupied and serves the people in a large area in both Bengough 

and Notukeu-Willowbunch 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

193 

constituencies,. We also hope to have a new special care home built in Assiniboia in the coming year. 

 

After 20 years, Mr. Speaker, Bengough constituency is finally getting its share of the monies allocated by the 

provincial highway system. I assure you our people appreciate the effort the Government has put forth in this 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, I would like to state that I heartily endorse the views, so ably expressed by the 

Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) regarding organized labor and their strikes and the 

adverse effect they have on the agricultural economy of our province. 

 

In consideration of the benefits, which our province has derived from the present Liberal Government under 

the capable leadership of our Premier, the Hon. Ross Thatcher, I obviously support the motion, but not the 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I will forgive the Hon. Member (Mr. Mitchell) who just 

took his seat for taking some of my time. He got so confused in reading that I thought he might put up a wall 

poster on behalf of the Premier, as they do in China. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the mover and seconder as well as all Members who preceded me 

in this debate. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What are you reading, Toby? 

 

MR. NOLLET: — As usual, Members on the Government side of the House continued their unfounded, 

hoary old lament about Socialist stagnation and magic prosperity under their administration. And in so 

doing, Mr. Speaker, they merely demonstrated their unbounded capacity to ignore facts in a desperate 

attempt for political survival. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not good enough for the Premier to say, “Well, why didn‟t you do this or that when you 

were in power?” This, Mr. Speaker, is the poorest possible way to cover up flamboyant and irresponsible 

administration. This type of political dodging and loud voiced ranting will not convince the people of 

Saskatchewan that they are now suddenly in the midst of a paradise on earth. 

 

Let‟s look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. Were it not for a record crop, the Premier of this province would be in 

deep trouble now. It is certainly true that the weatherman has been far more kind to the farmers of this 

province than either the Liberals in Regina or at Ottawa. The Premier glowingly talks of instant new records, 

Mr. Speaker. There are, however, some records which adversely affect every man, woman and child in 

Saskatchewan about which he is profoundly silent. Mr. Speaker, 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

194 

 

he doesn‟t mention that the consumers and wage-earners are now paying all-time record high prices for all 

their requirements, particularly food. This occurred under a Liberal Administration in Regina and almost a 

constant Liberal administration in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers are paying new record high prices for machinery and other farm cost items. These 

are records of which the Premier doesn‟t speak at all. The price of wheat to the farmer is still much the same 

as it was 21 years ago in 1945. In constant dollars, Mr. Speaker, it is the same as it was 31 years ago in 

1935., because farm costs are three times as high now as they were in 1935. In other words, a farm price of 

$1.75 per bushel now is only worth 69 cents in terms of purchasing power. 

 

The index of farm machinery costs has gone up ten points in one year. The Premier doesn‟t talk about this, 

he just talks about taxes, taxes, but he doesn‟t talk about these things, Mr. Speaker, which the farmer also 

pays. Is there any mention, Mr. Speaker, of this in the Throne Speech? No, on the contrary, it grandiosely 

takes credit for record crops by stating that the past year has been the most prosperous in our history. I ask, 

prosperous for whom? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Everybody! 

 

MR. NOLLET: — For farmers, or for business generally, particularly the machine companies? The factual 

answer, Mr. Speaker, is simple. A new record has been established but it is a one-sided record. Never before 

in the history of Saskatchewan agriculture have our farmers produced so much and received so little in 

comparative terms of realized net farm income than in this year of our Lord, 1967 or 1966, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What does the Throne Speech say regarding agriculture which comes directly under provincial jurisdiction? 

Well, let‟s look at it, Mr. Speaker. The Premier says agriculture has a priority position. The Hon. Member 

(Mr. Mitchell) who just took his seat indicates to me conclusively that agriculture does not have a priority 

position. He listed many things very insignificant ones, which he claimed as new programs. None of them 

were new, none were of any major consequences, Mr. Speaker, that he mentioned with the exception of 

selling Crown land. Oh yes, I pretty nearly forgot, Mr. Speaker, a Master Farmers Award policy, a trip for 

free. These are policies, Mr. Speaker, which have no substance in terms of diversifying our agricultural 

industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — Oh Toby! 

 

MR. NOLLET: — It says in the Throne Speech, “My Government intends to press forward with its efforts 

to promote rapid diversification 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

195 

of agriculture.” This is not new. Do they know that for 20 years we have successfully implemented programs 

that did in fact diversify our agricultural industry? In 1944 there were about 1,600,000 cattle in 

Saskatchewan. When I left the Department, there were 2,300,000 cattle in Saskatchewan. Every time I look 

at the Premier, Mr. Speaker, I get an inspiration. His statement the other day is a good example of the 

accuracy of his statements. He said that in the development of new pastures room was being made for sheep 

and they had received 7,000 applications from farmers for sheep grazing in pastures. Now, Mr. Speaker, they 

must have had to submit a separate application for each sheep the farmer was going to put in those pastures. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well, it was the sheep that applied! 

 

MR. NOLLET: — “You will also be asked to approve a measure to extend the brand inspection area.” Big 

deal. Big deal. Nothing new here, brand inspection was gradually been expanded over the years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have been ashamed to mention this item in a document like the Throne Speech. This is 

a true measure of their accomplishments and a measure of their exaggerations. Even the mexabition carried 

on by the Family Farm Improvement Branch was instituted when I was Minister, when we had the first 

mexabition. But they don‟t say that the Family Farm Improvement Branch was established under Socialist 

stagnation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They refer in the Throne Speech to the giant South Saskatchewan River project; it‟s now nearing completion. 

Another project instituted during the Socialist stagnation period! The only new thing about that project, Mr. 

Speaker, is the name, and with due deference and respect to the memory of Mr. Gardiner, I think it was a 

serious mistake to rename this dam, for many reasons. I don‟t think it‟s appropriate. Many other monuments 

or structures could have been named after this great Saskatchewan statesman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the consequence of renaming this dam the Gardiner Dam, certainly great offence must have 

been taken by our Conservative friends in Saskatchewan, particularly “Dief the Chief”, who probably was 

badly offended. So a gesture had to be made in order to win some Tory support. So what did the Premier of 

this province do? He‟s now going to move John‟s homestead buildings into the Wascana Centre area, of all 

places. Again, as a political gesture towards making up for having offended our Conservative friends and 

offending Mr. Diefenbaker in particular, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“My Government will put forward proposals regarding irrigation and fodder supplies to gain maximum 

benefits from this great resource.” This, too, has been going on for 20 years. Nothing new here at all. “My 

Ministers also propose to extend settlement of new agriculture areas in the province.” This has 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

196 

 

been done on a far greater scale under the previous administration. One needs only to look at the records, 

under which some $19,000,000 were advanced for the development of new settlement areas and bringing 

new land into cultivation on individual Crown leases. 

 

“My Government, will ask your support in expanding crop insurance.” Another program stated under 

Socialist stagnation. “Construction will continue on the Veterinary College.” Another project brought into 

existence under Socialist stagnation, Mr. Speaker. And so we can go on and on, Mr. Speaker, merely to point 

out the inaccuracy of many of the statements being made by the Hon. Members opposite. And also to 

demonstrate their unfairness in now trying to claim projects and programs that were developed by the 

previous administration as their own. This, Mr. Speaker, is the rankest kind of political plagiarism. 

 

Other records too were established, and these were the greatest annual junkets and provincial expenditures in 

the history of this province, Mr. Speaker, with a prediction of possibly another $40,000,000 increase in 

expenditures for the coming fiscal year. This comes strangely, Mr. Speaker, from a man who solemnly 

promised the people of Saskatchewan that if elected he would reduce expenditure by economies and greater 

administration efficiency. None of these pledges have been implemented. Instead, non-priority and often 

wasteful expenditures are now the rule. Might I cite the non-priority expenditure for marble floors in the 

Legislative Buildings, the homeowner grant which has only a political priority. Some proper priorities might 

have been, non-delay of a University Base Hospital for southern Saskatchewan, added assistance for needy 

old age pensioners, free drugs, and proceeding immediately with the construction of technical schools. 

 

The Premier should drop at once his political hoax that private enterprise expansion has provided the 

revenues for the huge expenditures which he stated would be drastically curbed upon assuming office. 

Private enterprise, Mr. Speaker, is not interested in low-rental homes, medical, educational, or hospital 

services. Of necessity their prime function and interest are higher profits and lower taxes. I would suggest 

that the Premier turn his eyes to the province of Alberta, where he might get a lesson, and where unrestricted 

private enterprise holds full sway. A province that has many more opportunities for non-agricultural 

employment; indeed that province is rated as the richest private enterprise resource province in all of 

Canada. What do we find? We find that this so-called wealthy oil province will have a huge deficit this year. 

Let this be a lesson to you Mr. Premier, regardless of how much development takes place. I‟m saying merely 

that private enterprise will not provide the sinews and revenues now demanded by the public sector of the 

economy. Mr. Speaker, in view of the situation in Alberta, with their mounting deficit, I‟m merely saying 

there were no crackpot Socialists there to frighten away investment, but this same province still has not 

reached the level of social security services provided by the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

197 

One also finds higher property taxes in the province of Alberta, and this is a fact too. In addition, an 

estimated sales tax opposition is generally regarded as certain, likely after they have their election. 

 

Likely the Premier may carry out the suggestion which he denied, that we have an election here at the same 

time Alberta does and some others as well so that the CCF connivers cannot mob up on them by coming in 

from all over the country, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think they‟ll need to come from all over Canada to put these 

people out of office here. Their record of irresponsibility and capacity for misleading statements are such that 

the people of Saskatchewan are getting sick and tired and fed up with them. 

 

It is very clear, Mr. Speaker, that increased spending by the public sector must come either from increased 

taxes or borrowing. It is well to remember, too, that almost all goods and services required by the public 

sector are purchased from the private sector of the economy; therefore, uncontrolled increased prices and 

profits play a most prominent part in the increased taxes required by the non-profit public sector of the 

economy. This is a logical fact about which you never hear the Premier talk; that is, the excessive costs for 

goods and services required by our Provincial Government, by municipal governments and by school boards. 

It‟s in this area where an investigation probably ought to be made to discover the contribution made by his 

dedicated private enterprise friends to the increases in our provincial taxes and our local taxes as well. Mr. 

Speaker, labor unrest and strikes are a natural part of our commercial business structure. Attempting to 

attach blame primarily on labor alone will not solve this undesirable struggle for survival. 

 

The record of strikes across Canada should make us all seriously thoughtful and desirous of finding a 

solution. These strikes involve some of the most responsible and respected citizens of our country, such as 

teachers, hospital interns, doctors, civic workers, policemen and other public servants. The prime cause, Mr. 

Speaker, seems to be escalating living costs. Even the housewives whose husbands are also wage earners 

went on the picket line against higher costs. The farmers, too, are considering a purchase boycott against 

high costs. Surely these people are not all wrong or irresponsible. Mr. Speaker, it is getting to the point 

where one would not be surprised if the Jesuits might not also join the picket line, even though they are 

committed to a life of perpetual poverty. There is, of course, a limit to what anyone can endure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is time, Mr. Speaker, that we placed more emphasis on human values throughout our entire economic and 

social structure rather than blindly holding to the thesis that unrestricted self-seeking material gain by huge 

business organizations such as the Weston gang here, operating both in Canada and the United States, will 

somehow reflect in better living for everyone. It is a proven fact that Weston gang are prominent not 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

198 

 

only here but in the United States as well. It is now also suggested that they are tied in with Safeway too. 

These are the kind of friends our government Members opposite seem to have. They are welcome to them. 

The CCF government, Mr. Speaker, over a period of 20 years laid a solid foundation for both economic and 

social progress in Saskatchewan. This is well recognized throughout Canada. It is time to return to 

responsible, progressive government, in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For these reasons I will not support the motion but I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be able to rise on this occasion to take 

part in the Throne Speech debate. First of all, I would like, as the other speakers have done, to congratulate 

the mover and the seconder which is customary, even though they may be on the other side of the house. I 

would like, on behalf of the citizens of Regina, to bid everyone here a welcome to our city and invite you all 

to enjoy the many and varied attractions which the Queen City has to offer. It is pleasing to be able to greet 

the people of Saskatchewan once again on this occasion, and to invite them to come to Regina sometime 

during the Centennial Year to their capital city, now commonly known as the Grey Cup City of Canada. And 

I invite them to take part in many of the programs that we will have to offer and that they will be able to 

celebrate Buffalo Days with us. Truly, our Centennial lies in our past and in our future; the past, because our 

forefathers dedicated themselves t making this massive, undeveloped country into one of the leading nations 

of the world; the future, because we are not fully aware of the potential which gave our pioneers the courage 

to take risks and brave the elements. We have been shown the way, and every one of us must play a part in 

the future development of this great land. We must dedicate ourselves to the goal of making Canada the 

foremost nation in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are entering our second century as a nation and our province has been a part of that nation 

for 62 years. In that time we have come a long way and may I remind you that our progress as a province did 

not amount to very much until the CCF took hold of the reins in 1944. When the CCF was in power, this 

province was known as a leader in many fields of legislation. Constantly the other provinces and the Federal 

Government in particular watched our progress and then followed our lead. 

 

I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to refer to something that took place just a few days ago in the 

announcement of a hospital for Regina. Let me say at the outset that no one was more delighted than I to 

hear the Premier announce that Regina is to have a new base hospital. This has been long overdue. The 

Government of Saskatchewan has now recognized the fact that all hospital costs should be borne by the 

Provincial and Federal 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

199 

Governments, a principle that I and many of my colleagues have advocated in city council and in this House 

by reason of the fact that we do pay premiums of $72 per year for families for this service. By our efforts all 

other centres and cities in Saskatchewan will now benefit by this announcement. The Premier has been 

annoyed because some of us did not let the Government rest until it made this announcement for a base 

hospital in our city without cost to the Regina people. Through our efforts this has saved the people a debt of 

$6,000,000 to $7,000,000 which would have been added to their taxes and could have amounted to $35 to 

$50 per home. It is a great victory for those of us, Mr. Speaker, in city council to have had the courage to 

expound this policy over the past eight years. The credit also goes to those people in Regina who 

overwhelmingly elected us to city council to see that this was done. I want to say thank you to the good 

people of our city for helping some of us see this through. I wish the Hon. Minister (Mr. Grant) success in 

dealing with the Federal Government and I sincerely hope that at the earliest moment, to use the Premier‟s 

words, that construction will commence in 1967 or at the latest 1968. 

 

However, I do feel that I should set the records straight on one or two points, if only to ensure that the 

Premier obtains his information from a reliable source in the future. According to Mr. Thatcher, I quote: 

“During the period 1957-65, the city took $335,000 paid to it by the province for old hospital debt and used 

it for other purposes.” It my interest the Premier to now that during that period, he even quoted the wrong 

figure; the amount involved was not $335,000 but $377,855. I would go further and state that by the end of 

1967 the amount involved will be $475,197. I would next point out that these funds were paid to the city for 

old hospital debts and this is just what these funds were used for though the Premier says they were used to 

balance a budget. I don‟t know which one he meant. Look at any financial statement of the city for the years 

in question; they have been audited by a reputable firm of chartered accountants. You will observe that each 

year the debt charges of the hospital have been met by the city and that every penny of the funds mentioned 

by the Premier were specifically allocated for this purpose and this purpose alone. 

 

Perhaps the Premier is not aware that since 1946 the city of Regina has gone into debt to the extent by 

issuing debentures for the Regina Hospital in the amount of $2,995,000 and during that time the Regina 

taxpayers have paid no less than $2,914,850 or in other words $140,000 per year. He may also be interested 

in knowing that the property owners in Regina will still be paying toward the Regina General Hospital debt 

in the year 1990. There were other payments made by the city on behalf of the hospital. One closing remark 

with regard to this, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier‟s reluctance to mention that almost half the patient days in 

the Regina General Hospital are due to the fact that the hospital is available to out-of-town people too. 

 

Of course, this new proposed hospital project and others could not have been made possible if the CCF had 

not left 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

200 

 

$33,00,00 in the bank for this Government to spend as well in the basic and secondary industries which it 

inherited: the gigantic Power Corporation producing electrical energy, the natural gas we distributed to most 

centres in Saskatchewan and which are the keys to industrialization; the steel mill and pipe plant in Regina; 

our cement production and fertilizing plant; the 5,800 oil and gas wells; the potash mines we had producing 

and others planned for the future; the extension to this tremendous Crown corporation, the telephone system; 

the Government Insurance; and I could go on to mention many others. This Government inherited everything 

from the former Government and we are still enjoying the fruits of the CCF government of 20 years. 

 

We must guard against our resources and Crown corporations being given away, some of which already have 

been taken from us. It is obvious our heritage is being jeopardized. Under this sort of administration, are we 

again going into an era of booms and busts, high cost of living, inflation and eventually recessions, 

depressions, and poverty? Heaven forbid that we should ever go back to those days before 1944 in 

Saskatchewan which was run by the same Government we have today in Ottawa and in this province. 

Already our security is being challenged in many area. The Mediation Board has lost its teeth to protect 

people from losing their homes. The Homestead Act and security of farms can again be challenged in the 

future. 

 

In viewing the Speech from the Throne, I find it most imperative that immediate steps must be taken to 

ensure the welfare of our people and the progress of our province. And in that regard, I have outlined several 

steps which I think must be taken immediately in order to cope with present conditions, the first one of these 

being from one of the 14 points that I had recommended here some 2½ years ago. 

 

1. (a) We must continue to press the Federal Government to establish a two price wheat system on 

the following basis. For the first 2000 bushels, a fixed price of $2.75 a bushel to be paid for No. 1 Northern 

wheat over and above freight charges. Wheat over and above the 2000 bushels must be sold at present and 

prevailing rates as they exist from time to time. (b) We must set up an Agricultural Loan Fund to purchase 

farm lands for sale to young men wanting to take up farming, loans to be given free for a five year period to 

enable young farmers to acquire land and machinery necessary to cultivate it. 

 

2. That this Legislature provide the following benefits for the working people: (a) establish a 

minimum wage for a single working person up to 225 a month; (b) We must establish a minimum wage for a 

married working man of at least $300 a month. 

 

3. We must increase Mothers Allowance and increase Social Aid by $30 a month on the same basis 

as the senior citizens pensions. 

 

4. It is necessary that this Government provide an 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

201 

unconditional municipal grant of $5 per capita to be given to all rural and urban municipalities separate and 

apart from all existing grants. 

 

5. We must press for the establishment of a Provincial and Municipal Bank. 

 

6. Enact legislation that a two per cent royalty be paid to all farmers who own the surface rights on 

their farms wherever oil and minerals are produced. 

 

7. We must institute a universal Provincial Group Insurance plan providing $5,000 coverage for 

every person 18 years of age and over in this province, the right of each one to take it from the Insurance 

Company of his choice. These are some of the things that I feel must be pressed for immediately. 

 

In addition to this I would like to gain refer to chiropractic services which I believe should have been 

included in the medicare plan some two years ago. Chiropractic is the third largest healing profession in the 

world, exceeded only by medicine and dentistry. Over 400 insurance companies in Canada and the United 

States accept and pay for chiropractic treatments to all claimants. The Saskatchewan provincial Department 

of Education has accepted the Canadian Memorial Chiropractic College in Toronto as an approved 

institution under the Provincial Student Aid Fund and the Canada Student Loan Act. The Department of 

Veterans Affairs has paid for the tuition, text books and living allowances of some 250 veterans returning to 

civilian life after their four year course. The provinces of Alberta and Manitoba have recently enacted 

legislation which provide the services of chiropractors for people receiving health care under pension and 

social welfare legislation. British Columbia and Alberta also provide for chiropractic care in their medicare 

act. In April 1965, as I mentioned earlier, I brought in the resolution which this Legislature unanimously 

approved: 

 

That this Assembly recommends that the Government give consideration to the inclusion of 

chiropractic service as insured services under the Saskatchewan Medical Care Act of 1961. 

 

From the budget that is brought forward this year, I hope that we can look forward to the inclusion of funds 

for free chiropractic services to the people of our province. And I may say further that early in December of 

1966, the Federal Government passed is Medicare Bill which provides partial free payment to the provinces 

for medical services rendered to that province. During the passage of this Bill an amendment was included 

which would allow a province to pass a law covering such services as those performed by chiropractors. Mr. 

MacEachern, the Federal Minister of Health, said in the house of Commons that this amendment was 

intended to allow federal coverage of any service covering a single provincial plan even though the 

provinces did not include such a given service. All arguments which have been given in the past by the 

Government as its 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

202 

 

reasons for delaying the inclusion of chiropractic care under medicare have been overcome and there would 

seem to be no reason now why this service cannot be included for this year particularly in the budget. 

 

Turning back again to agriculture, Mr. Speaker, I have over the past years listened to the Government talk 

about industrial and natural resources, but I suggest that this province was built by farmers to begin with. 

Their efforts behind the plough brought the capital that fostered commerce and industry. The farmer is still 

the backbone of our provincial economy and it is time that we took a closer look at his value and showed 

some means of appreciation. 

 

Nature has been good to us over recent years and in the main our crops have been plentiful. On the whole, 

most farmers have enjoyed a reasonable standard of living, but some have not. Should nature work against 

them, many more would be in serious trouble unless some action is taken immediately. And in this regard, 

that is why we emphasize one of the main points that I brought out some 2½ years ago for the two-price 

system that I enumerated in my talk this afternoon. The farmers must get this fair share of the national 

income during this period of inflation and high cost money and high cost machinery. I would also suggest 

that efforts be made to promote the use of the port of Churchill to assure lesser freight rates and consequent 

savings to the purchaser and to the farmer. These are essentials, if we are to encourage our farmers to stay on 

the land. If we want them to stay on the land and protect the family farm then we must do something to 

stabilize the economy. This is the reason why I recommended, in order to keep the young men on the farms 

that want to farm and others that may want to go into farming, this agricultural loan fund where they could 

get monies to purchase land for a five-year period interest free. Other measures which must be taken have 

been laid before you on previous occasions, Mr. Speaker, but it appears that constructive suggestions fall on 

deaf ears unless they are repeated time after time. We must aid the farmer to provide storage of surplus 

wheat to feed the hungry people of the world. We must build large terminal elevators, not only at seaports. 

We must make every effort to reduce storage charges and transportation charges on transferring Canada‟s 

wheat to the markets. We can help the farmer by taking action to stop, once and for all, the abandonment of 

the railways. These railway lines and related elevator storage space are required for the grain grower, in his 

struggle to provide adequate food for so many people in the world. We must see to it that the farm laborers 

definitely come under the Unemployment Insurance Plan of Canada so that the farmer can cope and have 

enough help to take care of his needs and make sure that he will secure an available share of the labor 

market. Unlike the contents of the Throne Speech, these are positive measures which can and should be 

undertaken to benefit the rural population of the province. 

 

I might also mention that I am looking forward to seeing that each farmer in the coming budget will be 

refunded the $400 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

203 

which he has been charged for the installation of power. To guarantee the security of the farming population, 

and particularly the family farm, we must promote and institute policies like I have suggested here. We need 

representatives from the rural areas who are sincere, men of good report, who will courageously carry out the 

progressive progress and give security to our farmers and to our people living in towns and in the rural 

constituencies. 

 

To those within reach of my voice, and I say that this Legislature needs the return of men like these 

outstanding farmer MLAs on this side of the House. I would like to name them: Art Thibault, Toby Nollet, 

Leonard Larson, Bill Berezowsky, Hans Broten, Fred Dewhurst, J.A. Pepper, Everett Wood, E. Kramer, 

George Willis, Dick Michayluk, and my own seatmate, Bob Wooff. These men have the farmers‟ interests at 

heart. Those of us coming from city constituencies support the needs and requests of our agricultural people, 

because we in the cities know that agriculture will always be the prime industry inn this province. 

 

Another measure of security which I mentioned in the seven steps that must be taken was that a 2 per cent 

royalty be paid all farmers who own the surface rights on their land. Our Saskatchewan farmers in the main 

pioneered and homesteaded the lands here. Many have not received the mineral rights with their purchase. 

They get very little, if anything from the oil companies that drill on their land and so have no recourse to its 

mineral right. Many of these farm lands have been handed down from members of their families and because 

of this inheritance, the present owners certainly deserve some of the fruits that could come through the 

development of oil industries and other mineral products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am astounded that nowhere in the Throne Speech do I see any reference to improvements 

concerning the wages of the working people of this province. Certainly there will be greater opportunity for 

educational and vocational training, but I suggest that wages play an important part in this field. Between 

December 1965 and December 1966, the consumer price index rose from 140.8 to 145.9, an increase of 3.6 

per cent leaving a meagre net gain to the worker of only one half of one per cent. This is for organized labor 

and the same situation would not even give them that much for unorganized groups. I suggest that the 

minimum wage laws in this province are a major reason for such minute gains as this and that is why I 

recommended that a minimum wage in this day of inflation and high cost of living must be established now 

so that every single person gets at least $225 a month, and that every married man can at least earn $300 a 

month in this wealthy province of ours. 

 

I mentioned the point with regard to the $30 a month in social aid. It is apparent that social aid and mothers 

allowances are inadequate. The Federal Government has seen fit to acknowledge the plight of those in 

receipt of old age pensions. This Government should recognize allowances for social aid 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

204 

 

widowed mothers so that these people may be able to enjoy a standard of living above that of mere 

subsistence. If the children involved are to be given a good start in life, it is essential that they are not placed 

in the position of being socially and financially embarrassed in front of their classmates at school or the 

children of their neighbors. It is the responsibility of this Government to correct this state of affairs. I would, 

therefore, as I stated earlier, suggest that we increase it to the extent of a similar plan to which the Federal 

Government adhered to a short time ago. 

 

With regard to housing, I may say that I was amazed at the remarks made by the Premier with regard to the 

residential accommodation in Regina. Or probably, once more, his sources of information are not too 

reliable. Obviously he does not endeavor to determine the underlying reasons to some setbacks in some of 

the cities in Saskatchewan. Let me assure you that construction in Regina, particularly residential 

construction has exceeded all expectations for the past number of years. For example, let me compare with 

our sister city to the north. From 1962-66 Regina has 7,370 starts on homes; Saskatoon had 6,750. These are 

comparative figures, taking into consideration, the population differences. The total value of construction 

from 1963-66 in Regina was close to $164,000,000, in Saskatoon slightly over $149,000,000, and I might 

say that we do not include n our building construction permits, bridges, as they do in the city of Saskatoon. 

Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that the Premier happened to read in a recent newspaper article that residential 

construction did fall behind in Regina in 1966, and I would be the first to acknowledge this fact. But of 

course, Mr. Speaker, due to his inability to diagnose, the Premier couldn‟t possibly be aware that after taking 

into account the tight money situation the next major cause of the setback can be laid at the door of this 

government. The city of Regina has spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in preparing city owned 

residential land for sale, primarily to those in low income groups, and in spite of this considerable 

investment we haven‟t sold a lot. There is a strong possibility that we may not be able to do this in 1967. 

Certainly there are lots available to those in the higher income brackets through private development and no 

doubt we shall see a reasonable number of houses built but those in lower income brackets will have to wait. 

Mr. Speaker, they will have to wait because the city cannot sell them a site to build on. The reason is the 

refusal of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to honor the sections of the agreement signed when it took 

over the city utility. In other words, we cannot get power to service the city-owned lots, and until we do we 

must continue to turn away prospective home builders and listen to the criticisms of the ill informed. And I 

want to say, Mr. Speaker, that if the Government does not want to put in underground wiring to which they 

agreed, then let them give the city power utility back to us and we‟ll do it ourselves. 

 

I am very proud of our housing program in Regina, in fact we have the highest rate per capita from the 

standpoint of public and low rental housing which some of us on the council had the courage to take hold of 

in 1959 and see that we had these 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

205 

built for low income people, and also particularly for the aged, which will be opened sometime in August 

this year. 

 

Turning to municipal affairs, over the years, Mr. Speaker, I have heard many criticisms of constant requests 

made by municipalities of the province. I would suggest the requests are amply justified. The province has 

vested the municipality with limited revenue source and the inequities inherent in these sources lead to 

constant protest. The province looks for development and inevitably the cost of expansion falls heavily on 

the municipalities. Highway construction, most of which eventually leads to a city, forces the city to spend 

large sums for street widening and other improvements. I readily admit, Mr. Speaker, that the province does 

share in the cost of construction for major arterial streets to the extent of 50 per cent, substantially different 

to the 75 per cent of the cost assumed by the province for streets constructed in smaller centres. Once built, 

however, the province shrugs its shoulders and leaves the city to bear the staggering costs of maintenance, 

including snow removal and street cleaning. The city is also responsible for the maintenance of major roads. 

I would suggest that on one of his trips to our neighboring province the Premier should pause long enough to 

take a page out of their books in so far as municipal assistance is concerned. The province has received 

revenues from motor vehicle licences and fees and fuel taxes in excess of some $40,000,000 and has 

estimated that well over 20 per cent of all vehicle miles are travelled in urban centres. Therefore, I would 

hope that the province would do something in this budget to see that proper grants are initiated in line with 

what I recommended in my speech earlier, that we get a $5 per capita grant over and above all existing 

grants, and this to be made unconditional. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Hon. Minister of Pubic Works (Mr. Gardiner) is to follow me, but I want to 

say that I was greatly disappointed as to what was contained in the Speech from the Throne. I was pleased at 

the announcement for a hospital here, something we had fought for, for many years. However we have 

gained one principle and that is all hospital costs from here on in shall be borne by the Provincial and 

Federal Governments. However, because the Speech from the Throne did not contain very much I must 

support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. J.W. GARDINER (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker — I should say Deputy Speaker — 

in rising to speak in the Throne Debate I want to congratulate all previous speakers for the part they have 

taken in the discussion of our provincial affairs. I want to particularly congratulate the mover and seconder, 

the Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) and the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), as 

well as the Premier for the manner in which they have presented the Government‟s case. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

206 

 

Saskatchewan is probably the best prepared province in the Dominion of Canada for entering into Centennial 

celebrations as we begin the celebration of our country‟s hundredth anniversary as a nation since 

Confederation. Saskatchewan‟s Centennial Corporation knows that well over 1,300 local provincial and 

national Centennial events will be staged in Saskatchewan during 1967. By the end of the Centennial Year 

some 550 projects will have been completed in Saskatchewan thereby contributing greatly to the growth and 

development of many of our rural centres. Today, 480 projects have been approved under the 

Federal-Provincial Centennial Grants Program at a total construction cost of $13,828,642. The total grants 

received from the Federal-Provincial Grants Program to this date is $2,188,406. 

 

I would like to extend at this time my thanks and appreciation as Minister in charge of the Corporation to the 

people of this province for the ways in which they have cooperated in not only making our celebrations of 

1966 and 1965 a success, but the way in this Confederation year they are joining once again in observing a 

very important milestone in the history of our country. In addition, we in Saskatchewan will be joining in 

1967 in many events which will be sponsored by the senior government in Ottawa and we are very pleased to 

be part of those events to this very important year. I‟m not going to take the opportunity to give this 

afternoon n detail the Centennial program except to say this, that I hope and I think I can expect that we will 

have the cooperation not only of the Members of this House, on both sides of the House, but I think the 

cooperation of the public in celebrating this important year, the celebration of the hundredth year of 

Confederation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a great deal has already been said on both sides of the House about the Speech from the 

Throne, what it contained; what it should have contained; some have stated it contains something for 

everyone; others have maintained that it is important for what it does not say. I want to say here this 

afternoon that in listening to the speeches of Opposition Members I have yet to hear one of them criticize 

any of the provisions made in the Speech from the Throne. I therefore find it very strange indeed that the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and particularly the Members from Arm River (Mr. Pederson), would 

be supporting an amendment when no one on the other side of the House has yet come forward with one 

objection to one of these things mentioned in the Speech from the Throne as has been presented by the 

Government on this side of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDINER: — Mr. Speaker I believe that this Speech from the Throne contains more to advance the 

welfare of the Province of Saskatchewan than any speech from the Throne since I have represented the 

Melville constituency in the last 11 years. I believe we must look at the recommendations that are being 

made by the Government in the Speech from the Throne on the light of circumstances which the 

Government found in this province when it came 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

207 

to office in 1964. Population figures have been used during the present debate, and I intend to use one set of 

such figures and leave it at that and then proceed to indicate why I think the Speech from the Throne and the 

actions of the Government during the past two years have placed Saskatchewan in the position of beginning 

to regain its place in Western Canada. 

 

In the year 1946, two years after the Socialist came to office, in this province Saskatchewan still was the 

largest populated province of the three prairie provinces, with a population of 832,000 compared with 

803,000 in Alberta, and 726,000 in our neighboring province of Manitoba. In 1964 when we came to office 

after 20 years of Socialism in this province what were the figures? Alberta — 1,427,000 people; the province 

of Manitoba — 956,000 and only 940,000 people in the Province of Saskatchewan. I think this more vividly 

than anything else indicates the failure of the previous Government to properly conduct the affairs of the 

Province of Saskatchewan during 20 years of office. 

 

Already, after only two years of Liberal Government, Saskatchewan‟s resurgence has been noted by all. We 

have already overtaken the province of Manitoba, and with the increasing activity shown in the last two 

years, and with ever increasing activity in the future, it will not be too long before Saskatchewan will again 

take its rightful place as the leading province of the prairies. 

 

This resurgence is due to the selling campaign both at home and abroad of the Premier of this province, 

which has interested industry and business not only n our own nation, but from the United States, Germany, 

Japan and Britain and almost every country n the world today. Today Saskatchewan has been put on the map 

more than ever before in its history. 

 

What of our own people, Mr. Speaker? Our own people have a new feeling of hope, a new feeling of 

excitement for the future. From our native Indian people to the youth of Saskatchewan, to our older citizens, 

and to those who are members of our working force and the agricultural communities and the business and 

professional people of our province, they have all been touched with the spirit of the new Government and 

the belief in the importance of the individual. The Throne Speech more than any other document indicates 

the important position in which this Government places the individual in Saskatchewan. Safeguards for our 

citizens, interest in the cost of living, highway safety, a new and intensified interest in the agricultural 

producer, and a real interest in the economic development of our province, all these today indicate to all our 

citizens that their Liberal government is looking to their welfare. 

 

To the youth of our province, in the field of education, increased grants, increased vocational and technical 

training, the opportunity caravans and the much-needed mobile counselling service for all areas of our 

province, free high school texts, increased university facilities, increased French language 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

208 

 

instruction, and particularly our new youth program, all point up the interest that is taken by the Liberal 

Government of Saskatchewan in the younger people of our province. This is what is giving the renewed 

spirit and feeling of a great future for the Province of Saskatchewan. Our programs for our native people in 

this our Centennial Year should be considered of prime importance to all of us as Members of this 

Legislature. For the first time in the history of our province a Government is genuinely considering and 

giving a place to the problems of the Indians and Métis in Saskatchewan. We realize as a government that 

this only has been a step in the right direction. We realize that we must move forward with even greater 

speed than we have in the past in order to give to our Native people their full place in the sun in our 

province. 

 

In the field of taxation the Liberal government has already carried out its major commitment made to the 

people of this province in the election campaign of 1964. The sales tax is reduced from five to four per cent. 

Tax-free gasoline has been permitted in farm trucks. The mineral tax on farm lands was abolished. Steps 

were taken through the homeowner grants to reduce property taxes. The list of sales tax exemptions has been 

increased by some 35 since 1964. A $175,000,000 four-year highway program has not only been launched, 

but will I am sure, when the budget is presented, have been completed by your Government. More financial 

help has been given to municipalities. Newly wed couples have been exempted from the sales tax on the first 

$1,000 of purchases of household goods. All of this tax program, guaranteed by the Liberal party in the 

campaign of 1964, has already been carried out after less than three years in office. Again, in every instance 

the tax relief has meant more to the little man in the Province of Saskatchewan than to the large operator or 

the large producer, indicating the importance placed on the average individual in the Province of 

Saskatchewan by a Liberal government. 

 

Again, in the field of health and welfare programs your Liberal Government has worked in its short period in 

office to improve health services, to reorganize the dental services for the people of the province which are 

so badly needed, worked with the Federal Government in Ottawa to reorganize welfare payments so that the 

people of our province who are in need can receive greater benefits and at less cost to the people of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

All of these actions have been part of the general program which has brought Saskatchewan to the position 

where it is enjoying the greatest prosperity in its history. The record of the Liberal Government of 

Saskatchewan in the first three years in office will speak for itself to the electors of this province. When you 

look back to the dismal record of the CCF in 1964, when after 20 years in office they had failed to put into 

effect the greater part of the program promised to the people in the election of 1944, and when you look at 

the record of the present Liberal Government with almost its entire program already fulfilled after three years 

you can see the difference in action 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

209 

between political parties. Not only, Mr. Speaker, have we been able to complete the majority of our 

campaign promises, but we have also been able to move off into other fields which will be of great 

advantage and great interest to our people in the years to come. 

 

Before entering this phase of my remarks which are going to deal largely with the program of the Water 

Resources Commission and the Water Supply Board, I do want just for a few moments to make reference — 

and it‟s not very often that I do that in this House, and I hope in some ways that it will probably never 

happen again in this House, as far as I‟m concerned — to matters that might be of particular personal 

importance and that has to do with the remarks of some gentleman in this House with regard to an honor 

which was given to my late father by the Government of Canada and by the Prime Minister last fall. I know 

when the Prime Minister made the announcement there was no mention in his announcement that the dam 

was being called the Gardiner Dam because of any particular activities of my father with regard to the dam 

itself. He stated that it was being called that in order to honor an individual who had given great service to 

his province and to his country and had since left political life and had passed away, in other words, an 

individual who was in a position to be recognized in the form that the Prime Minister was recognizing him 

by calling a construction promoted by the Federal Government after an individual in our country. 

 

I would like to add to what the Members from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) stated yesterday, that I hope that in 

the next few years, not only our Government but others will probably be prepared to recognize many of those 

that have been given service. I hope, not only in his party but in my party and in the party represented by the 

Member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) or anyone else who has been recognized as having given great 

service to this country. I hope that, when the time comes to the naming of many of the projects with regard to 

the developments on the South Saskatchewan River during the past few years and throughout this province 

in the future, we will feel free to give honor and recognition to those that have given service, not only to the 

people of our province, but to the people of this great country of ours. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDINER: — I want to say today that I have a great pride in the record that was established in 

public life in this country by my father. As I stated, I have never tried in this House to make any use 

whatsoever of his name unless it was absolutely necessary and I felt called on to do so. I want to say here 

tonight that I feel, with a great deal of pride, that the Prime Minister of this country who sat with my father in 

the Cabinet of this country, and I think probably his major assistant in the Cabinet, the Hon. Paul Martin, 

were probably the two men that had more to do with the decision of naming the Dam in the manner in which 

it as done because of the service that they knew that Jimmy Gardiner, my father, had given to his country 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

210 

 

and to this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDINER: — I would just like to say in concluding these remarks that about a year prior to the 

present Government coming into office, I was approached by the previous Government to give recognition to 

my father by making a dual honor to my father and my brother. Many natural sites have been named after 

those who have given their lives overseas in this province and they have been given for that specific reason. 

The suggestion was made to me by the Government of the day that a small bay or inlet in the Prince Albert 

National Park would be named jointly after my brother who gave his life overseas and my father in 

recognition of his services to this province and this country. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes this 

Government‟s time to pay honor o others that sit across the other side of the floor that we can probably come 

forward with better suggestions of ways in which honor can be given to them that have given great service to 

this province. I include many of those that sit across in the front benches, particularly, my old friend the 

Member for Kelsey, Mr. J.H. Brockelbank, who I think deserves recognition by the people of this province 

for the part that he has taken in public life. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDINER: — And so today, I just want to say that no one as a son could be any prouder of the 

record of a father, and I want to express to the Prime Minister of Canada on behalf of myself personally and 

my family, the appreciation of the recognition of those services that he gave during the 44 years of his public 

life. I hope, we as governments, both federally and provincially in the future, will find it possible to be able 

to give recognition from now on to people that have played a very active part in the public life of our country 

and give them suitable recognition at the same time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GARDINER: — I have the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of reporting to the Legislature on the activities of 

the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission and the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board. During this 

debate, a great deal has been said on the Opposition‟s side of the House with regard to water problems and 

with regard to water problems relating to pollution, two problems which I think all of us recognize as 

important ones. May I review briefly this afternoon the background of the formation of these two agencies of 

government. 

 

Water is one of our most vital and previous resources as it has been stated in this House. The great bulk of 

our population and industry is located in southern Saskatchewan where our 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

211 

water supplies are limited. Very large expenditures have been made in dams and other works to utilize 

existing water supplies over the past few years. Public expenditures in excess of $25,000,000 annually have 

been required over the past few years to meet our water storage needs. Now we are faced with the necessity 

of constructing very expensive inter-basin diversions. These projects will be designed to carry water from 

areas of surplus to water-short areas in southern Saskatchewan. In the future it may well prove necessary to 

make major diversions of water from Arctic watersheds into the prairie area. Today‟s water development 

projects are larger and more expensive. It is essential that they be designed in such a way that maximum 

benefit is recovered from all uses. 

 

This Legislature unanimously approved the Water Resources Commission Act in 1964. This Commission 

has been given a broad responsibility for coordinating the planning and development of water-use projects in 

this province. In addition, the Commission is responsible for the regulation of water use under The Water 

Rights Act, The Ground Water Conservation Act, and the Water Power Act. In this one agency, therefore, is 

centred the responsibility for review and approval of plans for all private and public water development 

schemes prior to construction. Where it is determined that a project is of a multiple-use nature, the Cabinet 

can designate the project and refer it to the Commission. On designated projects, the Commission must 

approve all policies and plans in the development and operation stage. 

 

Since its organization, the Commission has undertaken a number of important tasks. It has coordinated the 

work of all provincial agencies involved in the development of projects to use the water stored on the South 

Saskatchewan River Project. We expect that the major contracts on the construction of the reservoir works 

on this project will be completed this fall. Work is underway on the construction of the power plant by the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The three units of this Coteau Creek plant are expected to be in operation 

late in 1968. Good progress has been made on the pump plant, the main canal and the Broderick Reservoir 

which form the main components of the Outlook-Broderick irrigation block. The first areas will be supplied 

with water for irrigation in 1968. The Department of Natural Resources has completed its basic design work 

for the recreational use of Lake Saskatchewan. Development work is proceeding in three provincial park 

areas, a number of cottage subdivisions, and on boat-launching sites. Over one million seedlings of trees and 

shrubs have been planted. The use of fast-growing varieties will transform the typical prairie landscape into a 

truly park-like atmosphere in a few years‟ time. The Commission has continued its work on the development 

of operating procedures for this vast storage reservoir. It is expected that the reservoir will be transferred to 

the province for operation in the year 1968. The procedures developed by the Commission will be designed 

to maximize the benefits of the water used for power production, irrigation and recreation, and for diversion 

into the Qu‟Appelle River system. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

212 

 

The Commission has been studying the future water requirements in other parts of the province. Public 

hearings to assess local needs were held in 1965 for the Saskatoon Southeast area; in Moose Jaw in 1965 for 

the Moose Jaw and Thunder Creek region; in Saskatoon in 1966 for the Saskatoon West area; and in 

Melville and Yorkton in 1966 for the upper Assiniboine area. These public hearings are followed up by 

intensive study of the water supply and demand picture in these areas. Alternative methods of providing 

additional water are reviewed from both an engineering and economic standpoint. Upon completion of the 

required studies, the Commission recommends to the Government those development projects that can most 

economically provide the forecast water needs. In addition to this study of water requirements in specific in 

specific areas, the Commission is undertaking a forecast of overall provincial water requirements in the 

future. Saskatchewan‟s growing population and its industrial expansion will create demands for water that 

may only be met through interprovincial development projects. 

 

Saskatchewan took the initiative in promoting the Saskatchewan-Nelson study. This drainage basin provides 

the best source of surface water for the southern half of the Prairie Provinces. Agreement was reached 

between the Provincial Government and the Government of Canada on the terms of reference for this study. 

Briefly, the study would show the engineering feasibility and the costs of increasing the supply of water at 

different points in the basin. The Governments of Canada, Saskatchewan and Alberta have also agreed on 

the cost-sharing formula for the study. The overall costs estimated at $5,000,000 would be shared 50 per cent 

by Canada and the balance split evenly between the three Provincial Governments. It is unfortunate indeed, 

that the Government of Manitoba has not seen fit to agree to provide its share of these costs. Our 

Government believes that the study must proceed quickly and we intend to continue to press for an early tart 

with the hope that Manitoba will change its mind. 

 

There has been a great deal of public discussion recently regarding the export of Canadian water to the 

United States. The Government of Saskatchewan has made its views known on this matter. I would like to 

quote from a letter that I forwarded on behalf of this government, to the Prime Minister in May of 1966: 

 

It is our view that water is a fundamental resource and that history has demonstrated that the 

prosperity, indeed, the survival, of every human society has depended upon an abundant supply of 

usable water available at reasonable cost. 

 

Canada is fortunate to possess an abundant supply of fresh water, although there is some imbalance 

in the regional distribution of available supply. With proper planning, development and management, 

this supply of water can provide a major incentive for expansion of our Canadian economy. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

213 

We view with deep concern the suggestions that the water in our national rivers is a continental 

resource. Certainly we recognize that there are obvious and practical reasons why joint development 

and sharing of the water in international streams can be beneficial to both countries. We strongly 

believe that national waters are entirely Canadian and that our country has no obligation to make this 

resource available for use in any other country. 

 

Therefore, we respectfully submit that the Government of Canada should not consider the sale of this 

national resource. Furthermore, we suggest that no discussion should proceed with other countries 

for the export of Canadian water until such time as a detailed inventory of the resource and our future 

requirement have been completed by Canadian investigators. 

 

We recommend that the Government of Canada take the initiative in the development of a unified, 

national, water policy. The policy should be developed after appropriate consultation with provincial 

and regional authorities but there is an urgent need for long-term planning for future water needs in 

all parts of Canada, without regard to provincial or other local boundaries. 

 

As I mentioned, Saskatchewan is taking steps to determine its future needs for water. Saskatchewan is 

prepared to assist in any way in regional studies to ensure that we know how to get the water we will need in 

the future. We are prepared to cooperate in joint development projects for the mutual benefit of prairie 

regions. 

 

Now let‟s turn for a moment to the Water Supply Board. One year ago, this Legislature approved 

amendments to The Water Resources Commission Act that provided for the setting up of the Saskatchewan 

Water Supply Board. This new agency has the job of constructing and operating multi-purpose water supply 

projects. After the Commission‟s study of the Saskatoon southeast area, it recommended and the government 

approved an ambitious canal, reservoir and pipeline system to serve agricultural, industrial, municipal, 

recreation and other users in the area. Basically the Board intends to supply water to all users who can be 

economically served and to supply the water at reasonable cost consistent with repayment of the capital and 

operating costs incurred. 

 

During 1965, the Board made excellent progress in design and construction of the SSEWS project. The bulk 

of the work on the canal from Broderick reservoir to Blackstrap reservoir has been completed. The dam on 

the Brightwater reservoir is virtually complete as well as the substructure on a pump plant on the Bradwell 

reservoir. The work completed by the Board in 1966 involved the expenditure of $1,700,000. During 1967, it 

is the Board‟s intention to complete the construction of the balance of the canal-reservoir system. This 

involves 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

214 

 

construction of a canal from Blackstrap reservoir easterly in the final reservoir on the system on Dellwood 

Brook near Lanigan. Five reservoirs on the system will be completed, Brightwater, Blackstrap, Bradwell, 

Zelma and Dellwood. The pump plant at Bradwell will be completed along with additional plants at Zelma 

and Dellwood. Pipeline extensions to serve Noranda Mines, Alwinsal Potash and the town of Lanigan are 

included in the 1967 program. 

 

This SSEWS project will return great benefits. Nearly 15,000 acres of farmland can be irrigated from the 

system. Up to 20 towns and villages may be supplied with good quality water for their expanding 

populations. Initially three potash developments will be supplied and the system is capable of supplying the 

production water requirements of any further potash ventures in this promising area. Wetlands can be 

supplied with water for wildlife production. The new reservoir in the Blackstrap Valley has great potential 

for recreation development. Situated only 20 miles from Saskatoon and adjacent to a major highway this new 

lake will provide a recreation outlet in an area that needs it desperately. The level of Little Manitou Lake can 

be restored and maintained, enhancing and protecting a large investment in facilities around that lake. 

 

The Board constructed a short pipeline connecting the Duval potash construction site with the city of 

Saskatoon water system. This line is presently being extended to serve United Chemicals new chemical plant 

nearby. The Board intends to construct a large pipeline to convey raw water from the South Saskatchewan 

River to Duval and perhaps to serve municipalities and industries further west. The government believes that 

the projects underway now will prove to be the forerunner of similar supply systems in older parts of 

Saskatchewan. It is our view that multi-use developments can effectively meet the needs in water short areas. 

While these projects will require considerable public investment in the suture, this capital can be recovered 

through equitable water charges. In time the earning capacity of the Saskatchewan Water Supply Board will 

generate much of the new capital required. We can look forward to the day when no part of the province will 

be hampered in its economic expansion by a lack of adequate water supply. 

 

I would like to say before closing my remarks on the Water Supply Board that the Member for Arm River 

(Mr. Pederson) two days ago in his address to this House was somewhat critical of the operations of the 

Water Supply Board. I want to leave his mind at east with regard to some of the problems that he suggested 

in his remarks, particularly with regard to the danger of salt content in the water when it approaches Lanigan 

and other areas that will be making use of it. From investigations undertaken by the Water Resources 

Commission this problem will not be the problem that was suggested by the Member for Arm River (Mr. 

Pederson). The people that would be involved in the SSEWS system will be able to receive as good water as 

they would be able to get any place in the Province of Saskatchewan and they will have a guaranteed supply. 

I have already indicated the answer to his 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

215 

other problem when h stated that some were trying to prove that potash companies alone would pay the cost 

of this development. I just want to indicate to him that I have already said that this is a multi-purpose project 

not mainly for potash but to cover the needs of all the people in the surrounding area which will include a 

population in the future of some 45,000. 

 

Pollution control is the last item that I want to say a few words about. This is an item which I think is of 

great interest to the people of our province. Late in 1966 I had the honor to represent the Government of 

Saskatchewan at the Montreal Conference on Pollution and Environment sponsored by the Canadian Council 

of Resource Ministers. Highly qualified technical people presented papers to the Conference on the extent of 

the pollution problem in Canada and on control methods. Saskatchewan does not have a serious pollution 

problem although there are serious local problems in some areas. However, the quality of our water supplies, 

both ground and surface, is relatively poor and of course the available supplies are limited. We cannot 

afford, therefore, to use large quantities of fresh water for the dilution of sewage and other effluent. 

 

Over the past year, the Water Resources Commission has been examining policy and practice elsewhere. The 

general objective of water quality management programs is to protect and enhance the capacity of water to 

serve the widest possible range of human needs. Control programs elsewhere recognize that the discharge of 

suitably treated effluent into our water bodies is a reasonable use provided it does not interfere unduly with 

higher priority uses. 

 

During this session, this Legislature will be asked to consider amendments to The Water Resources 

Commission Act to provide the legislative framework for a pollution control program in Saskatchewan. This 

program will have as its objective the conservation of water and the protection, maintenance and 

improvement of its quality for the following purposes: 1. Protection of public health; 2. Encouragement of 

economic development; 3. Preservation of aesthetic value; and 4. Preservation of fish and wildlife. Since the 

Commission has the overall responsibility for water management, the proposed legislation will transfer the 

existing responsibility for approval of water and sewage systems constructed by municipalities and industries 

from the Department of Public Health to the Commission. 

 

The Commission‟s program will control pollution by requiring Commission approval before any waste water 

is discharged into our water bodies. It is proposed that all new developments involving discharge of wastes 

will be required to submit plans for complete treatment of these wastes. The Commission will allow staging 

of the installation of these works where adequate water is available for waste dilution. In areas where full 

sewage treatment is required due to an existing water problem, it is recognized that costly corrective 

measures may be necessary. The Commission is prepared to negotiate a schedule for the installation of waste 

treatment facilities in cases of this type. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

216 

 

The problem of waste discharge control does not contemplate fixed water quality standards. General 

guidelines for water quality assessment will be defined under Water Quality Criteria. The degree of 

treatment required to meet these criteria will vary from one part of the province to another depending on the 

ability of the particular water bodies to assimilate wastes. 

 

There has been some public discussion about the situation at Saskatoon where the city has been discharging 

untreated sewage into the South Saskatchewan River. This problem is a longstanding one. As long ago as 

1943, the rural municipality of Cory obtained an injunction to prevent the city from discharging untreated 

sewage into the river. Since that time, various legal and other approaches have been made to have the city 

install treatment facilities. Under normal stream flow conditions, this practice has not been considered a 

public health menace. It is the Commission‟s intention to require all municipalities to provide at least 

primary treatment of sewage or effluent in the future. Primary treatment involves the removal of all solid 

wastes. The city of Saskatoon was advised in 1961 that normal stream flow patterns in the South 

Saskatchewan would be changed when the South Saskatchewan project was completed. Now, and in the 

future, the river flows will be kept to a minimum during the summer months and much larger flows will be 

experienced during winter months when water is released from Lake Saskatchewan for power production 

purposes. The new pattern of stream flows was experienced for the first time this past summer and fall. The 

combination of low flows and the discharge of untreated sewage at Saskatoon resulted in very unpleasant 

odors affecting much of the city and downstream areas. The city of Saskatoon has had consultants examining 

the cost of new sewage treatment facilities and, I understand, these consultants have reported to city council 

on the matter. In anticipation of the Commission‟s control program, I extend an invitation to Saskatoon 

officials to discuss the timing of the construction of their new facilities with the Commission in order that 

the unsatisfactory conditions existing now can be alleviated as soon as possible. 

 

It is the Commission‟s intention to circulate its views to a water quality control policy to interested people 

and organizations soon. Public hearing are planned for this spring and the public will be invited to present 

their views on the matter prior to the implementation of control regulations. It is our hope that the program 

can be implemented and operating by midsummer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think you can gather from the remarks that I have made during my address that I will support 

the motion and I will not support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I intend to confine my remarks to a rather 

narrow section of the Throne Speech that was delivered 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

217 

in this House a short while ago. However, before I begin those remarks I want to make a statement on some 

remarks that have been passed by the mover (Mr. Hooker) and later endorsed in this House about labor. I 

think I can safely say that the anti-labor record of the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan is widely known. 

Since it formed the Government, bill 79 and Bill 2 served to demonstrate to the public that it is definitely 

anti-labor. At this point it must feel it‟s necessary to reinforce its public image to the electorate of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The attack made by the mover of the Address in Reply (Mr. Hooker) had no basis in fact. His ignorance 

about unions and about union members astounds me beyond belief. His mock concern for the benefits that 

union members receive from membership in a union is sheet political manoeuvre. I have access to the facts 

and for that reason I can refute his reckless charges. The members of the union he referred to, in particular, 

have a constitution and it is clearly stated for all members to read what they purchased with their dues and 

where their dues go. I dare say a great many Canadian unions that have counterparts of an international 

nature have received funds, and some time or other, to a certain degree from United States or from wherever 

their international is located, in this case the United States. I would suggest that all union members and all 

workers in Saskatchewan take careful note of the harmful changes that have been made in the labor law of 

Saskatchewan by a Liberal Government. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that it has been a pleasure representing the city of Saskatoon in this 

Legislature, and judging from the Premier‟s remarks on Wednesday last I can now begin looking forward, 

with pleasure, to be representing the people of Saskatoon Mayfair in the next Legislature. 

 

Canadians are embarking upon the second century as a Dominion and I am sure you feel as I do, that there is 

something exciting and almost mystical about the turn of our century. The accomplishments of the past are 

many and the future is full of promises. However, some goals have not been reached in the first one hundred 

years and the future does hold some real dangers. We all realize that the rate of change in our world is itself 

changing rapidly. Therefore, the preparation of our young people for the future must take into consideration, 

among other things, the population explosion, technological advancement, food production and 

redistribution and let‟s not forget peace and war. 

 

How are we preparing Saskatchewan youth for the future? Obviously they are healthier, thanks to all the 

pioneers in medicine and medical care. It is equally evident that they can look forward to a life relatively free 

of heavy manual labor. This is coupled with more free time due to our modern technology. To meet the 

challenge presented to us it would seem that the very patterns of life will undergo changes. 

 

The Government‟s Youth Report was a preliminary step 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

218 

 

meeting the challenge of youth. I would hasten to add that I believe it was a correct step. Since the 

presentation of that report on youth, the Youth Agency was established. Some of the recommendations were 

put into effect; unfortunately, as you have probably noted by the Public Accounts, the expenditures with 

regard to that agency were under-expended by 14 per cent. 

 

The Agency has received a great deal of publicity to date and I would say that this is proper and correct. The 

popularization of the Agency and its aims are essential to the realization of a successful program conclusion. 

I would like in particular to deal with this bulleting, it‟s volume 1, No. 1 of “Youth and Recreation.” On the 

front cover we see a genuine un-retouched picture of the Minister in charge of the Agency. I believe that this 

is highly desirable because it lets the young people of Saskatchewan know how tough things are in Regina 

and what they are up against. 

 

Now on page 2 of this particular bulletin — I read it very carefully — you will see reference made to the 

appointment of a Youth‟s Council, and in this particular article they state: “Appointments to the council 

marked a significant milestone, in the development of programs in youth work.” Mr. Speaker, here I stopped 

reading and I thought to myself what a happy coincidence that the Minister in charge is the MLA for 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) and the appointments were described as a “significant milestone.” The thought 

never entered my head, Mr. Speaker, that this happy coincidence would trigger the subconscious voting 

finger of some young person in Milestone constituency. The thought never entered my head. When I read 

onto the next paragraph there was a direct quote from the Minister in charge, and he states: 

 

So far as I now this is the first time that any government has officially recognized youth. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer you to the report “Youth in our Time.” There is a section 

there dealing with youth and the part taken by the previous government prior to implementation of the Youth 

Agency. On page 47: 

 

The following is a list of Departments and Agencies who are involved in programs and projects 

which directly or indirectly affected young people. 

 

Agriculture: 4H programs, Farm boys and Girls Camps, Agricultural Societies, Cooperation and 

Cooperative Development. Education: Book Bureau, Continuing Education, Correspondence Branch, 

School Curriculum Branch, Division of Guidance and Special Education, School Broadcast Programs, 

School Libraries Branch, Student Aid Fund. 

 

Now this is a very interesting one. I would just like to refer the Members to what it says about Student Aid 

Fund in this report. No. 10 on page 53: 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

219 

The Student Aid Fund as a program within the Department is serving a very worthwhile purpose. 

With the increasing concern for higher academic achievements, the general education achievement, it 

is expected that more financial resources might be employed to this end. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I checked the estimates ending March 31, 1966. What was the appropriation for the 

Student Aid Fund? It was $200,000. How much of that fund remained unexpended at the end of the year? It 

was $122,972 or 61 per cent of the Student Aid Fund remained unexpended at the end of that year. They 

must have been using it to balance the budget I guess. 

 

Other departments that were directly or indirectly involved with Youth programs prior to the establishment 

of the Youth Agency: Saskatchewan Arts Board promotes the arts; Bursary Scholarship Grants; Highway 

Traffic Board; Labor — I might mention the apprenticeship training; Municipal Affairs, Community 

Planning Branch; Natural Resources; Indian and Métis. 

 

Now there is something I should just make a couple of remarks about. On page 58 of the Youth report it has 

this to say about Indian and Métis: 

 

A Branch with this particular Department has been dedicated to serving the Indian and Métis ethnic 

populations of the province. This Branch has undertaken a gigantic task of social readjustment for 

these people. It has been concluded that the paramount change in living patterns can be best 

accomplished by working with young people. To this end, this Branch has solicited and is obtaining 

a cooperative concern of several other branches and departments of government. 

 

I am very glad to hear that that was being done. Other branches of the Department of Natural Resources 

involved in this same areas: Junior Hunters‟ Safety Program; Museum of Natural History; Parks and 

Recreation Planning Division; Provincial Library: Public Health Department; and within this Department 

programs far too numerous to mention at this time. The same applies to the Department of Welfare, 

programs far too numerous to mention at this time. 

 

With regard to this bulletin, Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that some political hacks can‟t keep their cotton 

pickin political fingers out of the program. Another example will serve to illustrate my point. An article on 

the same page relates to the establishment of the Agency. The second last paragraph reads: 

 

While at all times preserving the identity and opportunity for individual and group involvement (thus 

limiting the heavy hand of government) to best fill the needs indicated by the citizenry. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

220 

 

“Thus limiting the heavy hand of government.” Mr. Speaker, that fragment of sentence was obviously left 

over from some Thatcher election brochures. I will admit that it aptly describes the Liberal heavy-handed 

crushing of civil liberties and civil servants. Still it is highly political and has no place in this bulletin. 

Needless to say I am looking forward to Volume 1, No. 2 . . . 

 

MR. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — . . . very soon. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon City): — I am glad to hear that but I must admit with a certain amount 

of feeling of foreboding uneasiness, Mr. Speaker. We in this party would regard the loss of this program 

because of Liberal meddling to be a sad thing for the province. Mr. Speaker, we would encourage the 

Government to institute genuine, long-range research projects and I am not aware at this point if the 

Government is embarked on this course. We assure the Government of full cooperation in that direction. 

 

What do the young people of Saskatchewan consider as areas of concern? I would suggest that their 

priorities would be along this line: world peace and good-will among nations, Canada for Canadians, 

national unity, equality and identity, assistance to others less fortunate in other nations, a better deal for 

agriculture; also improved educational facilities. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker we want to assure the youth of Saskatchewan from this side of the House that we 

will take very careful consideration and endorse all worthwhile youth programs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, at the outset I wish to commend the Premier — I 

regret that he does not appear to be in his seat — for acting on the advice that Members on this side of the 

House and others, including Members of his own political party, gave him in making Cabinet changes a few 

months ago. I recall last year, Mr. Speaker, during one of the debates, I specifically proposed that the 

Members for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) who occupied the Social Welfare portfolio be removed from that office 

because the Department of Social Welfare was in chaotic condition. A new Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. 

MacDonald) has been appointed and I want to wish him well. I also wish to bring to the attention of the 

Government Members — and again I regret that the Premier is not in his seat — that some highway 

contractors have been complaining of the way they are being hounded and pressured by Liberal party 

bagmen to hand over money to Liberal party political funds. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — I hope, Mr. Speaker that this is not a new branch established under the Department of 

Highways, since the new 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

221 

Minister has taken office. If it is, we shall expect the expenditures of this „Squeeze the Contractors for 

Campaign Funds Branch‟ to be shown in the supplementary estimates. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — It‟s an old branch. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Chances are if we named them they would never get another contract or would never 

get any advances for future contract road construction. 

 

MR. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Name one . . . a little proof. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to wish the new Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) success in his 

portfolio. I noticed on Wednesday he breathed a sigh of relief when the Premier announced plans for the 

Regina Base Hospital. The Regina Base Hospital was a source of embarrassment to the Hon. Member for 

Regina South (Mr. Grant). He and other Liberal candidates in 1964 made a commitment to the people of 

Regina that the Liberal government would proceed immediately to correct the hospital problem in Regina by 

building a base hospital at provincial cost. Not three or four or five years later, they said, “immediately.” Mr. 

Speaker I welcome the proposal but I also want to make an observation. I noticed the very delicate words the 

Premier used when he made the announcement. He used such words as “earliest moment” and “if the 

hospital can be tied with the university as a teaching and research hospital, we can receive 50 per cent of the 

cost from the Federal Government.” Apparently, the government does not know yet. He further stated that 

“The Health Minister will enter into negotiations with the Federal Government,” and “a site has been 

reserved.” You‟ll notice these words, “the site has been reserved.” It has not been purchased yet, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier went on to say, “the hospital may have to be constructed in phases.” These, Mr. 

Speaker are weasel words. 

 

MR. MacLENNAN (Last Mountain): — You ought to know! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker there has been no date set to start construction, no agreement with the 

Federal Government, no land purchased, no hospital board appointed, no indication of how many beds will 

be included in this hospital. 

 

The Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) told us the other day that no architect has been hired to date. I wonder, 

Mr. Speaker, how was the cost determined? How as the $16,000,000 figure arrived at? There is no architect, 

there is no board, yet they are able to come up with fantastic figures like $16,000,000. My hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that the proposed hospital does not end up in the same category as many other announcements, for 

example, the heavy water plant in Estevan. Mr. Speaker, the Regina citizens will hold the government to its 

commitment, as they have kept the heat on the Liberal party and the Government to 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

222 

 

keep the promise of 1964. The Liberals know very well that they can‟t face the electors of Regina and 

southern Saskatchewan without clarifying their position on this important issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker I also want to tell the people of Regina that a $10,000,000 base hospital would have been 

nearing completion had a CCF Government been in office. May I also suggest to the Government, Mr. 

Speaker, and to the proposed hospital board, that when they consider the name for the hospital I would 

suggest that it would be named the “W.S. Lloyd South Saskatchewan Health Centre.‟ This would be 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker, in tribute to the man who introduced the most successful medical care plan in 

Canada so far. If the hospital is proceeded with, and at the moment it appears to be a big “if”, then we will 

consider this as a down-payment on the unkept promises the Liberals made in 1964. Let me remind you, Mr. 

Speaker, of other commitments that they made and we expect them to proceed with forthwith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind them of the promise that was made to remove the sales tax from children‟s 

clothing. I want to remind them of their commitment to have all textbooks free including grade 12. Up till 

now they have announced a program for grade 10 only. I want to remind them of the promise they made that 

the sales tax would be exempt from city purchases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here comes the big ones. They said that they would immediately proceed with the construction 

of a 600 bed geriatric centre. We have not heard a word about it since 1964. They said that they would 

provide from provincial funds, 50 per cent of all education costs. At present, Mr. Speaker, in the city of 

Regina they are providing only about one third, only one third of cost percentage-wise, less than provided 

under the CCF administration. They also promised to provide an equitable share of gasoline tax revenue for 

road construction and maintenance. Here too, Mr. Speaker, their record is a dismal one. According to last 

year‟s estimates, the urban people will pay on a per capita basis $35.40 each in gasoline tax and in return the 

Government will provide a grant of 88 cents per capita, only for road construction in urban centres. A ratio 

of 40 to one. This is an example of Liberal equitable sharing. One elephant, one mouse. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker I welcome the announcement regarding the base hospital. We shall continue to keep the 

pressure on to make sure that it is planned and proceed with forthwith, not two or three years from now. We 

welcome the interest shown by the current Minister (Mr. Grant) in this problem in the city of Regina. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, the former Minister of Health, the Hon. Members for Prince Albert, who was demoted 

apparently for lack of administration abilities, knowing that his residents in the city of Regina is very 

temporary, was really not interested or concerned about the hospital needs of the people of Regina and 

Southern Saskatchewan. He was more concerned about getting provincial funds for the Prince Albert pulp 

mill. 

 

Mr. Speaker the Throne Speech makes it obvious that the 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

223 

Cabinet reshuffle did not result in any new ideas. Let us hope that at least it will result in some improved 

administrative procedures; that is, provided some public servants particularly of senior category are not 

dismissed, compelled, or frustrated in terminating employment. 

 

Several items in the Throne Speech are worthy of mention. These are: the disclosure of credit costs, highway 

safety, pension portability, water pollution control, extension of housing for senior citizens, and one or two 

other items. These are measures which we on this side of the House have urged and made specific proposals 

on during previous sessions. If the legislation is positive then we on this side of the house will cooperate and 

support it. But until we see it e cannot make any firm commitments. It could be, Mr. Speaker, just 

window-dressing. We have no objection to the Government copying and accepting our ideas. What we are 

critical of, Mr. Speaker, is that the Government on its own initiative has not proposed a single item worthy of 

note. 

 

During the 1964 campaign, the Liberals were full of promise. They said that they were the party of new 

ideas, vigor, and full of steam. Well, sir, before they could work up enough steam to get moving they fell flat 

on their face. Mr. Speaker, this is 1967. The year of Canada‟s hundredth birthday. It is a historic occasion for 

every Canadian. It is a period in our history demanding of governments an agenda for action. It is time to do 

things for people, which will be of everlasting value. People are saying we have faith in our country. We 

want governments to give this notion a new dimension, and its citizens security, freedom, and a better way of 

life and equality of opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mover (Mr. Hooker) of the Address in Reply told us of the Government‟s centennial 

project. It is the everlasting Liberal kick; it was described by him in two words, “Hate Labor,” a repetition of 

the Liberal hate campaign of previous years. It comes to us as no surprise. The Hon. Member for 

Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) took his cue from the Premier, who told the November Liberal Party 

Convention; that come the next election campaign the number one plank of the Liberal Party will be, hate 

labor. May I remind the Hon. Member when he attacks labor in Saskatchewan, in the main he is attacking the 

sons and daughters of our farmers. I do not know whether the Hon. Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. 

Hooker) has any children but if he does, Sir, chances are ten to one they will join the non-agricultural labor 

force and will be working of wages. Chances are too Mr. Speaker, they will join the ranks of organized labor 

so when he and other Liberal spokesmen condemn and vilify and malign labor, they are in fact condemning 

and maligning the sons and daughters, relatives, friends and neighbors of our farm families. On the long run, 

Mr. Speaker, they are condemning their own children. 

 

Somehow, Mr. Speaker, I cannot get angry with the Hon. Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. 

Hooker). He is to be pitied more than criticized. He is a man with a bitter heart and 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

224 

 

certainly confused thinking. Hate and prejudice are the cause of today‟s division in our country. It is the 

cause of conflict between nations. What is needed today is understanding and appreciation of each other‟s 

problems between farmers and wage earners, business and professionals, the young and the old, and 

understanding between all segments of our society and above all, Mr. Speaker, an understanding and 

tolerance by the politician. Only in this way can we hope to build a bigger and better, greater Canada. 

 

May I suggest to the Hon. Member that he study the submission the Saskatchewan Farmers Union made to 

his Government but a matter of a few days ago. The Farmers Union represents many thousands of 

Saskatchewan farm families. I believe that they are in a better position to know the views of the 

Saskatchewan farmers. Their brief to the Government does not contain a single derogatory remarks about 

labor and labor organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker the road to progress of our nation lies not in divisive hate campaigns or repressive labor 

legislation like Bill 2 and Bill 79. The road to progress demands their repeal. It calls for understanding and 

extension of the rights and freedoms of all Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to this Government that as a start in this direction during this session of the 

Legislature it repeal Bill 2 and Bill 79. 

 

The Liberal party in 1964 promised to create 80,000 new jobs in a period of four years. Well, sir, between 

1964 and 1965 the non-agricultural labor force according to their own statistics, according to their own 

report, the Saskatchewan Economic Review of 1966, increased by only 3,000, a number which is less than in 

any period during the CCF administration in the 20 years of office. And no amount of screaming on the part 

of the Premier about the increase in the labor force or no amount of exaggeration on the part of the Minister 

of Labour (Mr. Coderre) is going to create the jobs that they have been talking about. Their own figures 

refute the statements that they have been making. The Economic Review is produced by the staff of the 

Premier under his supervision — I have it before me — a 3,000 labor force increase between 1964 and 1965. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite what the Premier says the non-agricultural labor force increased by no more than 

15,000 in total in the three-year period the Government has been in office, and the agricultural labor force on 

the other hand has dropped considerably. The net increase, and I‟m being very generous, is perhaps 10,000. 

 

Remember they promised 80,000 jobs in four years of being in office. In a period of three years the labor 

forces increased by less than 10,000. Labor force increases can be measured by population growth. Between 

1964 and 1965 our population was increased by 11,000, a rate of growth that is only half as fast as it was in 

the previous ten years‟ average. The Premier continues to make claim of labor shortages but he never 

mentions the number of persons who are unemployed. In September according 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

225 

to the Labor Gazette, there were 5,592 persons registered as unemployed in the Saskatchewan Manpower 

office. This is during the highest period of employment, during the best season. The number of persons 

registered as unemployed now is at least twice the September figure or at least 11,000. An equal of greater 

number who are unemployed or under-employed do not register with the Manpower Offices for one reason 

or another. I do not dispute the fact that there are shortages of certain skilled workers. This situation exists in 

every province in the Dominion of Canada and it has existed in Saskatchewan for many, many years. 

 

One of the speakers at the Manpower Training Conference held in Ottawa last February, at which for some 

reason or other the Government of Saskatchewan was not represented, made this claim, let me quote: 

 

The training of manpower has always been important to our economy, but it has taken on an added 

importance during the past decade, due to the acceleration of technological changes. The structure of 

the demand for labor is changing; we must therefore, take steps to change the structure of labor 

supply. Failure to do so would lead to a double catastrophe, unemployment and severe labor 

shortages existing side by side. The unemployment would entail its usual social hardships and 

economic waste; the labor shortage would cause bottlenecks, declining productivity, as employers 

attempt to have certain jobs performed by inadequately trained workers. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker is precisely the situation in Saskatchewan. On the one hand there is a labor shortage of 

skilled personnel,, on the other hand we have thousands of persons who are unemployed. This is because this 

Government is failing to take necessary steps to provide proper training and retraining of the working force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I digress for a moment. As this House came to session today it came to my attention that 

the employees working in the Department of Education on the 14th floor are very much concerned and in 

fact very worried at the shifting and moving and caving that is taking place on the 14th floor at Avord 

Towers. Since the audio and visual branch has moved in and the files have been put in on that floor and the 

machine room installed, the floor is apparently caving or is moving and they are working in danger. May I 

ask, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) and he Minister of Education (Mr. 

Trapp) attend to this matter immediately, call upon the Workmen‟s Compensation Board and contractors and 

others to make an immediate examination. We have seen and heard in recent years of buildings, new 

buildings collapsing. I hope this is not the case in this building, but there is some danger and I know that the 

people, the employees there are expressing some real fears. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

226 

 

This Government has failed, refused, or is totally blind, Mr. Speaker, to the urgent demands of giving top 

priority to education and in manpower training needs. The record of the Government for the last three years 

is worse than any other in Canada, despite the fact that millions of dollars are available from federal funds 

for construction of technical schools, living allowances, grants for teacher training, etc. Last year we said in 

this House that there were wide cracks in the Government education policy. Mr. Speaker this year it appears 

that the roof is caving in. During our last year‟s winter session I asked the Government this question: How 

many persons who applied for technical institute courses were refused admittance because of lack of space? 

The Government‟s answer was: 880. I also asked: How many were refused admittance for academic reasons? 

The answer was: 123. Mr. Speaker, apparently the Hon. Members on the other side can‟t read. I would be 

prepared to file, in case they do not have the answers they gave me. These are the figures that were given to 

me last year on April 7. The figure is 880 who were denied because there was no space; 123 were denied the 

opportunity to education for academic reasons. In 1965, over 1,000 persons were denied the opportunity of 

technical education directly as a result of the lack of policy on the part of this Government. How many were 

denied admittance this year we do not know yet, but the chances are that two or three thousand are being 

denied the right to education this year. 

 

The Canadian Association for Adult Education calls learning the fifth freedom. But this Government treats 

education with callous disregard. Let me give you some further examples, Mr. Speaker. Look at the question 

I posed when this House opened. Question No. 5 that I placed on the Order Paper, look at the answer. I asked 

how many meetings did the Provincial Apprenticeship Board hold in 1966. The Minister of Labour gave me 

the answer, None. Mr. Speaker, apprenticeship training is a very important part of upgrading and training of 

our people in the skills that are needed. Yet there wasn‟t even a single meeting called by this Government of 

the Apprenticeship Board in the whole of 1966. Let me give you a further example, Mr. Speaker. On the 

second day of this session, I asked this verbal question: “has the Government entered into new agreements 

with the Federal Government with respect to technical and vocational education training; also with respect to 

apprenticeship training?” The Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) said, No. 

 

In a few days, in fact it‟s only a week today, this House will be considering, we will be asked to vote on a 

budget, but there is no agreement with respect to education between this Government and Ottawa. Mr. 

Speaker, I suppose this is what can be called the business approach to government. It has been making 

announcements regarding living increase allowances of school construction but there is no agreement. Mr. 

Speaker, if it really does not matter how large the living allowances are if there is no room in the schools to 

admit the possible students. Such increases don‟t solve the problem of those who can‟t be admitted for 

academic reasons, for want of an upgrading program. 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

 

 

 

227 

It is not going to help such workers nor reduce the shortages in skilled labor force. It is reported, Mr. 

Speaker, that 120,000 of Saskatchewan labor force have grade eight education or less. This is one third of the 

total of the farm and non-farm labor force. These people have many years to live. They have many years of 

contribution to make to the growth and development of our nation in a technological society. In order to be 

employed they need to be upgraded academically and technically. But this Government has no program; 

there‟s a shortage of facilities and there is a shortage of personnel to do the job. 

 

Let me briefly refer to the University program. They have been bragging a good deal about it the last few 

days. In the two previous sessions, Mr. Speaker, this Legislature approved large sums for university capital 

construction, but Mr. Speaker, it was not spent. Much of it was either cancelled or ordered to be deferred by 

the Premier. The Premier is reported in the Regina Leader Post of June 23, 1966, that $4,000,000 of the 

1965-66 budget was not spent and in the same article it was reported that he directed the University to stop 

$3,000,000 worth of construction in the current fiscal year — $7,000,000 worth of capital construction 

which was approved by this Legislature was either cancelled or deferred. 

 

Last year for the first time in the history of the University of Saskatchewan controlled student enrolment was 

implemented because of lack of facilities and because of not providing adequate funds for the University. 

Last year again, the tuition fees were increased by $35 on the average. No matter how much the Premier and 

other Members talks about tuition fees in the past, everybody knows that the Federal Government has made 

large contributions and large grants available to the Provincial Government in the last couple of years. This 

is a new era, Mr. Speaker. The Bladen Commission in its report states emphatically that “there should be no 

general increase in fees without assurance of a simultaneous increase of student aid.” 

 

Provincial Student Aid Loans have virtually been eliminated. We have noticed that Government Members 

stay clear of talking about a Provincial Aid Plan because there is none. There is no Provincial Student Aid 

Fund Program any more. What they are talking about is the Federal Program; the Canada Student Act Loan 

Program. It is provided and paid for by the Federal Government and the only thing that happens is that 

Provincial Government administers the fund. Let‟s not make any mistake about that. Last year the Federal 

Government increased university grants to Saskatchewan by some $3,000,000. What happened? The result 

was that the Provincial Government used this amount to reduce its share. Taking all the university students 

into account, the full time and the part time, you will find that operating grants last year were reduced by $33 

per student. They were reduced from $419 to $386 from the previous year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear a great deal about the amount of money that is being spent on education but the truth is 

that between 

 



February 10, 1967 

 

228 

 

1963 and 1966, the increases in education in Saskatchewan were 42 per cent. The increases for Canada as a 

whole were 84 per cent, from $2,400,000,000 in 1973 nationally to $4,400,000,000, an increase of 84 per 

cent. In Saskatchewan the increase is only 42 per cent. This is the story in respect of education. Three million 

dollars were taken out of student education funds last year and were put into the general revenue of the 

Government in order to offset the deficit budget. 

 

The Hon. Members from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) the other day tried to tell us about the Government 

school construction program. Well, sir, I did some checking and I have made some comparisons. Mr. 

Speaker, the Government last year out of provincial funds spent less than $4,000,000 on school construction. 

You know it brags about highway construction, and I‟m not opposed to construction of roads. But, Mr. 

Speaker, let‟s set some priorities and I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the priority today is education. May I also 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the result of vetoing debenture sales by the Provincial Local Government Board 

for school construction, especially in the cities and larger communities, will mean that in 1967 there will be 

even less school construction. Yet this is the period when our present facilities are taxed to capacity, and this 

government is vetoing the sale of debentures and is hacking the programs in respect to school construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say on this item on Monday, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADDENDUM, ON ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

TABLING OF MANPOWER RETURN 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker I would like to give to you a report entitled 

Saskatchewan Manpower — Needs and Resources. This report was sponsored jointly by ARDA and the 

Government of Saskatchewan. The research was undertaken by Hillis and Parners. The tabling of this report 

was requested by the Leader of the Opposition. Although it was not designated distribution, we are pleased 

to make it available to this Legislature, particularly because it shows such a healthy position for the Province 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we were only able to get six copies and I hope these may suffice for the 

Opposition. If they do not of course we will have to go out at some cost and print additional copies. However 

we are hoping these six may do. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o‟clock p.m. 


