



















































Hansard: February 03, 1967


7 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 3, 1967. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTION RE: CBC TV CREWMEN 

 

MR. M.P. PEDERSON (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to rise on 

a question of privilege, a privilege I believe of the House. I would like to draw the attention of Your Honour 

and this House to the lack of respect that was shown in this chamber yesterday by members of the TV 

camera crews who filmed the opening of this House. I believe the disrespect was shown to His Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor and to Members of this House, and I would request, Mr. Speaker, with your 

concurrence, that an apology be received from the CBC TV crews to the Lieutenant Governor and through 

you, Sir, to this House. I would like also to suggest, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier that in the future that he 

give some consideration to denying the privileges of filming the opening to the CBC, leaving this task to our 

local media choosing them on a rotating basis. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I am a little unsure of my procedure in this regard but I think I am correct in saying that 

when a question of privilege is raised it is for the Speaker to decide whether a bona fide question of privilege 

has occurred, and if that is the case, to entertain a motion that the subject matter thereof be referred to the 

Committee on Privileges and Elections which will report to the House with their recommendations or 

without recommendations, as the case may be, and the House would then deal with the matter. Now if the 

House will excuse me for a moment while I confer with my Clerk and I’ll see if I have this routine 

thoroughly and correctly laid forth   . . Well, I was correct in my description of the procedure on a question 

of privilege. Now it becomes necessary for the Chair to decide whether a question of privilege has been 

raised which would grant that question the right of way over all other business at the present time. While I 

feel that the Member may have a complaint I doubt if this would exactly qualify as a question of privilege. 

However, if the Member has a complaint, I would draw to his attention the fact that he may put it down in a 

motion covering whatever he wishes done about it and it will come up in the normal course of debate in this 

House. Now I hope that satisfies all concerned and is a good enough explanation of the situation as it is. 

 

QUESTION RE: PROTECTION OF RIGHTS 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

8 

Orders of the Day, the Speech from the Throne yesterday made reference to a White Paper with respect to 

protection of rights generally. May we ask the Government when we may expect to have this tabled? 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the White Paper will be tabled in due course. I 

would think about a week from now. 

 

QUESTION RE: SASKATCHEWAN MANPOWER STUDY 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, some publicity has been given to a 

Saskatchewan manpower study which the Government had done for it during the year, I think, taken under 

contract by Hillis and Partners. Could I ask the Premier whether it is the intention of the Government to table 

copies of this for the Members? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — I will look into that matter and give the Hon. Member an answer on Monday. 

 

QUESTIONS RE: AGREEMENTS WITH FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ON TECHNICAL 

TRAINING SCHOOLS 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Government a question: 

whether the Government has entered into any new agreements with the Federal Government with respect to 

technical and vocational education and training, also with respect to apprenticeship training? If agreements 

have been entered into, will copies of each of these agreements be tabled in the Legislative Assembly, or are 

the details of these agreements available to the Members of the Legislature? 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): — I couldn’t say at the present time, but I think probably 

later in the session they might be available. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Is this for both the vocational education and also apprenticeship training? 

 

MR. TRAPP: — Yes. 

 

QUESTION RE: PAYMENT OF CASUAL EMPLOYEES AT THE SASKATCHEWAN 

TRAINING SCHOOL 

 

MR. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw City): — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Public Health 

with respect to the payment of casual employees at the Saskatchewan Training School. I think the Minister is 

aware that these employees are paid normally on or about the 21st of each month at the same time as the 

cheques for overtime are issued. In recent months there has been a substantial delay involved on a number of 

occasions since last July or August, I 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

9 

believe. On two occasions I had the opportunity of ‘phoning the Deputy Minister in this respect . . .  

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! If the Member wishes to ask a question, he can ask a question in the normal way 

on the Order Paper. If he wishes to debate and make a speech thereon he can make it and debate on a motion 

for return in the orderly fashion. I would ask that Members do this or we will develop into a disorderly, 

ragged oral question period for which the standing rules of this House make no provision. 

 

MR. SNYDER: — I agree . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Or I will have to move the adjournment of the House. 

 

QUESTION RE: PENSIONERS IN RECEIPT OF SUPPLEMENTARY INCOME 

 

MR. LLOYD: — May I ask whether or not certain pensioners in receipt of supplementary income would 

receive the full benefit of the $30 a month made available through changes in Federal Government policy? 

May I ask the Minister of Welfare whether the Saskatchewan Government has made arrangements so that 

they will receive the full $30? 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, this will be announced in a very short 

time. There are still two questions under negotiation with Ottawa, the first the method of handling 

retroactive payments, the second the protection of health benefits. As soon as these matters are cleared up the 

policy of the Government will be announced. 

 

QUESTION RE: ARCHITECT FOR REGINA BASE HOSPITAL 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Public Health (Mr. G.B. Grant). In view of the serious shortage of hospital beds 

in Regina area, has the Government engaged an architect to begin work on the plans of the Regina base 

hospital? 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — You had 20 years . . .  

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Sit down, sit down! 

 

QUESTION RE: BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR REGINA BASE HOSPITAL 

 

MRS. M. HUNT (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day could I 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

10 

ask the Minister of Public Health a question? Have the Board of Directors been named for a new base 

hospital and secondly has land been acquired or purchased for such a hospital? 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I think it is quite evident that if the Board had 

been named they would have been announced. There have been indications in the press that we are holding 

discussions with individuals and that is the state at the present time. There is land that has been optioned. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): — 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of seven former 

Members of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution each made to 

his community, his constituency and to this province: 

 

Frederick Bertram Bagshaw, who died on June 21, 1966, was a Member of this Legislature as the 

Representative of Saskatchewan Soldiers in Belgium and France from 1917 to 1921. He was born in 

Southport, Lancashire in 1878, and he came to Canada in 1894. He farmed and engaged in 

businesses in Manitoba before undertaking the study of law, and he was admitted to the Bar in 

Alberta and Saskatchewan in 1912. After overseas service during World War I, he returned to 

practise law in Regina, and was appointed King’s Counsel in 1929. For his services with the 

Wartime Prices and Trade Board during World War II, he was awarded the Order of the British 

Empire. From 1951 to 1958 he was Regina Police Court Magistrate. Mr. Bagshaw was an active 

parishioner of St. Paul’s Pro-Cathedral in Regina, and he participated in the work of a variety of 

community and fraternal organizations such as the Canadian National Institute for the Blind, the 

Royal Canadian Legion, the Royal Society of St. George and the Victorian Order of Nurses. 

 

Malcolm James Dobie, who died on October 27, 1966, was a Member of this Legislature from 1944 

to 1948 as the Representative of Active Service Voters in Canada and Newfoundland. He was born 

in Tyner, North Dakota in 1885, and settled in the Paynton district of Saskatchewan in 1905. While 

serving overseas during World War I he was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal and Military 

Cross. During World War II he was a member of the Veterans’ Guard of Canada. He was a member 

of the Royal Canadian Legion, and served from 1925 to 1930 as Reeve of the Rural Municipality of 

Paynton; 

 

Judge Bamm David Hogarth, who died on November 13, 1966, 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

11 

represented Regina City in this Legislature from 1938 to 1944. He was born in Minnedosa, Manitoba 

in 1887. He came to Regina in 1906 after teaching school in Manitoba, and was admitted to the Bar 

in 1913. In 1935 he was appointed King’s Counsel, and he served as Judge of the District Court from 

1944 until his retirement in 1962. He was a member of the First Presbyterian Church. He was an 

officer of the Regina Bar Association, a member of the Board of Trade and the Canadian Club, and 

in his early years an active sportsman; 

 

Murdoch Alexander MacPherson, who died on June 12, 1966, represented Regina City in this 

Legislature from 1925 to 1934. He was born in Grande Anse, Nova Scotia in 1891. Upon graduation 

from Dalhousie Law School in 1913, he came to Swift Current where he practised law. After 

overseas service with the Canadian Expeditionary Force in World War I, he moved to Regina as 

solicitor for the Soldiers Settlement Board. Mr. MacPherson held two portfolios as a Minister of the 

Crown: he was appointed Attorney-General in 1929, and Provincial Treasurer in 1931. He served as 

chairman of a Royal Commission on Transportation appointed in 1959. He was a Bencher of the 

Saskatchewan Law Society, and in 1961 was awarded the degree of Doctor of Civil Law honoris 

causa at the 50th Convocation of the University of Saskatchewan; 

 

John Henry Sturdy, who died on September 20, 1966, represented Saskatoon City in this 

Legislature from 1944 to 1960. He was born in Goderich, Ontario in 1893, and came to 

Saskatchewan in 1912. After overseas service during World War I he attended the University of 

Saskatchewan and later resumed his career in teaching. He served as Secretary of the Saskatchewan 

Teachers Federation from 1935 to 1940, and during World War II served as Assistant Director of 

Educational Services for the Canadian Forces Overseas. He was Minister of Reconstruction and 

Rehabilitation from 1944 to 1948, Minister of Social Welfare from 1948 to 1956, and Minister 

without Portfolio from 1956 to 1960; 

 

William Sancho Thair, who died on November 28, 1966, represented Lumsden Constituency in this 

Legislature from 1944 to 1956. He was born in Holstein, Ontario in 1885, and came to Saskatchewan 

in 1907. He farmed in the Lumsden district from 1910 to 1956. He was an active member of the 

United Farmers of Canada, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, and the Sherwood Cooperative 

Association, and for 27 years he served as school trustee; 

 

John Andrew Wilson, who died on May 20, 1966, was a Member of this Legislature for Rosetown 

Constituency from 1921 to 1929, and for Elrose Constituency from 1934 to 1938. He was born in 

Hopetown, Ontario in 1881, and moved with his parents to Reston, Manitoba in 1889, where he 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

12 

received his education. Later, he settled at Mondou, Saskatchewan, where he farmed. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in seconding the motion which the 

Premier has just put before us, I add the support of the Members of our group on this side of the Legislature 

to the words of recognition and appreciation for the service of these former MLAs who have passed away 

since our last meeting. The list is rather long this year, Mr. Speaker, seemingly somewhat longer than usual. I 

suppose as the years of history pile up behind Saskatchewan, this is rather an inevitable consequence. A 

number of my fellow colleagues will be expressing some thoughts with regard to some of these MLAs. 

 

I would just like to say something about some of them. Unfortunately, I didn’t know Mr. Wilson, who 

represented the part of the province very close to my constituency. 

 

Judge Hogarth I knew by reputation as a judge and citizen of Regina. 

 

Mr. Bagshaw I did have the opportunity of meeting in a number of different ways. He was intensely 

interested and active with respect to public library development and since I had the opportunity to be 

associated with that work for the Provincial Government, I had the opportunity to make his acquaintance in 

that way. The previous Government also found his services very valuable from time to time with respect to 

labor conciliation. This way we were able to share with the respect which many people in the province had 

of his integrity and his skill and his goodwill. 

 

Mr. MacPherson, the late M.A. MacPherson, is one of course who was known exceeding well, not only in 

this city, but all across the province. He did achieve considerable pre-eminence as a lawyer in the province 

and certainly will be remembered for a long while as one of Saskatchewan’s outstanding lawyers. It’s been 

my privilege to have among several of my older acquaintances a number of men who served under the 

command of M.A. MacPherson overseas. All of them speak with very great affection and respect for his 

leadership and their relationship with him in that capacity. He has served different governments in different 

ways in Saskatchewan. We found his advice extremely useful with respect to transportation problems and 

many representations which have had to be made over the years with regard to these matters. 

 

The remainder of the MLAs it was my privilege to sit with in the Legislature at varying periods of time. Mr. 

Dobie, who represented men in the Armed Forces in the Canadian area - a Newfoundland area as it was at 

that time as well - was here  



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

13 

from 1944 to 1948. He was a quiet and unassuming kind of person who spoke with feeling with respect to 

the constituents whom he was here particularly to represent. 

 

Mr. William Thair, Bill Thair, as he was known to all of us, was of course a member of our group. Few 

people who have known Bill Thair will easily forget that he was a man almost unanimously cheerful, always 

with something kind, something not only kind but sincere and frequently refreshing to say. He was a 

valuable counsellor in our group. As the record which the Premier has read would indicate he was associated 

with many farm groups for a long time in the Province of Saskatchewan. We will join very sincerely in the 

expression of regrets about Mr. Thair’s passing. He had of course been ill for some time. 

 

Like many others in the House, I knew best of all Mr. Jack Sturdy, who was a member of the Cabinet for a 

number of years. I suppose I knew Jack Sturdy longer than I have known anybody in the House at the present 

moment. I pay my respects to him, not only as an associate in the Legislature, in the Cabinet, but as a very 

dear friend over a considerable period of years. Jack Sturdy can first of all be identified with three groups of 

people in the province. One of those, teachers. Reference has been made to his association there as Secretary 

of the Saskatchewan Teachers Federation. He was one of the prime movers in bringing together various 

teachers organizations into one organization in the province in the early 1930's. He worked extremely hard 

on behalf of teachers and on behalf of education during a very trying period for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. He was associated too with returned men. Few people had reserved a larger place in their 

heart for the returned man than did Jack Sturdy. He had some opportunity to direct his attention specifically 

to their problems when he was overseas during the Second World War as an educational officer and when he 

returned to a Cabinet post which had to do with the problems of the returned men here. The third group with 

whom we shall identify the late Jack Sturdy, obviously our senior citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

All of us I am sure are proud of the Senior Citizens’ Homes which have been built around the province with 

the participation of the Federal Government, Provincial Government, municipal government, charitable 

organizations and other groups. Under Jack Sturdy’s initiative this particular plan began in the province. I 

say we associate him with those three groups of people in particular - teachers, returned men and senior 

citizens. 

 

We associate him also with two locations in the province, locations about which he never tired of talking 

with very considerable eloquence. One was Qu’Appelle Valley and in particular Fort Qu’Appelle where he 

taught for a number of years. The other was the city of Saskatoon. Those who have heard him will not soon 

forget his description of the beauties and the virtues of that near northern city of Saskatchewan. We associate 

him maybe in particular with one day, as March 17 was the day on which Jack Sturdy grew to the height of 

his eloquence. He and the Member from Cannington (Mr. McCarthy) used to vie in producing insults to all 

the population who are not Irish on that  



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

14 

particular occasion. These were rather interesting if light moments in the Legislature. He was a man of great 

heart. He was a man of great courage. His loss is a very real one for ourselves and the family. Mr. Speaker, 

we join with the sentiments which the Premier has presented to us in his motion earlier about all of these 

former MLAs. 

 

MR. M.P. PEDERSON (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself and those people I 

represent in this House with the words of the Premier in moving his motion and the thoughts expressed by 

the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) in commenting about the various Members who have passed away 

in the past year. Unlike many Members in this House, I wasn’t privileged to know many of these people. But 

I feel that the contribution that they have made to our province regardless of the particular path they chose to 

make that contribution in is one that should be recognized by all citizens of the province, and as a citizen I 

hasten to do that in this manner. 

 

Naturally, I would like to say something of my very dear personal friend, Mr. M.A. MacPherson, whose 

friendship with myself, and acquaintanceship with myself go back to my boyhood. I have always marvelled 

at the scope of the activities of this man in his lifetime, the tremendous influence that he wielded from a 

position that might be considered in some areas of not too great power, and yet the influence, that will affect 

not only the lives of people who have lived here, and who now live here, but most certainly a good deal of 

our nation for a long time to come. 

 

Some mention was made of his tremendous war record, it is also noteworthy to point out that he was one of 

the original founders of the Great War Veterans’ Association, which was the forerunner as we all know, of 

the Royal Canadian Legion. His contribution to veterans when he came back as legal counsel for the Soldier 

Settlement Board, helping young fellows returning to settlement plans, was also outstanding. 

 

In the field of politics he made a tremendous contribution, sitting in this Legislature as a Member for ten 

years and holding two Cabinet posts through five very difficult years during that time. He was considered of 

sufficient stature in our nation to seek the leadership of the Conservative party on two occasions and time 

and circumstance perhaps will be recorded as the reason why he didn’t succeed on those occasions. He most 

certainly had the ability. I think all people in this province and certainly in this area of the province are 

familiar with his very extensive legal practice and his eminence in that field. 

 

What has struck me over the years is that in spite of the fact that he had devoted his life to law, time and 

again he appeared as the defender of the farmer. It was he who accompanied the Prime Minister of the day in 

1933 to London, England, to the famous conference, famous as far as western farmers are concerned, 

because out of that conference the new International Wheat 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

15 

Agreement was eventually drawn and the ground work laid; and Mr. MacPherson had a very leading role to 

play at that time. He was called upon after he left this House to set up and administer the Farmers’ Creditors 

Arrangement Act which was of tremendous value in the 1930's to those who were suffering from the 

depression. He was also a tremendous advocate and defender of the western wheat pools. In fact he appeared 

and argued their case before the Turgeon Commission back in 1936 with some considerable success. And he 

was always a strong advocate on the side of the farmers against the railroads, particularly when there was any 

threat of increasing freight rates. I believe that his history as defender of little people, as defender of the 

farming community that he adopted when he came to western Canada was the main reason why he had such 

tremendous success in heading up the Royal Commission which bears his name and which will go down in 

history books as one of the most important Commissions of this half century. I believe that when the various 

measures that he placed before the Government are implemented that we will see the mark of Mr. M.A. 

MacPherson for a long time to come. 

 

But what the record doesn’t show is that above all else he was a kind and considerate man. I always recall 

the time that he would take out of a busy schedule to sit and chat with young people who were trying to get 

ahead and who had a goal in life that he felt would make a contribution to the welfare of the province. 

Besides that he was a good and kind father and a husband. I would like to express to his family my personal 

regrets as well as the regrets of those that I represent at his passing. 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Public Health): — I would like to join with those who have expressed 

their sympathies today particularly with regards to three of these gentlemen. First, the late Mr. Bagshaw I 

knew primarily as a neighbor and a gardener who demonstrated a keen interest in his fellow man. While I did 

not agree with his horticultural program particularly I claim I always had a better lawn than he did although 

he certainly outdid me in the floral department. 

 

I remember Mr. Bagshaw particularly for two events. While I was mayor of Regina, Mr. Bagshaw assumed 

the post of magistrate for the city police department. Recognizing that the mayor was the chief magistrate he 

asked me to join him on the bench and while I didn’t dispense any sentences I did appreciate the honour he 

bestowed on me in the recognition of the office. The other event was his interest in the preservation of 

historical items. Due to the perseverance of Mr. Bagshaw we now have displayed at the Plains Historical 

Museum - many of you will not recognize that name but it is a museum maintained at the Regina Exhibition 

Grounds - the goat that was the mascot of the Fifth Battalion in the First Great War. If it hadn’t been for Mr. 

Bagshaw’s efforts I’m afraid this very historical animal would have been lost to posterity. I recognize his 

contribution in various public circles and join with others in paying homage to him today. 

 

My acquaintance with the late Mr. MacPherson extended over 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

16 

40 years during which period I became a great admirer of him and of the things he stood for. Not only was 

Mr. MacPherson an eminent legal person but, as the Hon. Member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) 

mentioned, he was a great humanitarian and a sincere person as far as his fellow man was concerned. It was 

through his interest in civic affairs that I was approached one day as a relatively young man and convinced 

that I should become interested in civic office. Due to his urgings I stood as a candidate for the local school 

board. Fortunately or unfortunately he wasn’t able to convert me to his political views, but this did not seem 

to interfere with our close friendship. He’ll be long remembered for his many contributions to this 

community, the province and our country and I join with other Members in recognizing his contributions to 

these areas. 

 

In the passing of the late Judge B.D. Hogarth last November I feel we’ve lost one of our rugged pioneers. He 

came to this western country many, many years ago and like so many others after a stint as a teacher he 

ultimately entered the legal business and served his profession so ably for some 42 years. For 18 years as a 

District Court Judge he demonstrated himself to be a fair and reasonable dispenser of law and penalties. 

Somewhat like Mr. Bagshaw, Mr. Hogarth not only made a valuable contribution to the life of this province 

and to its legal history but proved to be a very human individual who enjoyed living and in his later years 

certainly enjoyed sharing his life with others. It is an honor to share in the sentiments being expressed in this 

House today concerning the late Judge B.D. Hogarth. 

 

MRS. M.A. HUNT (Regina West): — I would like to say a word of tribute regarding the late F.B. 

Bagshaw. I had the opportunity and the pleasure of knowing him and working with him on very many 

occasions in community work and in community organizations. He was a man who took his civic 

responsibilities very seriously indeed and was very helpful in so many areas and in so many organizations 

over many years in the city of Regina. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) mentioned his interest 

in libraries; he served very capably on the Regina Library for many years. He was very helpful and very 

active when the Victorian Order of Nurses was formed here in Regina. He never lost interest in the Victorian 

Order which could always call on him for help. My closest association with Mr. Bagshaw was during the 

period when I was President of the Board of Directors of the YWCA and Mr. Bagshaw was on the Men’s 

Advisory Committee. He certainly was most helpful on so many occasions, whether it had to do with 

building fund problems or with finance or with presenting a brief to what was then the Community Chest. 

Anytime I asked Mr. Bagshaw for help he was always available. In fact, the first contact I ever had with a 

government committee was during that period of time when the YWCA needed a private member’s bill to do 

with a trust fund, a building trust fund. Mr. Bagshaw appeared with me on that occasion. He presented our 

case very capably. We got our bill passed and he never charged a cent for his professional services and that 

meant a great deal at this particular time to the YWCA. Nothing was too much trouble for him in spite of the 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

17 

fact that he was a busy man. He was very highly respected in his own profession. He was very highly 

respected throughout the whole community and if we had more people like Mr. Bagshaw with such a sense 

of responsibility and with such a willingness to help wherever he could, our country would be a better place 

to live in. I’m glad to be able to associate myself with this tribute and offer condolences to his wife. 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to support the remarks that have been made 

with regard to three of Regina’s outstanding citizens who have passed away in the past year, namely Messrs. 

Hogarth, MacPherson and Bagshaw. 

 

Over the past few years I became quite a good friend of Judge Hogarth. I think the record shows that he was 

a pioneer, a legislator, an outstanding lawyer, a school teacher and a judge. I always found Mr. Hogarth to be 

a very friendly man and a judge who weighed every case with the utmost care when meting out justice. He 

was a kindly man and loved to mingle with people. He was a good church member and a member of many 

fraternal and community organizations, an active and keen sportsman and a man who loved nature. 

 

Mr. MacPherson who passed away June 12, 1966 was also a legislator, a veteran, an outstanding lawyer who 

for his record and for his great accomplishments was given an honorary degree of Doctor of Civil Law. He 

certainly has left his mark on the nation by his transportation studies and the impact of its recommendations. 

He was certainly a dedicated Canadian. 

 

Turning to Mr. Bagshaw, a person whom I got to know best of all, was also a legislator, a soldier, a farmer, a 

lawyer, a civil servant, a police magistrate, and a distinguished veteran of good report. He was one of the 

stalwart members on our local Public Library with whom I had the privilege of serving for the past eight 

years. He was one of our strong members on the building committee when we built our new Public Library 

in the city of Regina. I am sure he would have been most pleased had he heard the remarks of the Speech 

from the Throne with regard to government assistance for public libraries in the future. This was something 

that he and I had pressed for, for several years. And so these men will be a tremendous loss to our 

community. They were dedicated people and to each member of their respective families I offer sincere 

sympathies on behalf of the Regina people. 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself with all of the 

fine tributes that have been paid this afternoon by all of the speakers who have preceded me to the former 

members who have left us in the past 12 months. Specifically, I would like to refer to four of the Members 

who have passed away. First of all, I would like to refer to Mr. W.S. (Bill Thair), who for 12 years 

represented the constituency of Lumsden in this Legislature. It was not my privilege to know Mr. Thair well, 

but I 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

18 

did make his acquaintance a number of years ago and I do know many members of his family who still reside 

in the constituency of Lumsden. And since I have been more closely associated with the people of the 

Lumsden constituency I have come to be very much aware of the very great affection that all of the people in 

the constituency of Lumsden held for Bill Thair. As the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) pointed out, 

Mr. Thair was very active in his community life. He served on the school board for many many years. He 

served on church boards for many years and he was very active in all farm organizations: the United Farmers 

of Canada, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Sherwood Cooperative and so on. This man served the people 

of the constituency of Lumsden with a dedication that is a great example for those of us who are privileged 

to follow in his footsteps in representing that constituency in this Legislature. So, Mr. Speaker, I join with all 

of those who have paid tribute to Mr. Thair and extend condolences to the members of the family. 

 

The second Member that I would like to refer to specifically is Murdoch Alexander MacPherson who was 

the sixth Attorney General of Saskatchewan. I do not want to be repetitious in repeating and citing and 

reciting the many achievements that Murdoch MacPherson had to his credit during his life-time, but I think 

mostly of Murdoch MacPherson when I first came to the city of Regina as a law student fresh out of law 

school. When I was articling in 1940 one of the first lawyers that I met in the city of Regina was M.A. 

MacPherson. Along with many of my fellow law students and young lawyers in the city of Regina we came 

to be acutely aware of the fact that Murdoch MacPherson had one characteristic that set him apart perhaps 

from other lawyers, other busy lawyers who had made their mark in the legal profession. Murdoch 

MacPherson took a very great personal interest in all young law students and sort of acted as a father or as a 

tutor to them. And when you became an adversary of his in court he of course fought the good fight and 

always had the interest of his client paramount; but if there were things that you should know about the 

practice of law, things that you should be doing that perhaps you weren’t doing, there was always the 

friendly word of advice from one of the leaders of the profession. This is the way that I will remember 

Murdoch MacPherson more than any other way, as being a friend. The Member for Arm River (Mr. 

Pederson) said he was a friend of the little man. This is true. He defended many people, many many 

hundreds of people not for the retainer or the fee that he hoped to obtain for his service, because this was 

always a secondary consideration with Mr. MacPherson, but he was a great defender of causes, he was a very 

compassionate man and so I pay him tribute here publicly this afternoon. 

 

So far as Mr. F.B. (Barry) Bagshaw is concerned I knew him very well. Many of the Members who have 

spoken before have referred to his various activities in public life, libraries and so on. I knew him best when 

he was a Judge of the Magistrates Court in the Regina City Police Court. I came to have for Mr. Bagshaw a 

very great respect because of the way in which he conducted his courts at all times. He was always just but 

he 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

19 

tempered justice with mercy when the circumstances of the case called for it. As the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) pointed out he was also very active latterly as chairman of many arbitration boards 

and it was a tribute to Mr. Bagshaw that people in adversary positions, such as representatives of 

management and of labor, on countless occasions agreed on Mr. Bagshaw as a chairman for their arbitration 

boards because they had complete confidence in his fairness, his impartiality and his objectivity. 

 

I also remember very well from close personal association His Honour Judge Bamm D. Hogarth. I remember 

him as a young lawyer also appearing in his court. One of the things that I remember most about Judge 

Hogarth is the fact that he had a particular hypothesis about the behavior of lawyers in courts and he had a 

very firm belief that the best way for an inexperienced lawyer to become experienced was in the school of 

hard knocks. Judge Hogarth never excused you for making errors if you should have known better and he 

made a lot of lawyers better lawyers because they always received justice in his court. But they weren’t 

pampered and they weren’t babied and they were made to understand that when they took a case into court 

they had a responsibility to their client to present the case in a proper manner in accordance with proper legal 

principles. Judge Hogarth was one of the great legal scholars that were on our bench for many years and he 

will be remembered by the legal profession and I am sure by all of the people of Saskatchewan as one who 

by his presence did adorn the bench of Saskatchewan and he was an outstanding jurist. Mr. Speaker, with 

those comments, as I said at the outset, I join with all of the tributes to all of the deceased Members, but I did 

want to say these few words about those whom I knew the best. 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to express the feelings of the Members of 

this Legislature for the seven who passed away in the past year. I do observe that all of these seven people 

lived to a good age. They were indeed all pioneers; three of whom were of the legal profession and perhaps 

the best tribute I can pay to them is to say they don’t make lawyers like that nowadays, Mr. Speaker. When I 

say this I have in mind particularly Messrs. Bagshaw, M.A. MacPherson and Hogarth. They were of the old 

school, all of these were pioneers. The only one that I didn’t know personally was Mr. Wilson. All the rest I 

knew very well and admired greatly and it’s indeed a real privilege for every Member of this Legislature to 

pay tribute to these gallant pioneer gentlemen. 

 

I knew Cal Dobie very well personally and his record as a pioneer has been outstanding. He first settled in 

the Paynton District in 1905, and went through all of the rigors of pioneer life. He served overseas with great 

distinction in World War I. At the time he was wounded he had the privilege of being a commissioned 

lieutenant. He served later on in World War II as has already been mentioned in the Veterans’ Guard of 

Canada with the rank of Major. Above all else perhaps the greatest mark of 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

20 

a man is the esteem in which he is held in his local community. Cal Dobie was highly esteemed. He was of a 

kind and lovable disposition as well as a man of great honesty and integrity. He was always prepared to help 

a neighbor, a man of very even disposition and a man who used good judgment. He served his country well, 

he served his community well, and it is a privilege for me to join with others in extending our deepest 

sympathy to those who mourn him. 

 

The other Member who passed away, whom I knew very well, was William Thair. His record of 

performance has already been very well stated in the records of this House and by the Premier and the 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald). I can only corroborate that my impressions are the same. Bill Thair was one 

of the finest gentlemen that I have ever met. He was a wonderful community worker and a true Christian and 

a man who took a great interest in advancing every cause for the good of his fellow men. It has already been 

recorded that he was very active in the Farm Movement, in the original United Farmers of Canada, 

Saskatchewan section, he was a director for that organization for District 6, a very enthusiastic supporter of 

the Wheat Pool and the Cooperative Movement and also very active not only in the field of education but in 

the church activities of the religion of his choice, the United Church. Above all else I will remember him I 

think, as we all will, for his kindly disposition and his deep human motivations. 

 

I can’t let this opportunity pass without saying something about Mr. Sturdy as well. Mr. Sturdy will be 

remembered by myself and I am sure many others who knew him as a real determined Irish humanitarian. 

The one great achievement of Jack Sturdy in my mind is his contribution for the well-being and security of 

the aged people of our province. I can recall vividly his many journeys to Ottawa when he was negotiating 

for the program of developing senior citizen homes and on other matters, when he came back saying, "Well, 

I was rebuffed but I shall return to the fight". This is typically a true Irish virtue, and he did persist. And so 

we have these homes for our senior citizens and every time I pass one I think of Jack Sturdy. He was the man 

who carried this through to a successful conclusion. I think this alone ought to provide some kind of entry 

for Jack, wherever people go when they leave this earth. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, again my tribute to these seven pioneers and our expression of sympathy to their 

widows, where widows were left behind, to their immediate relatives and to all who knew them. 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with those who have 

expressed their sympathy regarding the seven former Members of this House. I knew Mr. Jack Sturdy as a 

teacher and as a principal at Fort Qu’Appelle in the late twenties and early thirties. First when I got to know 

Mr. Sturdy I was a boy at high school and we used to compete against his high school. Later I became 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

21 

a young teacher and he was giving the teaching organization leadership at that time in our area. I want to say 

only this in addition to what has been said. He made a very fine contribution in the classroom and on the 

playing field. I have never known a keener competitor but always a good sport. I knew him in the days 

chiefly as one who was active in sports and in athletics. Mr. Sturdy made an outstanding contribution to the 

youth of his community. I must also agree with the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). He dearly loved 

the Qu’Appelle Valley. It is with deep sympathy that we have learned of the passing of Mr. Sturdy. 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to the tributes 

which have already been given with respect to the Members who have passed away during the year. It was 

my honor to know five of those who have passed away. References have already been made to Mr. Bill 

Thair, the Member for Lumsden. I think I need only say that I too found him to be a cheerful, sincere and 

able MLA. He had an encyclopedic knowledge of his constituency, and his constituents generally had a high 

regard and deep affection for him. He served them well. 

 

Judge Hogarth was the Member for Regina as has already been stated. He was widely respected among his 

fellow lawyers. He had sometimes a rough exterior which appeared fairly formidable to younger lawyers, as 

the Attorney General has already mentioned, and as I have also observed; but withal he bore the general and 

well-deserved reputation for being a fair man and having a full appreciation of the rights of the underdog. If 

there was a small claimant against an insurance company he understood the nature of the small claimant’s 

position. If there was a tenant with a dispute with a landlord, he appeared to understand the nature of the 

tenant’s problem. In these regard I believe he served the administration of justice in this province well. 

 

Barry Bagshaw was, as already observed, an ornament to the legal profession and to the public life, widely 

defined, of the city of Regina. He bore a high reputation among his fellow lawyers for probity, fairness and 

erudition. He was a man who was well read and when you met him at a reception it was always a pleasure 

because he always had something useful and interesting to say. Reference has already been made to his very 

outstanding work in the field of labor relations. I simply want to add that he served with distinction on the 

Bench of the Magistrate’s Court in Regina. Here he appeared to have a soft spot for veterans who had fought 

to uphold our laws and now had fallen afoul of them. His was a long and distinguished career. 

 

With respect to Jack Sturdy, I really have little to add except my own personal association with him. When I 

first came to Saskatchewan I served as Secretary of the Saskatchewan Reconstruction Corporation when Mr. 

Jack Sturdy was chairman. This was a particularly imaginative idea which he brought to fruition. Members 

will recall that airport buildings and other war assets were distributed around the province. I think largely 

because 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

22 

of Mr. Sturdy’s drive, and the tenacity with which he pursued the Federal Government with respect to these 

assets, some 250 housing units were distributed throughout the province; some 175 buildings were 

distributed for churches, rinks, community halls. Members will know where they are. There’s a rink at 

Herbert for example, I could go and name many of them. One of his monuments will certainly be the 

buildings and more particularly the hundreds and perhaps thousands of people who have lived a fuller life 

because of this particular imaginative idea of his. 

 

M.A. MacPherson was a friend of every younger lawyer who is in this city. I believe he was a particular 

friend of mine and I think every young lawyer has the same sensation. I attributed it to the fact that I, like 

him, had been a young lawyer from Eastern Canada, from Dalhousie, who had come out here to make a life 

in the legal world. But even at that time in 1950 when he had a busy legal practice, he always had time for a 

kind word and a word of counsel for a young practitioner who was just testing his wings. Reference has 

already been made to the fact that he was widely known in Western Saskatchewan. Members will also know 

that there are numberless stories of him spending some hours with an old lady with a problem and then 

charging her a nominal fee, a fee which was just sufficient to preserve her self-respect. These stories are 

legion, and I think they are legion because they were well-founded in fact. My own association with him has 

largely been in later years in attending Board of Transport hearings. In this regard a reference has already 

been made to the fact that few if any Canadians had a better grasp of the intricacies of our freight rate 

structure. I knew him as a man who gave counsel and advice when the steel mill was established and he 

served as the first chairman of the Board of that venture. This list of the community services rendered by Mr. 

MacPherson would be too long and too well known to repeat here. I think it is sufficient to say that his career 

as a legislator, as a lawyer, and as a community leader was an illustrious one. He is widely mourned and will 

be long remembered in Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to join with previous tributes and to extend my sympathy to the members of the bereaved 

families. 

 

MR. A.M. NICHOLSON (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, it was my privilege to have known three of 

the former members: M.A. MacPherson, Mr. Thair, and Jack Sturdy. I shall ever be grateful to Mr. 

MacPherson for his assistance to Saskatchewan members of the Federal Parliament during the many years 

when he was so active in dealing with freight rate problems. Members of all political parties in Western 

Canada found him a most courteous, most helpful person. Mr. Thair spent his last days in Saskatoon. I am 

sure the sympathy of everyone in the House and in the province who have known of his outstanding work is 

extended to the family. 

 

I would like to say a few more words about Jack Sturdy who preceded me in the Cabinet from the city of 

Saskatoon. I was one of four of his Saskatoon friends to be a pall bearer. I am 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

23 

referring to Mr. P.G. Makaroff, Q.C., who with Mrs. Makaroff made a special trip from Saskatoon to 

Victoria on hearing of the death of such a good friend. Roy Knight, former MP from Saskatoon and Mrs. 

Knight were in Vancouver and went over for the funeral. Mr. G.D. Eamer succeeded Mr. Sturdy as Secretary 

of the Saskatchewan Teachers Federation. He was also in Victoria and later wrote the following which 

appeared in the October bulletin of the STF: "A tribute to Jack Sturdy" 

 

Jack Sturdy is dead. It doesn’t seem possible that such a vibrant personality should cease to be. This 

was the man whose vision of teaching and persuasive ability did much to create the Saskatchewan 

Teachers Federation. 

 

It was my privilege and good fortune to have worked with Jack during the formative years of the 

STF. What a doughty fighter he was. 

 

He worked for recognition of teachers and their freedom from want and fear. 

 

There are many fitting touches at his funeral. So many of his former colleagues were there. Friends 

from his teaching days at Fort Qu’Appelle, teachers from many parts of the province, political 

associates from his later years; all were there to pay their final tribute to a man, who during his life 

had fought the good fight. 

 

It seemed fitting that a former Saskatoon Rector, Canon Sampson should give the eulogy. Canon 

Sampson said it wasn’t a eulogy, but the quiet, sincere voice of the Canon was indeed touching. 

 

A bugler sounded the Last Post as a tribute from Jack Sturdy’s comrades of two world wars. 

 

As the service ended, the choir and congregation joined in the recessional, the lovely Nunc Dimittis. 

As they sang ‘Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, in my heart I said ‘Ave atque vale’. 

 

Yes, I hailed a great leader and a good friend, and I bade goodbye only to the man. The spirit that 

was Jack Sturdy, the contribution that he made to the lives of his pupils, his colleagues in the 

Federation, and the people of Saskatchewan by his great public service - these will live on. 

 

After coming back to Saskatchewan and recalling the address of Canon Sampson, I wrote and wondered if he 

would be good enough to give me a copy of his remarks. He replied he hadn’t kept a copy but he had said 

something like the following: 

 

‘I have fought the good fight’, ‘I have finished the course’, ‘I have kept the faith’ from Second 

Timothy 4-7. Jack Sturdy will be remembered as a fighter, an adventurer 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

24 

who unselfishly gave up his time and talents and energy in pioneering many projects to a successful 

conclusion, particularly in the realms of education and welfare. His ceaseless fighting on behalf of 

the interests so dear to him revealed something of a consuming fire that spurred his efforts in the face 

of many difficulties. He, truly like the great St. Paul, kept the faith in God, in his fellow men, and 

what he must have felt was God’s purpose for his life. Words used in connection with Sir 

Christopher Wren apply equally to the one who many of us like to think of as a personal friend. 

There is no need to erect an imposing structure to remind us of the contribution made by Jack Sturdy. 

‘Just look about you.’ There must be many, especially in the Province of Saskatchewan, who can 

truly thank God for the life and contribution made by the one we are remembering in this particular 

manner this afternoon. Truly, his deeds live after him. 

 

Other Hon. Members have referred to Jack’s outstanding contribution in the field of housing for elderly 

citizens. He was chiefly responsible for the Federal Government making funds available for the hostel type 

of accommodation which unfortunately, is still confined chiefly to Saskatchewan for this important sector of 

elderly people in Canada. In places like Saskatoon, Swift Current, Assiniboia, North Battleford, and many 

other places, the hostel as a part of our Senior Citizen Program is a tribute to the vision of Jack Sturdy. 

 

I am sure all of the Members will wish to join in extending our sympathy to Mrs. Sturdy, to Dorothy (Mrs. 

Tom Hill) and to Ferris, and the grandchildren on the passing of such an outstanding citizen of this province. 

 

MR. J.E. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon City): — I would like to say a few words about J.H. Sturdy. He 

was leaving the political stage in Saskatchewan when I was still in the wings. However, I had the opportunity 

to assist in his last successful political campaign. Had my father not been in Ottawa today, I know that he 

would have had a few words to say about Jack Sturdy as well. I know that in the matter of Senior Citizens 

Homes - Jack Sturdy was a Saskatchewan pioneer in this area. And as a pioneer, he ploughed the first long, 

deep furrow in the Senior citizens Program. Many senior citizens will have a warm feeling of appreciation, 

as we do, knowing that Jack Sturdy passed by here. 

 

MR. G.F. LOKEN (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to what the Hon. Premier 

has already said in respect to John Andrew Wilson, who represented the Rosetown constituency in the 

Legislature from 1921 to 1929. I had the honor of knowing Mr. Wilson and knew him to be very sincere and 

conscientious, and a hard-working Member. Mr. Wilson homestead in the Harris district in 1904 and farmed 

in this area from 1905 to 1932. He then moved to the Mondou district where he continued farming until 

1940, when he retired and moved to the West Coast. He passed away on May 20, 1966. On behalf of the 

constituents we wish to extend our sincere sympathies to the bereaved family and the host of friends he left 

behind. 

 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

25 

MR. E.I. WOOD (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to add a few words of tribute to the 

former Members of the Legislature who have passed away. I don’t wish to be unduly repetitious, but I would 

like to say a few things concerning Mr. M.A. MacPherson. It has already been pointed out, the great 

contribution that this man made to the people of this province and to the people of Canada, such as helping 

to lay the ground work for the International Wheat Agreement and protecting the rights of farmers of 

Saskatchewan in regard to railway rates and being Chairman of the MacPherson Commission which drew up 

a monumental work in regard to the railways which will remain as a real reference for these matters for many 

years to come. But I would especially like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that when Mr. 

MacPherson, as a young man graduating from law school came west, the place that he chose to set up a 

practice was in the town of Swift Current. He came there in 1913. In 1915 he married a local girl, Miss Iowa 

Briggs, who was the daughter of a well-known local business man and merchant. He joined up in the 209th 

battalion which was raised in southwestern Saskatchewan and served in it as a Major with distinction and 

has had many complimentary things said about the services he rendered. He was wounded overseas. When 

he returned, he returned to Swift Current and practised law there until the fall of 1919, when he then moved 

to Regina to take a position with Veterans Affairs. 

 

I cannot say that I was personally acquainted with Mr. MacPherson. His term of taking part in public affairs 

in Swift Current was a good long while before it was my duty to do so. But I can remember one very small 

incident. As a high school boy, I was attending school in Swift Current. There was some sort of function and 

while my memory of it is quite vague I know there was a huge bonfire in connection with it. At this bonfire, 

Mr. M.A. MacPherson was one of the speakers who were asked to say a few words and I can recollect the 

huge cheer that rose from the people there when it came to Mr. MacPherson’s time to speak. I can’t 

remember the words that he said but the impression has been left with me through the years that Mr. 

MacPherson was tremendously popular with the people of Swift Current. I am sure that the people whom I 

represented would wish me to express their respect for Mr. M.A. MacPherson and express condolences to 

the family at this time. 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — I, too, would like to associate myself with the 

remarks of the other Members of the House in expressing sympathy to the families of former Members of 

this House who have passed away during the past year. I would like specifically to say a few words about 

Mr. John Sturdy, a man who was a predecessor in the Department of Welfare. I did not have the honor of 

knowing John Sturdy personally but each day I come in contact with areas of public service that he initiated. 

He was regarded with a great deal of respect and affection by all of the older members of the Department 

who still remain. I think, too, that Mr. Sturdy made several significant contributions to this province 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

26 

in his capacity as Minister of that Department. These deserve special mention on an occasion such as this. 

 

Without being repetitious, I would like to point out three of them. The first was Emergency Housing for 

returning servicemen. In the days when housing materials were in very short supply, he evolved the idea of 

arranging to purchase air force and other buildings and convert them into housing. Projects were set up in 

some sixteen centres in the province. From what I understand, the last one was finally closed when the 

buildings were torn down to make way for the new Technical Institute in Saskatoon. I also understand that it 

was Mr. Sturdy who evolved the idea that eventually became the Valley Centre for Fort Qu’Appelle. What 

this has meant to the cultural development of the province is in itself quite monumental. He was also 

instrumental in setting up the Housing and Home program for senior citizens. I would like to say that many 

of the old timers around the Department will remember him saying, "We need a more dignified name for old 

people; let’s call them senior citizens". Mr. Speaker, I join with other Members in expressing our deepest 

sympathy to Mr. Sturdy’s family. 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — I would like to join all the other Members in paying tribute to the 

Members who have passed away. Mr. F.B. Bagshaw and M.A. MacPherson were distinguished Regina 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Thair’s home is in my riding. His contribution to the farm people of the Regina plains will never be 

forgotten. He was liked and respected as a neighbor and as an MLA. 

 

In my capacity as a member of the Provincial Mediation Board, I got to know Judge Bamm David Hogarth 

as a lawyer and a judge. In my estimation, he was a very able lawyer and a very conscientious judge. I also 

admired him as many of you have, for his ability as an after-dinner speaker. His speeches were colourful, 

witty and effective. When he spoke to an audience, they remembered his remarks and enjoyed his 

presentation. As a District Court Judge he made decisions without fear. He called them as he saw them. In 

his court, as many people will testify, there was not one law for the rich and another one for the poor. With 

him there was only one law, and a defendant’s station in life did not influence him. 

 

A Legislative Committee of the Legislature sought his guidance after his retirement. I recall the advice he 

gave was clear cut and very helpful. I am pleased to join other Members in expressing sympathy to the 

bereaved family. 

 

MR. G.G. LEITH (Elrose): — I would like to join other Members of the Legislature who have paid tribute 

to the seven Members who have passed on and who were once servants of the people of Saskatchewan. I 

must say that I knew none of them; I had not even met Mr. Wilson, who represented the Elrose constituency 

from 1934 to 1938. But I do want to say a word to the Assembly about him and about his 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

27 

relations with people whom he represented. I tried to find out something about Mr. Wilson; I have known 

Mr. Wilson by reputation for many years and when I spoke to the Hon. William Patterson, who was formerly 

Premier of the province, he said that Mr. Wilson was a very quiet speaker; and that he served his 

constituency well, honestly, sincerely, with sympathy and understanding. In the records of that era, I find that 

he served on four committees from 1934 to 1938, on Agriculture, Private Bills, Privileges and Elections and 

a committee on Railways, Telegraphs and Telephones. I am sure that Mr. Wilson, sitting in the difficult 

period of time that he did, served his constituency well and worked for the people of Saskatchewan. I wish to 

express the sense of loss that the people of my constituency feel on his passing. 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, it has been my privilege to have sat in this Legislature 

with three of the seven names which are before us here today. I did not know Mr. Wilson or Mr. Bagshaw 

personally, but I had met Mr. Hogarth and Mr. MacPherson. I had had considerable contact with Mr. 

MacPherson when he was working on the Legislative Committees with us during the time I have sat in the 

Legislature. Mr. Sturdy, as has been mentioned, was well known and I had a lot of contact with him working 

on behalf of senior citizens of this province in helping to establish the Senior Citizens Homes and the other 

work which has been done by that Department. Mr. Thair was one I knew quite well. I sat in this Legislature 

with him during the term of his office here with the exception of the first year he was here; and Mr. Thair 

was always energetic, very kind man to work with. We sat as Government backbenchers, and on many 

occasions in those years it wasn’t possible for some of us from out of the city to bring our car to the city, but 

Mr. Thair was always available if you wished to go any place, to give you a ride in his car or of an evening 

when the House adjourned at night, he would always see that if necessary we had transportation downtown. 

He was a man you could always depend on being around to attend to his work on committees or to take any 

other duty which was assigned to him by the House. I am sure that Mr. Thair was a good husband, a kind 

father, and above all, he was a great community supporter and participant. He helped to promote all 

community activities which he felt were in the interest of his community. He not only was a strong believer 

in Christianity but he believed in putting Christianity into practice. And I wish too, along with others, to 

extend my sympathies to the families of the bereaved ones here today. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — It is moved by the Hon. Premier, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of seven former 

Members of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution each made to 

his community, his constituency and to this province. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 



 

February 3, 1967 

 

 

28 

MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, if I may move again, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:56 o’clock p.m. 


