



















































Hansard: February 15, 1967


382 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

10th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 15, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. B.D. GALLAGHER (Yorkton): — I would like to introduce to the House a group of students in the 

Speaker‟s gallery. They are a group of grade eight students from St. Mary‟s and St. Alfonsus School in 

Yorkton. They are accompanied by their teachers, Sister Beatrice and Sister Ambrose and their bus driver, 

Mr. Armstrong. I‟m sure that all Members want to welcome this group of students to our Legislature this 

afternoon. I do hope that the Member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) will exercise restraining in the remarks that 

he is going to make later on this afternoon. I am sure that he wouldn‟t want to leave any bad impression with 

our students of our legislators and particularly so, Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that one of the students is 

my own son. I am sure all Members will want to join with me in welcoming this group of students and 

wishing them a most enjoyable afternoon. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker through you, sir, and on behalf of all Members I would 

like to welcome to the Legislature this afternoon 20 grade eight students from McNab School in northwest 

Regina. These bright young people are in the east gallery and they are with their principal, G.B. Kirby and 

their driver, Mr. Jones. All Members join me, I‟m sure, in expressing the wish that their stay with us on this 

afternoon will be pleasant and educational. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.D. LINK (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery we have with us today a very fine 

group of students from Brunskill School in Saskatoon, and I‟m sure all Members in the House will join with 

me in extending to them a very warm welcome and we hope that they will find the proceedings this 

afternoon very educational and very informative. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. SALLY MERCHANT (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker I think along with the group from 

Brunskill School there is a group from Brevoort Park School in the city of Saskatoon and I would like to add 

my welcome to the other Member‟s 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

383 

 from Saskatoon, but also to welcome Brevoort Park School to the Legislature through you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like the House to welcome a fine group of students 

from Birch Hills — the grade twelve students and they are accompanied here by their teachers, Mr. Grant 

Getz and Mr. Armstrong; their bus driver, Mr. Ernie Lowe and Ray Salen, and if you see a few bearded 

fellows amongst the bunch, I want to tell you that on March 20, Birch Hills have got a Forty-niner‟s Day. Up 

there we have two queen candidates, the queen from the Legion, Diana Evans and Debbie MacKay for the 

Board of Trade. I want to wish them a very educational tour and I also want to wish them a safe journey 

home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you and other 

Members of the Assembly a group of student situated in the Speaker‟s Gallery. They are the grades ten, 

eleven, and twelve high school students from Goodwater in the Weyburn constituency. They are 

accompanied by their vice-principal, Mr. George Watson and their bus driver, Mr. Elmer Erickson. I am sure 

I am expressing the wishes of all when I say that we hope their visit with us will prove pleasant and 

educational and that we all wish them a very safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT RE: POTASH AND AUDITORIUMS IN REGINA AND SASKATOON 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Hon. Member for Kelsey (J.H. 

Brockelbank) asked me if the government had any knowledge of Chinese endeavoring to buy potash in 

Saskatchewan. We have made a number of checks and we can find no specific instances of this having 

happened. As far as we know, they haven‟t made any efforts. I might also say that yesterday the government 

officially approached the Minister of Finance (Mr. Sharp) to see whether the Federal Government would be 

interested in putting up another $1,000,000 for the auditorium here in Regina and perhaps giving us some 

assistance for Saskatoon. I regret to say that they are not particularly sympathetic, although Mr. Sharp has 

promised to look into the matter again and see whether in the future something additionally could be done. I 

only mention this because I am hoping that the Regina Auditorium will not die a natural death as it appears 

may happen unless some further assistance is coming. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE: DRIVER TRAINING GRANT 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

384 

 

could direct a question to the Minister in charge of the Government Insurance Office (Mr. Boldt). Does the 

Government plan to continue its driver training grant in 1967 to the Saskatchewan Safety Council at the 

1966 figure? 

 

HON. D. BOLDT (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — No. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Hooker (Notukeu-

Willowbunch) for an Address In Reply and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of 

the Opposition). 

 

MR. R.A. WALKER (Hanley): — Before I commence my remarks I would like to express my appreciation 

for all of the students who are in the gallery here today to attend this afternoon‟s session and particularly I 

want to express my appreciation to a special group that is in the west gallery here, the grade seven class from 

Brevoort Park School in Saskatoon. This class is very special to me because my son is also in this class, my 

son, Kenneth and so like the Member from Yorkton, I‟m very proud and I‟m hoping that the proceedings of 

the House will be carried on in a dignified way today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I‟m also pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that this group from Brevoort Park School, these 

people are residents of Hanley constituency. This is the constituency which I have the honor to represent and 

. . 

 

MRS. SALLY MERCHANT (Saskatoon City): — No, they are not. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Well the Lady Member from Saskatoon shakes her head and says, “No, they are not,” 

but the fact is that the government has decreed that come the next election the borders of Hanley 

constituency are going to be altered so that Brevoort Park won‟t be in Hanley constituency. Every Hon. 

Member of this House knows what a gerrymander is. A gerrymander is the cutting off of areas around the 

edge of a constituency that have a strongly predominant CCF vote and the adding to the constituency of 

communities which have a strongly predominant Liberal vote. The fact is that I have the honor to be the only 

Member who has ever sat in this Legislature to have had his constituency gerrymandered twice in one term. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — It is reported that last night the Premier was seen hovering around his map room again. 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

385 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — He was fingering the borders of Hanley constituency again. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, that all Hon. Members will cooperate with me in trying to 

maintain the dignity and the decorum of this Assembly this afternoon, because if these young people go back 

to Brevoort Park and tell their parents that I made a dull speech, then this might get back to the Premier and 

the Premier may put Brevoort Park back in Hanley constituency again. So I hope that something like this will 

happen because I would like to have my own community, where I live, back in Hanley constituency for the 

next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to join in this debate on the Speech form the Throne. First of all I would like to 

comment on the government‟s promised 1966 program as outlined in that Speech. Secondly, I would like to 

put forward some that, I believe, the constructive suggestions of thing which the government might adopt 

and which are not in their forecast for legislation action. Thirdly, I would like to make some comments on 

the failure of the government to live up to its election platform, to its previous promises, and its 

commitments. 

 

The Speech from the Throne this year, Mr. Speaker, is rather a barren and sterile document but it is 

distinguished by one area of proposed action and that is an area which has been strongly pre-empted by the 

CCF in this province over the last few years. I speak of the area of consumer protection. When my young son 

heard that the Liberals had stolen some of our CCF platform and put it in their Speech from the Throne, he 

said, that I should remind the Liberal government in this House what it was that Eli Whitney said when some 

people tried to steal his patent for his new machinery. He said, “Keep your cotton-picking fingers off my 

gin.” Well I personally have no objection to the government stealing the legislative program of the CCF 

providing they will implement it honestly and conscientiously and sincerely, and when they adopt our 

program, I think this is some small evidence of good intentions on their part. 

 

It appears at long last, Mr. Speaker, that the government is waking up to the need for an extension of the 

laws designed to protect the consumer and we applaud the government for this evidence of good intentions. 

 

At last we are told that we are to have legislation to compel disclosure of the cost of credit. Hon. Members 

will recall that a year ago a Bill was submitted to the House from this side patterned after the Nova Scotia 

legislation. The Nova Scotia legislation is recognized, I believe, by students of this subject as being some of 

the most advanced in Canada. The Government could have adopted that Bill last year. It 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

386 

 

could have itself moved passage in the Legislature of that Bill. But Members will recall that the present 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald) speaking for the Thatcher government refused to adopt that Bill and indeed 

went further than that, demanded that you, Your Honour, should rule it out of order on the ground that it 

involved the expenditure of some public funds. The Liberal government at that time was evidently unwilling 

to see any public funds spent on this purpose. 

 

Now the Premier is blustering about the prospects of an early election. Well, now the government is prepared 

to pass this Bill or something similar. And if there is an early election, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan will never have any way of finding out whether the government is prepared to implement the 

Bill. They‟ll never have any way of finding out whether the government is really concerned about protecting 

the public or whether this is just being put up as window-dressing for an election campaign. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — We are promised now that we‟re going to have legislation to give the courts power to 

relieve against unconscionable contracts. It will be recalled by Member who were here at that time that in 

1964 the previous government put forward such a Bill and the opposition had some very unkind things to say 

about it. So the Bill was accordingly deferred until after the election, and now the Liberals have done nothing 

about it for three years, although notice was given of it in 1964. What is the real position of the Liberal party 

regarding unconscionable transactions? Is this just another deathbed repentance of the Liberal government 

on the eve of a general election in this province? 

 

It is now proposed to extend and improve the legislation governing the promotion of securities. In view of 

certain scandalous events that have occurred in Eastern Canada, it is time that the government did something 

about this. If there is one lesson, Mr. Speaker, to be learned from these incidents in Eastern Canada, it is this, 

that the most costly financial frauds occur, not in the sale or promotion of the stock to the public. 

 

To deal with this aspect of the problem requires federal legislation and if this government was really 

concerned about putting a stop to this sort of thing, it would be demanding that the Federal Government pass 

legislation in this area. 

 

We have legislation in every province in Canada regulating insurance companies and trust companies. This 

legislation provides that there must be disclosure, there must be filing of financial statements, there must be 

the maintenance of trust funds, there must be guarantees of adequate reserves and there must be the filing of 

their financial reports on their internal operations every year in order for them to be allowed to continue to 

carry on business. But I doubt if most people in Saskatchewan 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

387 

who invest money in mutual funds are aware of the total lack of such regulations with respect to these 

mutual funds. Indeed, some funds are solicited in this province from the savings of widows and elderly 

people by funds which are merely private operations of individuals hiding behind fancy trust company 

corporate names. 

 

In my view, the government should go further than it proposed to go in this securities legislation. Before a 

mutual fund or indeed any promotion should be allowed to be sold in Saskatchewan, the Securities Board of 

this province should be satisfied with people who are operating this fund, that they have provided some 

evidence of accountability, of responsibility and of experience as proprietors of these operations. 

 

The government proposes now to put forward a Bill dealing with local aid. Mr. Speaker, the previous policy 

laid down by the previous government was to leave it to the judges to administer legal aid. The Provincial 

Treasury simply picked up the tab after the judges had appointed counsel or allowed the defendant to appoint 

counsel, and after the judges had certified his account for legal fees and with the exception of two or three of 

the larger cities, this is the way it was done. It remains to be seen whether the proposal to set up committees 

to administer legal aid will be better than the administration of it by the judges of the province. 

 

This Speech form the Throne, Mr. Speaker, is significant, however, for what it does not do to protect and 

entrench the rights of the citizens. It is one thing for the government to pass legislation bolstering and re-

affirming the rights of the citizens against arbitrary powers of policemen or the courts, of stock promoters, of 

mortgage brokers, or the perpetrators of vicious crimes. There is nothing proposed at this session by this 

government to protect the citizen against the loss of employment from political discrimination at the hands 

of the Thatcher government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — There is nothing proposed, Mr. Speaker, to provide a remedy for the arbitrary abuse of 

administrative power by this Thatcher government. There is n legislation proposed by this government to put 

an end to the one-side and oppressive taking of people‟s land and property for government purposes by the 

Thatcher government. This side of the House has always taken note and has on many occasions taken note of 

the firings of civil servants and the firings of employees of Crown corporations on no other grounds than 

pure political reprisals. 

 

Last year we introduced legislation to try to put a stop to this archaic practice but we were steam-rolled by 

the Liberal majority across the way and prevented from doing so. 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

388 

 

MR. L.H. MacDOUGALL (Souris Estevan): — Why didn‟t you do it in ‟44? 

 

MR. WALKER: — Year after year we have proposed the establishment of an Ombudsman to take up, and 

to publicly report upon the grievances of the citizens ho felt that they had been wronged by unjust 

administrative actions. In the last two or three years other provinces in Canada had provided for the 

appointment of such an official, other countries in the Commonwealth have done the same. 

 

Apparently other Governments are prepared to acknowledge the possibility of unintended administrative 

injustice. Either this Government has no humility, not enough humility to admit the possibility of 

administrative error or it accepts injustice as an essential part of the Thatcher Government policy. 

 

The failure of the Thatcher Government to bring forward a new and more democratic formula for the 

expropriation of property is even more to be regretted. In 1962, the previous government recognized this 

problem. We set up a Legislative Committee representing Members on both sides of the House. They held a 

number of hearings and they heard scores of briefs and they came in with a report which was unanimously 

recommended to modernize this legislation. They submitted a model bill to the Legislature which was 

unanimously approved by the Committee. The Liberal Government, therefore, cannot escape just censure for 

its failure to adopt that legislation. 

 

This Government still follows the archaic practice offering citizens inadequate compensation. After settling 

with the citizens who are most easily dealt with then they increase their offer in order to try to get the rest to 

fall into line. When the stubborn few still resist and demand arbitration, the Government then increases its 

offer again still further. Then when it goes to arbitration, almost invariably the arbitrator awards more than 

the highest offer the Government made. 

 

There could be no complaint about this free bargaining over prices for land provided the parties are in an 

equal bargaining position, but they are far form equal. The Government has at its beck and call a staff of 

experts or skilled land evaluators and a whole bureaucracy of lawyers to aid with their battle against the 

citizen over this matter of expropriation of property. 

 

Since in most cases the value of land taken in expropriation involves sums of less that $1,000, it is 

understandable why the citizen doesn‟t insist upon his legal rights, to have the value arbitrated. Because 

where the value or the amount involved is $500 or $600 or even less, as it is in most cases, the costs of 

arbitration would be prohibitive to the private citizen. But they are disregarded by the Government. The costs 

of arbitration are not even reckoned by the Government in these disputes. This Government, I say, is to be 

roundly condemned for continuing the present archaic and oppressive practice of expropriation procedures. 

And it cannot plead ignorance on this problem because 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

389 

joint committee of the Legislature did make a report which was unanimously agreed to. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Looking at these examples, Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the Liberal Government has no 

real interest or desire to give fair treatment to the citizen where it means any curtailment of its use or abuse 

of power. If this Legislature doesn‟t do something about these areas of problems, then the voters can redress 

these grievances only through the ballot box. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Mr. Speaker, there are even more serious shortcomings in the government‟s legislative 

program as announced in the Speech from the Throne. Agriculture ranks high in priority only in being 

mentioned early in the Speech. It‟s regretted that there are not more worthwhile proposals to deal with 

agricultural problems. Look at these words, Mr. Speaker, contained in the Speech form the Throne: 

 

My Government intends to press forward with its efforts to promote the rapid diversification of our 

agricultural industry. 

 

That‟s what it says. Then it itemizes how it proposes to do it. It proposed community pastures, brand 

inspections, the South Saskatchewan project, the Veterinary College and crop insurance. Now of course, 

these are all good programs, Mr. Speaker, but each one of them had the advantage of newness when it was 

launched many years ago by my seat mate, Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife) when he was Minister of Agriculture in 

the T.C. Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd Governments. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Apart from bowing to these well-established and highly successful agricultural 

programs, the Thatcher Government offers nothing but back-slapping to the farmer. It‟ll pat them on the 

back. 

 

It‟s all very well for it to point to high agricultural income, but the farmer looks more deeply into the matter 

than that. The farmer knows that these high income levels are the result of a happy combination of good 

crops and good markets, something for which this government can take no credit whatever. The farmer 

watches while even these high levels of income are being eroded by higher living costs, galloping inflation 

of farm machinery costs, and rising municipal costs. In his campaign statement published in the Leader Post 

in April of 1964, the Premier said: 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

390 

 

We are determined to get taxes down on land and property of this province. 

 

In my own constituency, property taxes have risen by almost 20 per cent since the Premier made that 

statement, that promise in 1964. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — As for living and farm machinery costs. I am sure we were all shocked when the 

Premier told us here in this House that his government does not propose to submit a brief to the 

Parliamentary Committee investigating this problem at Ottawa. 

 

This Government says that its agricultural policies are aimed at greater diversification of the agricultural 

industry. If that is its aim, Mr. Speaker, it has missed the target. Hog production and cattle production are 

down and sheep production the lowest in the history of the province. There is much that this government 

could do for agriculture. I have already mentioned inflation. 

 

What does this Government propose to do to assist the farmer in his request for more efficient methods of 

distribution of farm machinery? Surely this is a matter which comes under provincial jurisdiction and which 

this government ought to take some interest in. 

 

What is it doing to assist the purchasers of farm machinery, Mr. Speaker, to assess the quality of the 

machines they‟re buying before they buy them? Buying a machine that is of not use costs the farmer years of 

income and that‟s lost and this government demonstrated its lack of concern for this problem when it 

abolished the farm machinery testing service two years ago. It demonstrated then its allegiance to big 

business and the machine companies‟ rights to maximize their profits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — What is this Government doing to assist farmers in the control of their own marketing 

through producer-controlled marketing boards? Here again, Mr. Speaker, subservience to the interests of 

their private enterprise friends, the middle man and the trader has prevented this Thatcher Government from 

giving any leadership in that area at all. A far-sighted federal policy of financial aid to the agricultural 

industry was launched several years ago under the name of ARDA. Under that agreement which commenced 

on April 1, 1965, some $14,000,000 of federal money was made available for programs which had to be 

matched by provincial funds between that date and April 1, 1970. The funds are available for provincial 

projects and program aimed at bettering rural, social and economic development and land use. Last year this 

gGovernment used only $1,660,000 of the available funds. At that rate, by 1970 almost half of the funds 

made available by 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

391 

the Federal Government will have gone unspent. 

 

And what projects do we find included in this? Well, we have here a report on manpower which the 

Government was most reluctant to table in this Legislature. This is one of the things that was paid for by 

ARDA. This is a report which the Premier tabled in the House the other day after being pressured by the 

opposition to table it. He most reluctantly tabled it. Then he tried to put the best possible face on it and said, 

“This is an excellent report,” and he commended it to the reading of the Members of the Legislature. Well 

I‟ve read some of the things in this report. Do you know what this government is paying people‟s money to 

produce? This Government is paying out public funds in the amount of some $60,000 to get a report from 

Hillis and Partners, Management Consultants Limited, a group chosen by the Liberal government to report to 

the Liberal Government and to lay down the policy of the Liberal government in this province. This is their 

report and I suggest that this report bears reading particularly by the rural people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Page 156 of the report says, “Previous investigators have found that the intelligence of the rural people is 

significantly lower than the IQ of the general population.” This is the kind of expert that this Government 

leans upon for its policy directions. The people of this province are taxed to produce a report which is an 

insult to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This report on page 190 speaks of farmers again in the most disparaging way. It says, “Our findings are as 

new as the adage, „You can‟t teach an old dog new tricks.‟ a man‟s willingness to embrace the idea of 

uprooting himself and moving to a new way of living and a new type of community depends very much on 

his age.” Now it is perfectly plain that this report of this Government looks forward to the depopulation of 

the rural areas of Saskatchewan. This is part of its policy. It is going to send out into the rural parts of 

Saskatchewan a trailer to try to attract young people away from the farms, to try to attract people, these 

people whom the Liberal Government condemns as being people of low IQ, and put them to work as hewers 

of wood and drawers of water for their big industrial friends. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is what this 

Government‟s attitude is toward agriculture. 

 

They could be using the funds of ARDA for something worthwhile, to help agriculture, not to punish it. 

 

In the Leader Post of April 1, 1964 the Premier said one of the main planks of the Liberal party platform is 

that, “We will provide adequate long-term farm credit at moderate interest rates over a 30-year period.” He 

had suggested something like 2 ½ or four per cent. Mr. Speaker, the interest rates being borne by farmers in 

this province are at the highest level in decades. It is the result of Liberal policies of tight money and high 

interest rates. The Premier was boasting just last week that Saskatchewan Savings Bonds were being sold at 

the highest interest rate every. Well, the Liberal government seems to thrive on high 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

392 

 

interest rates and big returns for their banker and big business friends. And so the Liberal government has 

done nothing about implementing that solemn promise which the Liberal Premier made. If he is interested, 

as he pretends to be, in the agricultural industry he would take advantage of these federal funds to do 

something about the people in depressed farm areas and on marginal and sub-marginal farm lands. 

 

Probably one of the most damaging blows threatening hundreds of rural communities and thousands of our 

farms is the threatened abandonment of railway lines. The CCF government when it was in office made 

professional and technical staff available to communities to help them to resist proposed abandonment of rail 

lines. I recall that the first abandonment was the Reston line; they got away with that before the government 

had mobilized its services, but the second one was the Killdeer-Rockglen line and the Department of 

Industry and the department of the Attorney General made staff available to help the people of those 

communities and they successfully resisted the application to abandon that rail line. Their determination and 

the assistance of this government turned the tide and that line and all the other lines that were slated for 

abandonment in the early 1960s are still functioning and still providing transportation services to the people 

of Saskatchewan as a result of action taken by that government at that time. 

 

Now Parliament has given its stamp of approval to a policy which gives the railways more freedom to 

abandon rail lines. It is true that the railways have promised that only about 800 miles will be abandoned in 

the next ten years but ten years quickly pass, Mr. Speaker. More than half of the rail lines in this province are 

in jeopardy. Let no one be deluded into thinking that it is just these 800 miles. Half of the rail lines in 

Saskatchewan are in jeopardy. 

 

This will drastically increase farm costs in many areas of the province. But our Premier couldn‟t bestir 

himself to get into his luxurious private plane and go to Ottawa and to stand up for Saskatchewan agriculture 

when this issue was being decided in the House of Commons in Ottawa. He was too busy campaigning for 

special income tax concessions for the solution potash mines and his big US oil company friends. It fell to 

our Leader Woodrow Lloyd, to make the meaningful brief before the committee of the House of Commons 

on behalf of the Members of this Legislature and on behalf of prairie people on this important issue. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to just conclude by saying something about the record of this 

government and whether or not it has carried out its commitments and whether or not it has lived up to its 

mandate as a result of its election in April, 1964. At the time we heard, we were persuaded that the Liberal 

program called for the establishment of 80,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

393 

It is rather significant that the Liberals haven‟t been saying much about this in recent months and they might 

well be reticent; they might well be quiet about this issue, because the study on manpower, which was tabled 

in this Legislature last week, given some very important figures and facts on the industrial growth of 

Saskatchewan. It is no wonder that the Premier wanted to keep the report under wraps, because it is a 

damning indictment of the failure and the bankruptcy of Liberal election policies and demonstrates the 

hollow sham of its pledge to create 80,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now of course, the Leader Post cooperated with the government and published banner headlines promising 

61,000 new jobs between 1961 and 1971. A little over twice as long a period and 25 per cent less jobs. But 

it‟s only after reading this report more carefully that one finds out what the report really says, you certainly 

didn‟t get it by reference to the newspapers. No reference was made in the news reports to the fact that this 

61,000 job figure refers only to the non-agricultural labor force and does not take into account the anticipate 

decline of 25,000 people in the agricultural labor force over this same 10-year period. Thus, the net growth 

of the labor force form 1961 to 1971 is estimated in this report to be 36,000 and not 61,000 as reported and 

as the Liberals would like to make you believe 

 

It is also clear form this report that the greater part of this increase has already taken place. This report 

reveals some very damning information on the performance of the Liberal government, the Thatcher 

government that is sitting across there. The net growth in Saskatchewan labor force in the last three years of 

the CCF government was just under 18,000 people. It is estimated that it will take, as estimated by the 

authors of this report, seven years form 1964 to 1971 to produce a further 18,000 increase in the labor force. 

Thus, it will take a Liberal government seven years to do what the CF government did in three years in terms 

of the expansion of the labor force in this province. 

 

It is estimated, Mr. Speaker, that between 1964 and 1968 the non-agricultural labor force in Saskatchewan 

will grow by only 22,840 and if you deduct form this the 10,000 decline in the agricultural labor force it 

means that the net growth in the provincial labor force will only be 12,840 or 16 per cent of the 80,000 jobs 

promised by the Liberal party in 1964, a 16 per cent performance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The best we can expect, Mr. Speaker under the Liberal government, a continued exodus of people form 

Saskatchewan, such as occurred during the first two years of the Liberal administration will net an out 

migration of people from this province totalling 16,000 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this report which was tabled in this Legislature has no appreciation and no concept of the 

requirements of 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

394 

 

rural Saskatchewan or the small communities of this province. This is the report, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government commissioned, that this government paid $60,000 of the people‟s money to get, which this 

government acknowledges to be its guidance force, its guiding light for future policy. The sole objective of 

this report, Mr. Speaker, is to drain as many people as possible away from the rural areas of this province 

and the smaller communities of this province to the larger centres of the province. And this is what the 

caravan that the Premier is promising is designed to do. 

 

While some movement of people from rural areas to the cities is inevitable, there is a complete absence of 

policy recommended in this report or proposed by this government which will in any way deal with rural 

manpower needs. It‟s been estimated, as I have said, that upwards of 30,000 persons, that 2,500 persons a 

year will be taken from agriculture. The purpose apparently of this government is to take them away, to 

move them to the cities, or to send them to other provinces. Mr. Speaker, this report says, and this is what 

this report thinks, about the efficiency of our farm industry; it says it has been estimated that upwards of 

30,000 persons could be released from the agricultural labor force without impairing productivity at all. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have rural constituents and when I tell them three out of every eight could be moved out 

of their township without impairing agricultural efficiency one bit, then I wonder whether it is the farmers 

that have the low IQ or whether it is the government sitting across here that has the low IQ. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I see that my time has almost expired. I want to just say that the summary is given of 

the total labor force in Saskatchewan. This summary is set out very concisely. It points out that from 1961 to 

1964 the net growth in the labor force in Saskatchewan was 18,232, those were the last four years of CCF 

government. According to their estimate it will take from 1964 to 1971 to see the labor force of this province 

grow by 18,650 and I think that report illustrates clearer than anything I can say the relative efficiency, the 

relative competency of a CCF administration and a Liberal administration. It takes seven years to do as much 

under a Liberal government as can be done in three years by a CCF government. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are becoming more and more aware of this incompetency of this Thatcher 

government. They are becoming more and more aware of the failure of is policies. The Premier now says 

that the reason that there wasn‟t any industrial development in Saskatchewan during the 20 years the CCF 

was in office was because the socialists scared them away. Now when he finds that there is even less 

industrial development, he says that the reason is that his big business friends are afraid that the socialists are 

going to get elected at the next election. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

395 

MR. WALKER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the only time that the Liberal government is less effective than 

when it‟s in opposition is when it‟s in government, because when the Liberal party was in opposition we did 

have a stimulating growth of our economy. We did have burgeoning new industries. We did have an increase 

in the hob opportunities; we did have a prosperous country, a prosperous province with expanding welfare 

measures, with additional services, health, education and welfare services. Saskatchewan, as was well said, 

in a piece of Liberal literature the other night, led the way. 

 

Saskatchewan will once again lead the way, Mr. Speaker. I say to the Premier, and I think I can say it on 

behalf of my colleagues on this side of the House, certainly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, that 

they can‟t wait to have an opportunity to deal this Liberal government its just deserts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Mr. Speaker, I have five seconds left and I just want to say that I will not suggest the 

motion. 

 

HON. A.C. CAMERON (Maple Creed): — Mr. Speaker, I understand this afternoon that I am sandwiched 

in between the Member from Hanley (Mr. Walker) and the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Steuart), 

therefore I am going to restrict myself pretty much to replying to some of the remarks that were made. I was 

interested in the remarks of the Member from Hanley because they are so in keeping with the remarks of all 

Members of the opposition in that in this session they are showing a great solicitude for the farmers‟ 

problems. I notice that they are not talking about the cooperatives and the Wheat Pool. I wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, the reason why? I think it becomes evidence when you hear that the Wheat Pool has come out flatly 

and stated that compulsory arbitration in labor disputes that threaten the national interests should be 

incorporated into legislation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I was interested in his remarks about rail abandonment. If there is one person who 

shouldn‟t be talking about rail line abandonment it‟s the Member from Hanley. I would just remind him that 

the only rail lines that were abandoned in this province were the ones that were abandoned when we had a 

CCF government in office in Regina and a Conservative government in Ottawa. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I want to turn for a moment or two, Mr. Speaker, to 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

396 

 

some of the comments that were made by the Member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) and the Member 

from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) in regards to the Friesen Commission Report. I can understand the remarks of 

the Members from Weyburn because he is a comparatively newcomer to this House. I cannot say the same 

for the Member from Swift Current; he was a Cabinet Minister of the former government. He stood up in the 

House and said he hadn‟t heard of the farmers‟ uneasiness and the farmers‟ complaints in regard to surface 

rights until someone approached him in the last election. Then he said, “I told the farmers. „Re-elect us and 

we‟ll look at the problem.‟” Well, Mr. Speaker, the farmers know what happened. They couldn‟t wait any 

longer and they turned them out. We were no sooner elected than delegations of farmers besieged us to 

correct these injustices, as they so-called them in regards to surface rights. We said, “We shall not take a 

look at it but we shall take action and we set up a commission to look into the whole aspect of the 

relationship between the farmer and the oil industry.” These farmers had many complaints. They claimed the 

amount of compensation they received through the formula established by the former government was not 

sufficient. They expressed dissatisfaction with the compensation paid under the Power Corporation Act 

when they moved in to service the oil fields. They resented having their claims for compensation and 

damage awarded by a government Board of Arbitration and from those decision there was no appeal. We 

asked these farmers, “How come you‟ve landed all of these problems on the doorstep of the new 

government?” Their answer was brief and to the point. They said the former government simply turned a 

deaf ear to our pleas. 

 

What did this government do? As I said, we set up a Royal Commission. We didn‟t only set up the 

Commission to report on these problems, we went further than that. At our first opportunity we removed that 

legislation which compelled every farm to pay mineral tax who owned his minerals. What was important in 

that was not only that we exempted them from the three-cent mineral tax but we stopped once and for all 

forfeiture of farmers‟ minerals to the Crown. Today, Mr. Speaker, farmers who were fortunate enough to 

retain their minerals are selling them on the market today for as high as $30 an acres. That‟s a far cry from a 

few years back when a horde of landsmen were loosened on this province, exempted from the Securities 

Commission and were out to rob from the farmer and did rob the farmer of his mineral rights at ten cents an 

acre. 

 

Now the Member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) say we have shelved this Commission Report; we are 

dragging our feet. What have we done with the Commission Report? Immediately we received it, within a 

mater of three days after it was printed, it was in the hands of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). 

Within four days it was in the hands of every Member of this Legislature. There were 800 additional copies 

distributed to each and every one who was interested in the matter, namely, to the Farmer‟s Union, to the 

Wheat Pool, to the Surface Rights Association, to the Association of Rural Municipalities, 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

397 

and to the oil industry because we wanted everyone who had an interest to see the recommendations of this 

commission. 

 

What have we done since? We have made a synopsis of the major portion of the recommendation. We have 

put them into a sort of a draft form and we have forwarded them to the Surface Rights Association, the 

Farmers‟ organizations and to the industry and we have asked them to take each in turn and to give us their 

constructive comments. We anticipate that we will receive these constructive comments by February 20. 

After that, after having assessed the comments of the farmers and the comments of industry, it is my hope 

that we will be able to sit down with representatives of the farmer and representatives of industry, and 

together in a spirit of helpfulness draft terms and conditions of regulations or legislation which will 

guarantee to the farmer an equitable and fair return and will assure the oil industry that this government is 

not unmindful of the tremendous contribution it has made and is making to the development of the resources 

of this province. I am confident in this spirit that we will be able to come up with something that will be a 

model for the Legislature to endorse. 

 

If I may, Mr. Speaker, I would like now to turn to some of the comments of the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd) in regards to mineral resources. Mr. Speaker, I find myself once again compelled to speak out 

against the concerted campaign of the Leader of the Opposition and the NDP to downgrade and to besmirch 

all aspects of all operations in Saskatchewan. I refer, Mr. Speaker, to his charges that the government has 

sold out our resources, that we have indulged in a give-away program. He charged that if a Devonian 

discovery was made the people of Saskatchewan would lose tens of millions of dollars. One can perhaps 

forgive him and the opposition for making these statements prior to the discovery, but we cannot forgive 

them for continuing this concocted story after the discovery. I was shocked to hear the Leader of the 

Opposition the other day, repeat this accusation. Mr. Speaker I am going to take a few moments to lay before 

this House and before the people of Saskatchewan the facts in regard to our Devonian oil discovery. I found 

on becoming the Minister of Natural Resources that Saskatchewan was facing a critical shortage of oil 

reserves. Something had to be done to induce the oil industry to fan out from the known oil areas into the 

unknown oil areas in search of new reserves. We believed it was necessary to go deeper into the bowels of 

the earth in search of new reserves. We stated that we didn‟t know whether oil could be found there, but we 

believe that we owed it to the people of Saskatchewan to go down and to find out. In order to encourage the 

industry to undertake this expensive deep drilling we said to them, “If you will undertake this, in the event 

that you make a discover, in order that you may regain part of your expenses, we will exempt you until 1970 

from royalty on this discovery.” Let me make it abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, however, that this exemption 

does not relate to oil production on any horizon above the Devonian. Companies will pay royalty today, as 

they always have, on very barrel of oil that 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

398 

 

comes from the depth shallower than the Devonian. What has been the result? Mr. Speaker, last September I 

was able to announce the most exciting oil discovery that Saskatchewan has witnessed in decades. The 

discovery was so exciting and of such great significance to Saskatchewan that reports were carried of it in 

many areas beyond the borders of Saskatchewan. In fact I was pleased, Mr. Speaker, to receive a note from 

our Agent General in London, Mr. Graham Spry. He says, “I think you will appreciate this and include the 

article in the press report from the London Times on the Saskatchewan discovery.” This discovery was 

exciting, Mr. Speaker, not only because we struck Devonian oil for the first time in Saskatchewan but on the 

way down, oil was discovered in two of the upper horizons. Thus we are fortunate in Saskatchewan on this 

discovery in that we collect royalty immediately and royalty on all oil below after 1970. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) says this discovery would cost the people of Saskatchewan tens of 

millions of dollars. He repeated that in the House the other day. Mr. Speaker, these reserves are just now 

beginning to come on stream. As of January 1, we had six wells in production. These wells are pumping oil 

from both the shallow Mississippian formation and the deeper Devonian formation. The department has met 

the daily rate of production on the Devonian wells at 150 barrels per day. We have set the rate of production 

on the Mississippian wells at 300 barrels per day and in the history of Saskatchewan this is exceptional 

production. Each well pumping form the Mississippian, Mr. Speaker, and note this, at his present moment 

each well pumping oil form the Mississippian is contributing in the form of royalty $41,000 to the coffers of 

Saskatchewan. Ask any farmer how he would feel if he owned the mineral rights on his farm and had a well 

that was brining him $41,000 per year. In the Devonian, on that production the royalty would have amounted 

to $21,000 per year. We are temporarily foregoing that royalty of $21,000 on the Devonian but in return we 

are collecting $41,000 on each of its twin wells. Each of these wells is brining us $410,000 per year today 

where yesterday we had nothing. This discovery, Mr. Speaker, I would point out again is not costing the 

people of this province one penny, but in return will make a tremendous contribution to the swelling of the 

coffers of this province in order to use these funds for many other services in the interest of the people. 

 

Not only was this discovery exciting n remote areas, it has had an immediate effect throughout all of 

Saskatchewan. On our last land sale two months ago, we put up a section of seven blocks of permits south of 

Moose Jaw, 60 miles removed from the discovery. These permits 60 miles away brought seven times the 

price of what the permits had brought along side of them prior to the discovery. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — There is an area from the Trans-Canada south extending 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

399 

from Weyburn in the east, to Swift Current in the west, from Trans-Canada south to the Montana border, that 

was termed the unknown land, no-man‟s land, the barren land. It was not anticipated that oil would be 

discovered in that area. As a result of this discovery, that area has virtually spring to life and the exploration 

is reaching further and further west until it will connect from Weyburn to Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to bring this story right up-to-date. Yesterday, my department conducted a land sale. I want to report on that 

sale. We just now finished balancing the books of the sale. Permits offered in this sale brought the Province 

of Saskatchewan in excess of $1,000,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — the cause of this, Mr. Speaker, is two-fold. First, to illustrate the significance of this 

Devonian discovery in our land sale. I only need to use on illustration. I am sure the Member from 

Milestone, the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) will be happy to know that one of the permits offered 

is just neighboring the town of Milestone, 70 miles from the new discovery. This permit brought the highest 

price ever recorded in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — This permit of 50,000 acres, Mr. Speaker, brought to the Provincial Treasurer, 

$308,000, the highest price ever obtained for a permit. Prior to that was in 1956 when a permit of 100,000 

acres brought $301,000. On a per acre basis, Mr. Speaker, this permit brought double the amount that any 

other permit ever brought in the history of this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — But I ask you, Mr. Speaker, if they will repeat the charges of a giveaway of our 

resources. The second highlight of the sale just concluded, Mr. Speaker, is the interest being shown in the 

Winnipegosis reefs. These reefs, as many of you may know, are north of a line drawn from Lloydminster to 

Esterhazy. This line was named by the former government, the A-B line in order to designate it. This is 

interesting, Mr. Speaker. Under the former department, any land lying north of this A-B line could be had for 

free. All one had to do was to go into the Department of Mineral Resources and file on it. Mr. Speaker, we 

changed that giveaway. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — We stopped giving this land away and we said to the oil industry, “From this day 

forth you will bid competitively at an auction sale if you wish to acquire this land.” 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

400 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can report today that as a result of the change of this policy, land north of the A-B line has 

brought this province an excess of $400,000 — not a giveaway. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. T. MCFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture): — Big spenders — the socialists. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Today, Mr. Speaker, the complete oil picture has changed. In place of activity being 

limited in the main to Weyburn and Estevan and Lloydminster. It has fanned out across the whole of 

Saskatchewan. There is hardly an area south of the Pre-Cambrian which will not be witnessing oil activity 

this coming summer. The bidding from Crown land has never been more active. And another example, 

permits, that we put up in the last sale prior to the discovery, in Yorkton were bringing $2,200 to $2,600. 

Yesterday‟s sale, a permit in the same area netted us $24,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — And as a matter of personal interest to myself alone, I was happy to see the results of 

the sale that there was a block near the town of Avonhurst where I was born, that brought $40,000 in its sale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been pinpointing the results of this land sale. To those who may be a bit confused about 

what land sales are, may I take a moment to point out that in these so=called land sales, no land is actually 

sold. The land remains in the name of the Crown. The land sales are bonus bids or bonuses which the 

companies compete and offer for the right to lease the land for exploration purposes. So these are bonus bids 

or gifts over and above the rental and the work commitments on each parcel of land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I have said sufficient to point out to this Chamber, to the people of Saskatchewan the 

falsity of the concocted story that we have sold out our heritage and our resources. I hope it will put to bed 

once and for all these vicious innuendos and mistruths that cast discredit, not only upon this government but 

upon the people of Saskatchewan to think that they would even tolerate it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I only want to take a few moments more to answer one or two other 

wild charges of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). I turn now to telephones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, great things have been happening in Saskatchewan Government Telephones. Great automation 

is taking place. New 

 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

401 

equipment is being installed in which we are extending across this province what we term “direct distance 

dialing,” in which anyone may pick up his phone in his living room and phone anyone of millions of people 

on the North American continent. This conversion program in which we can place our own calls station-to-

station has resulted in savings in the placing of calls because they don‟t require the services of an operator. I 

was able to announce on two occasions during the past year a reduction in long-distance calls and to pass 

along this saving to the people of Saskatchewan. This is not particularly true however of construction costs 

on the local level in the installation of telephones. Costs are rising, labor is rising, material is rising. We have 

found construction costs have risen considerably, thus in order to put it into balance, I announced a modest 

increase in telephone rental. I was amazed at this. In each of the reductions that I announced, one looked in 

vain for a comment from the Opposition, but when we increased the rental rate they fell over each other, 

tripped over each other in their rush to the press. I was interested in the comments, particularly, of the Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) because knowing what he says, I now what all the rest mouthed. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Lloyd is quoted as having said, “As a result of this increase business phones in 

Regina and Saskatoon will be paying the highest rates on the prairies. Then he said, “Calgary will be paying 

$39 a year less than what they pay in Regina and Saskatoon.” I‟m sure Hon. Members would want me to tell 

you what Alberta has just done with their rates. If the press report is correct, Alberta didn‟t raise their 

residential rate from 20 to 50 cents, they raised it to 75 cents across the board. Business phones in the city of 

Calgary will rise from $6.50 per month to $11.00, up $4.50 or a 70 per cent increase. Regina and Saskatoon 

rates on the other hand rose by a mere $1.00 from $8.50 to $9.50 a month. Again Calgary rates are not $39 

per year less than Regina and Saskatoon as claimed by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). They are in 

fact $18 per year more. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — He was wrong again in his claim that Calgary residents pay less rental on their house 

phones than they do in Regina and Saskatoon. Residents in the city of Regina pay $49.80 per year. Residents 

in Calgary pay $51.00 per year. I was interested to note, Mr. Speaker, that these charges were reiterated in 

the press under the caption, if you noticed it, “Wrong Number Lloyd”. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I was interested in a comment of an old pioneer who had been interested in 

telephones. He said to me, you know, “When I read that first announcement headed „Wrong Number Lloyd‟ 

I said to 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

402 

 

myself „Wrong Number Lloyd rides again‟.” 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I reiterate that these modest increases in Saskatchewan rates still keep 

Saskatchewan telephone rates among the lowest in all of Canada. And again I have disproved another charge 

made by the Opposition particularly the Leader of the Opposition to be without fact and without foundation 

and to be a figment of the imagination. 

 

I could go on, Mr. Speaker, but before I do, I think I have one announcement I would like to make because of 

the interest I‟m sure to those people in the unserved areas. You will recall that last year I announced on 

behalf of SGT a program of some $7,000,000 in order to bring telephones to unserved areas in the province, 

to farm families that had never experienced the amenity of a telephone in the home. I announced that we 

would bear the major portion of this cost. We would construct the line, we would operate the phones, we 

would own them and that we would assess a charge against each farmer of $400 and $6 per month rent. We 

had completed this year the first of these projects in the Mankota area and they for the first time now are 

having the amenities of a telephone in their home. Some 29 applications we now have on file from other 

areas, and as soon as the construction season open in the spring, we‟ll be reaching out in other areas to bring 

these farmers also the amenities of a telephone. Some farmers have said to me, “I find the $400 cash 

payment a little steep; it would be better if I could spread it over a period of years.” Rather than face the risk 

of any farmer being unable to take advantage of this program when the lines are being constructed, I wish to 

announce that effective beginning with the construction season in the spring, a farmer may elect to pay one-

quarter of the $400 down and the balance over a three-year period at seven per cent interest. 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Cumberland): — Big deal. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — I am amazed that the Member from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) is it or no, it‟s 

now Prince Albert East says, “Big deal” to move in and give them this service which he terms “Big deal.” At 

least they will know that someone in this department has the interest of them at heart. 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister jumped me because I did not say 

what I said, but I do say this now that they had better build some houses first before he starts giving 

telephones. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — That‟s not a point of privilege. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — Mr. Speaker, I could have said much more but I want to allow the Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Steuart) his share of the 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

403 

 time. I think it is evident from what I‟ve said that I am going to support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, may I first join with others in 

congratulating the mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne. They presented positive and 

constructive approaches to the problems facing Saskatchewan people today, and I‟m sure that the 

constituents of Jim Hooker and John Garner were so proud of them as were Members of government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, contrast the negative destructive line taken by the opposition socialist 

party. It‟s obvious the CCF-NDP haven‟t had a new idea since Clarence Fines fled the province, nor a 

spokesman that could keep anybody awake since Tommy Douglas joined the labor bosses down east. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, unable to offer constructive criticism to our dynamic program, they have 

taken refuge in attacking our Premier, Ross Thatcher. And when the Toronto Star, better and I think more 

appropriately knows as the Red Star, sent a little hatchet ma out here to smear the Premier, CCF MLA for 

Cumberland, Bill Berezowsky, probably spoke for all the socialists when he said, “Thatcher deserves it.” 

Thatcher deserves what? To be lied about and vilified. Because he had the courage to fight for the rights of 

the Saskatchewan people, because the Premier was strong enough to say to Mr. Kimmerly and the oil, 

chemical and atomic workers, “You can‟t shut off the gas to our homes and our hospitals,” should he be 

abused and smeared? If Ross Thatcher continues to have faith in our province and our people as well as the 

energy to travel across this nation and outside its boundaries to bring in new jobs and new prosperity to 

Saskatchewan, boundaries to bring in new jobs and new prosperity to Saskatchewan, does he deserve, as our 

socialist friends say, to have his character assassinated? You know Mr. Douglas and Mr. Fines, and even Mr. 

Brown took trips all over the world when the socialists even Mr. Brown took trips all over the world when 

the socialists were in power, and all we eve asked them is, “Where are the results?” “Show us the industry, 

show us the jobs.” Mr. Lloyd and his socialists are afraid to ask for the results because the evidence of the 

Premier‟s success is in the mills, the mines, and in the factories springing up all over this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I have confidence that Saskatchewan people will look for themselves at 

the results and ignore the whining and the sneering of the embittered Socialists in opposition. You 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

404 

 

know, Mr. Speaker, yesterday — I‟m sorry he‟s not in the House at this time — the Member from Moose 

Jaw (Mr. Snyder), I don‟t know whether he is the junior Member or the senior Member, but I‟ll tell you after 

the next election he won‟t be the Member at all. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Snyder rose in his place and made serious charges about the treatment ex-patients 

from the hospital in Weyburn are supposed to be receiving in private and public homes in Moose Jaw. Now, 

the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) immediately took up the cases that were brought to his attention as he 

always does. A careful search of the records of the hospital by Mr. Snyder has failed to turn up the case he 

referred to. Now, Mr. Speaker, why would the MLA from Moose Jaw wait this long before bringing this case 

and others to the attention of the Minister of Health? I suggest for two reasons, that the charges are false and 

he wanted to sneak these charges into the House to gain a little political advantage. Once again, in this 

Legislature, we witnessed one of the CCF Socialists attempting to tear down and discredit the mental health 

program in this province, and I refer to these charges made by the Member from Moose Jaw, Mr. Snyder. In 

view of this seriousness of these charges, and the possible effect on this whole program, I phoned Mr. 

Steininger, the manager of the Central Park Lodge in Moose Jaw, since this was the institution referred to in 

most of Mr. Snyder‟s remarks. The gentleman stated to me that he was willing to go on oath to say that the 

charges made by Mr. Snyder were false, they were lies and they were without foundation. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Snyder charged that because they were taking people, for example, from the 

Weyburn Mental Hospital, they were driving other guests out of the home and as a result this institution was 

not being used for its original purpose. This statement, I am informed, is false. The institution has a capacity 

of 112 people. There are about 20 who were formerly in the Weyburn Mental Hospital and the balance are 

from the Moose Jaw area and the institution is full. Mr. Steininger stated they have never had any problem 

filling the home to capacity and that by and large ex-Weyburn patients are among the easier to handle. Mr. 

Snyder says that the Department of Health has failed to implement the recommendations of the committee 

on the resettlement of mental patients. Another false statement. Fifteen out of 17 of those recommendations 

are now being carried out. The next statement Mr. Snyder made was that some of the guests in that home 

that were from Weyburn were taking off their clothes and going out to catch the bus. He called them 

“strippers.” I don‟t know what kind of night club he‟s been in but I‟m told this isn‟t the 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

405 

way to refer to any patients. But I‟m again informed by those in charge of the home that this is an absolute 

lie. I‟m told that although these ex-Weyburn patients do catch the bus from time to time, there have been no 

complaints. I repeat no complaints, about any of them disrobing or attempting to board the bus in that 

condition. Now they had one case of one person in this condition and this individual had never been near 

Weyburn, in fact, he was a local resident, a guest in that home. Now Mr. Snyder further stated the ex-

Weyburn patients at the home were in such terrible condition that the ambulance either refused to take them 

to the hospital or if they did, they had to disinfect the ambulance after such a trip. Both Mr. Steininger and 

Mr. Yates who operates the ambulance state that this is an outright lie and they were shocked at this charge. 

As a matter of fact, the ambulance has taken patients form that home to the hospital this very week. Mr. 

Speaker, we must ask why the MLA for Moose Jaw would make these charges without going to the trouble 

of checking with the responsible people running this home or the Department of Health. The answer has to 

be political. Just as the Member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) last year stooped to the same kind of 

falsehoods and distortions the same way to discredit this program. We must draw the same conclusion this 

year that these Socialists will do anything or say anything in an attempt to gain some political advantage. 

They would wreck the Mental Health Program in an effort to hurt the Liberal party. Mr. Speaker, this is a 

disgraceful performance by supposedly responsible Members of this Legislature and he should withdraw his 

statement and apologize to this House and to the authorities running this home in Moose Jaw. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I might add, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. I.H. MacDougall, the MLA from Souris-Estevan 

took the trouble to drive down to Moose Jaw this morning to check on this home. It‟s not only a new home, 

it‟s in excellent condition, it‟s spotlessly clean and the guests are happy and the level of care is extremely 

high. Mr. Speaker, who are these Socialists really hurting by these cheap tactics? They‟re not hurting this 

side of the House. Mr. Speaker, they‟re making war on the mentally ill, they‟re making war on the old, the 

weak and the sick which is a disgusting exhibition and they should be ashamed. I could further tell you that, 

if Mr. Snyder really wanted to get the answers to his charges, he would have got them from the Moose Jaw 

Times Herald of March 11, 1966. This is when some of these events took place, this is when one of their 

CCF friends in Moose Jaw went out and tried to stir up trouble and the answers were all there in that issue of 

that newspaper. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the opposition will do just about anything to avoid talking about our program. 

When 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

406 

 

they aren‟t attacking Ross Thatcher, it‟s the Liberal party. 

 

MR. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — . . . 

. can‟t talk about nothing. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Brockelbank says he can‟t talk about nothing, but he spent 30 

years in and out of this House talking about nothing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — It took them a long time to catch up, but they finally did. When they aren‟t attacking 

Ross Thatcher, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the Liberal party. And the big them this year is that we are anti-labor. Well 

let me tell this House and the people of Saskatchewan that this is a pack of lies. The Liberal government, 

nationally and provincially, has done more for the working people of this province and this nation than any 

other governments combined. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — We will continue to do these sort of things as long as we have a mandate. You know, 

Mr. Speaker, it is too bad Mr. Nicholson isn‟t in the House either. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They are all away. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Dear old Sandy Nicholson from Saskatoon was spreading some of his woolly charm in 

the House the other day, and he said, “You know, “ — to us on this side of the House — “really, you fellows 

shouldn‟t go after some of these labor leaders, they are just farm boys at heart.” Farm boys at heart? — Bill 

Davies, a farm boy? — Hub Elkin — a farm boy?‟ Kimmerly of the OCAW — a farm boy? — this is like 

calling Jimmy Hoffa a choir boy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well I‟d like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if these are farm boys at heart, then the labor 

unions had better take a hard look at what they are doing trying to take the labor unions, the good 

membership of the labor unions into the NDP party and as a result they are ruining the labor movement. 

They had better send the farm boys home and get some enlightening labor leaders. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

they wave Bill 2 and they say you have taken away the rights of the workers to strike. This is nonsense. We 

have given the government the right to stop strikes in vital industries 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

407 

or services, such as the supply of gas, electricity, and in our hospitals. Let me remind the house, Mr. Speaker, 

that the CCF government took away entirely the right of policemen and firemen to strike in Saskatchewan 

when they held office. 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw City): — That‟s not true. 

 

MR. STEUART: — That is true and you know it. If you know anything, you know it. 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina West): — No sir . . .  

 

MR. STEUART: — It was the Government of Saskatchewan that passed the Act, Mr. Blakeney, and if you 

don‟t know that, you‟d better go back and read the statue and I would also point out that during . . .  

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . the Socialists‟ term of office the Power Corporation Union threatened to strike and 

Tommy Douglas called them into his office and he said, “If you don‟t get back to work I‟ll put in 

compulsory arbitration.” 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, has it been proper for the Hon. 

Member to refer to other Hon. Members by names, rather than the Members for their constituency? 

 

MR. STEUART: — I‟m sorry, Mr. Speaker, some of them will be here such a short time, I thought I‟d 

better name them because they‟ll be long forgotten after the next election. When Stanley Knowles once said 

the CCF have an idiot for every occasion, he must have had the Hon. Member for North Battleford in mind. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that hundreds of thousands of men . . .  

 

MR. KRAMER: — Shorty. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Shorty . . . I‟ll tell you . . . Mr. Speaker, hundreds of thousands of men, women and 

children in Saskatchewan . . .  

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Having settled that 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

408 

 

argument, might I suggest that we have a little more decorum in the House and a little more silence in order 

that the Member that is speaking can be heard. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won‟t refer to his unimaginable, ungainly size if he‟ll quite 

referring to mine. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . hundreds of thousands of men, women and children in Saskatchewan depend, Mr. 

Speaker, on a safe and continuous supply of gas for their heat, their work and in fact their very lives. It is 

unthinkable that electricity and gas could ever be shut off because of a strike or work stoppage. Make no 

mistake, such a strike would have affected workers far worse than any other group. They would have had no 

heat for their homes, no heat to cook with; in fact as industry ground to a halt, not even jobs to go to. This 

same thing is true in our hospitals. Close these hospitals, Mr. Speaker, by strike action and you have in fact 

condemned some people to death. You know, Mr. Speaker the Socialists opposite talk a much better fame 

than they ever play. We Liberals like to be judged by our actions and we have proven over and over again in 

the fields of education, industry, highways, in fact right across the board, that the CCF talk and the Liberals 

act. The Socialists say we‟re anti-labor. Let‟s look and see how we have treated our workers as compared to 

their record in the same regard. Well, first of all, Mr. Speaker, wage levels all over this province are at a new 

high since we became the Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — And we have achieved full employment, something the workers‟ so-called friends, the 

Socialists, could never do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how have we done by our civil servants and the Crown corporation employees? Let‟s look at 

this record, the record of the pay increases for the civil servants shows that the last three years of the 

Socialist rule they received an average pay increase of less than three per cent a year, less than three per cent 

under the Socialists. During the first three years the same employees under the Liberals average better than 

four per cent increase in pay. The Power Corporation workers, the last three years under the CCF received 

again less than three per cent. The first three years under the Liberals the power workers received or were 

offered an average increase of four per cent. And how about the hospital workers they bleed so much about? 

Well many people consider, and maybe rightfully so, that the hospital workers in this province are 

underpaid. Well, if they are underpaid they became underpaid under your Government, Mr. Davies, the CCF. 

Let‟s look at the record. 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

409 

The record shows that the hospital workers were granted an average of 3.4 per cent under the Socialists. 

Under the Liberals the same hospital workers have been granted pay increases that have average 5.8 per cent 

— 70 per cent more under the Liberals than under their Socialist friends. Mr. Speaker, the job of any 

responsible government is to safeguard the rights, the life and the property of all its citizens. 

 

You know it‟s a funny thing, we aren‟t accused of being anti-business but we passed laws licensing and 

controlling car dealers, bond dealers, and direct sellers of merchandise. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) 

tabled a White Paper and outlined in his speech to this House action that our Government will take to make 

business concerns disclose interest rates. We will pass legislation at this session to outlaw transactions 

between people in business and individuals that are unfair or unjust to those individuals. All these acts are to 

control the business community from going too far and to protect the rights of individuals. Does this make us 

anti-business? It does not. Nor do acts controlling certain labor union from destroying the rights of the 

individuals make us anti-labor. Our Government, our party is not anti-labor, it is not anti-farmer, nor is it 

anti-business. We are for labor, we want our working people to have more money, more services, in fact 

more of all the good things of life as well, Mr. Speaker as more freedom and independence. Mr. Speaker, we 

are for the farmer and the businessmen and we want them to prosper. We are for Saskatchewan because we 

have faith in the individual and the great future that we can all enjoy if we can continue to develop this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Socialists have a theory, and it worked pretty well for 20 years, that if you misrepresent the 

facts long enough and loud enough a great many people will believe you. Now led by their leader this is their 

plan of attack on our education program, the greatest program and the most forward-looking educational 

program in the history of Saskatchewan. Mr. Lloyd and his Socialists repeat over and over again that we 

have short changed education. Mr. Speaker, Woodrow Lloyd should be the last man in this province to talk 

about short changing education. As Minister of Education, he set an all-time record for shortsightedness and 

lack of action in the face of a growing crisis in education. You know, Mr. Speaker, in 1945, the young men 

and the young women came out of our armed forces. A great many of them got married and began to raise a 

family. About five years later this so-called crop of wartime babies hit the elementary school level. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the whole process was never kept secret, in fact it was very well known to most people, but it 

evidently caught the present Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and his Government napping because they 

failed to have the elementary schools ready for these children. They failed again in the late fifties to have the 

high schools 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

410 

 

and technical schools ready, and then the present Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) proved beyond any 

doubt that he had forgotten everything, that he had learned nothing by again failing to have our university 

ready in the early sixties for the same group that by now had reached their teens. It is a fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that in our first two and one-half years of office we opened more classrooms in our universities than the 

Socialists did in the last five years they were in office. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, we inherited a school system that was totally inadequate to meet the 

needs of today‟s youth. 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — What . . .  

 

MR. STEUART: — Our young people — I‟ll get around to you in a moment, Toby, don‟t get excited — our 

young people need the best that we can give them and we are building and we are helping others to build 

elementary schools, high schools, technical and vocational schools and university buildings. I suggest the 

Hon. Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) take a trip around the province and see what is really happening to 

education since the people of the province put him out to pasture. You know, Mr. Speaker, the Socialists 

talked about a veterinary college but the Liberals are building one. They talked about a Dental College but 

we are building one. We have added new buildings and new facilities to the universities at both Regina and 

Saskatoon. Look at the technical and vocational schools at Yorkton, Regina, and at Weyburn . . .  

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Where . . .  

 

MR. STEUART:— . . . in fact look anywhere you want, Mr. Smishek. Open your eyes for a change, you 

will see that schools are being built from the elementary to the university and they are being built at record 

rates. Mr. Speaker, we have given top priority to education and will continue to do just that, a fact that is 

proven when you compare our record with that of the socialists. In their last year of office, the best year they 

ever saw, they spent some $55,000,000 on education. This year I predict that we will spend more than 

$85,000,000 on education, an increase of $30,000,000 in just one year. 

 

You now, Mr. Speaker, last night we witnessed an interesting spectacle. We listened to the Member from 

Hanley (Mr. Walker), the former Attorney General, talking about political morality. Can you imagine a 

sermon on political morality from the CCF and especially from the ex-Attorney General. I am not sure, Mr. 

Speaker, if he even knows how 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

411 

to spell the word. This is a man who had his phone tapped to a secret recorder when he was an Attorney 

General. This is the man who was in charge of that infamous insurance company that the CCF operated 

down in the United States in the State of Montana. This is the man who refused year after year to tell us the 

truth about the operation and then when we became the government we found out why he had been so 

devious. The socialists had lost millions of Saskatchewan dollars to Americans and others. I am sure none of 

us will ever forget the fact that Mr. Walker insured some Florida shrimp boats just before they sank in the 

Gulf of Mexico. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — You know I found out something else he insured. He was a great man for insuring bars, 

road houses, booze palaces . . 

 

MRS. M. HUNT (Regina West): — Who built them? 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . down in United States of America. They would burn down and they would cost the 

Saskatchewan people thousands of dollars. Those Yankees really trimmed the ex-Attorney General and his 

socialist friends. You know, Mr. Speaker, the sermon on political morality from a party that spawned 

Clarence Fines is almost beyond belief. Equally unbelievable was his attempt to justify the socialist record 

on Crown corporations. It was as dismal and as costly as was their success in driving legitimate business 

away form the Province of Saskatchewan for over 20 years. You know, Mr. Speaker, he and other socialist 

speakers have jeered at our promise to provide 80,000 new jobs in our first term of office. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we have created thousands of new jobs and more important, we have created full employment, 

something the socialists failed to do for 20 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Last summer it was estimated that we were short thousands of skilled workers, and 

with our continuing boom the cry for manpower will be even greater this summer. We will need over a 

thousand workers in Prince Albert alone. In fact the socialists drove over 200,000 of our young workers out 

of the province. Today we invite them back because this province is finally on the march. All we say is, 

“You get us the workers and we‟ll find them the jobs,” and it might even be more than 80,000. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we have heard a great deal inside and outside of this House from socialists about 

political pull to get lease land. How anybody on that side of the House could ever bring that subject up is 

beyond me. 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

412 

 

I wonder if we all remember when the CCF were in the government our friend Toby Nollet was the Minister 

of Agriculture in charge of the program. Did he have any lease land? Mr. Speaker, when Toby Nollet was 

there, the Member from Cutknife (Mr.Nollet) was the Minister of Agriculture. When they were the 

government he had over 2,500 acres of lease land. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I learned the other day about our fiend from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk), the CCF 

Member from Redberry. This was from a returned man. He said, “My brother, another returned man, had 

some lease land but when the CCF got elected and they elected a Member from Redberry, he took it away 

and gave it to his cousin.” I am told that even Woodrow Lloyd‟s relatives were in on the gravy train along 

with some relatives of the senior Member from Moose Jaw, the one that‟s sitting over there, the labor expert 

(Mr. Davies). 

 

MR. W.B. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — On a point of privilege, would the Member care to be 

more explicit on that charge? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Do you want the names of your relatives? 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Yes, yes . . .  

 

MR. STEUART: — I‟ll get them for you. 

 

MR. LLOYD: — . . . I do indeed, Mr. Speaker, I do indeed. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Would you like the names of your relatives? 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Yes, and Mr. Speaker, I ask the Member here to name the relatives that have benefitted 

from leases unfairly. 

 

MR. WALKER: — On a point of order, the Hon. Member either has to put up the names or withdraw the 

charge. It is not good enough for him to say, “Well I will give them to you next year.” 

 

MR. STEUART: — You‟ve finished making your point of order. 

 

MR. NOLLET: — On a point of order. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Is Mr. Nollet going to deny he had any? Do you deny your relatives had any? 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

413 

MR. NOLLET: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister has indicated there was something 

wrong with the fact that I had a government lease. Would he mind telling the House how long and at what 

time I acquired that lease and what was wrong with having it? 

 

MR. STEUART: — Sit down, Toby, wait until I finish. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! 

 

MR. STEUART: — I‟ll carry on, Mr. Speaker, if I may. I know their conscience is bothering them. I don‟t 

blame them. If you‟ll sit quiet, Toby, and quit flapping your legs and listen, I will get around to telling you 

what you want to know. 

 

Well as a matter of fact the empires of land they gave out to each other and to their relatives as well as 

hundreds of others whose only qualifications were the fact that they carried a CCF party membership. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I suggest that it is an unparliamentary statement to 

attribute nepotism or anything of that kind to any Member of this House. And if the Hon. Member is 

accusing Members on this side of the House when they were in the government of giving to themselves or 

their relatives . . .  

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, he hasn‟t made a point of order. Let him make his point of order or sit 

down. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Mr. Speaker, he said that when they were the government they gave to their friends and 

their relatives . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — I said that when they were in the government . . 

 

MR. WALKER: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that is an unparliamentary reference and should be 

withdrawn. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The Member is saying on his own responsibility as a Member, if I understand it 

right, what he considers to be what happened within his own knowledge. If he says that it has to be accepted 

as he said it. Other Members can refute the statement if they so please but they have to do it in the proper 

place. 

 

MR. WALKER: — If any Member denies it, that 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

414 

 

denial must be accepted. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Well, we‟ll weigh it with a little bit of salt. Who has denied it? I haven‟t heard anybody 

deny it. I said that when you people were the government that the former Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

Nollet) had over 2,500 acres of lease land and he did. I‟ll get around to what I think about it in a minute. 

Now let me tell you what we think about it. We‟re pretty broad minded. You know, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not 

really complaining because the relatives of all these CCF Members when they were the government being 

given lease land. I don‟t think we should condemn them just because they re related to the socialists. This in 

itself is probably handicap enough without us adding to their burden. All I am saying is this, that we are sick 

and tired of the hypocrisy of the socialist Members getting up and talking about lease land because the odd 

Liberal happened to qualify, and I stress the word “qualify,” for a little of this lease land. Mr. Speaker, this 

was the greatest mess that we had to clean up. The Minister of Agriculture and the one before him cleaned it 

up and we put it on a nonpolitical basis. But if these people ever want to open up that can of worms to find 

out who was into the hog trough, it will be found they were in not only with both elbows but with both feet 

and they had all their blasted relatives in there right along with them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — On a point of privilege, and speaking for myself, I challenge the Minister to produce at 

this time any evidence to show I ever had my feet in any hog trough as he so eloquently puts it with respect 

to any lease land for any of my relatives. And, Mr. Speaker, if he does not have that evidence, let him deny it 

in this House. I say it‟s shameful. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I think it is too, Bill, I would be ashamed if I were you. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — I am asking for a withdrawal. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I‟ll take it back. I‟ll withdraw. I don‟t think he had his feet in. Maybe his hands up to 

the elbows but not his feet. 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, surely the rules of this House are entitled to some 

respect. We are getting none from the Member who is talking across here. He has made a withdrawal and 

went on in his usual effective way to play the part of court jester to the person who sits next to him. Surely 

this House has the right to have some 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

415 

respect to its rules paid to it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I will read citation 145 of Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms which I think 

is applicable to the circumstances which have apparently arisen. I quote as follows: 

 

It has been formally ruled by Speakers in the Canadian Commons that a statement by an honourable 

member respecting himself and particularly within his own knowledge must be accepted, but it is not 

unparliamentary to temperately criticize statements made by a member as being contrary to the facts: 

but no imputation of intentional falsehood is permissible. A statement made by a member in his 

place is considered to be made upon honor and cannot be questioned in the House or out of it. 

 

While I am on the subject let me say among some of the things that have been mentioned, I do rather 

deprecate the mention of the word “hog trough.” 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, if I imputed any motives, I will withdraw them. The main point I wanted 

to make is that we just think it is time that they change their hypocritical stand and if I imputed any motives 

to the Hon. Member from Moose jaw (Mr. Davies) I will withdraw. I won‟t withdraw the fact that his 

relatives did get lease land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn my attention to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. As chairman of the 

board of the SPC, I am happy to report that this corporation had a very successful year in 1966. The Power 

Corporation enjoyed a profitable year without raising either gas or electrical rates. Improved efficiency has 

allowed the SPC to generate 20 per cent of the funds needed in 1966 for its own expansion. We improved 

our equity position from a low of seven per cent in 1963 to over 11 per cent at the end of 1966. This simply 

means that the people of Saskatchewan now own little over 11 per cent of this concern, far from a 

satisfactory position but a vast improvement over the socialist record. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the last five 

years under the socialists the SPC actually lost money. Had the CCF lasted in power another ten years the 

people of this province would have owned little or no equity in their own power corporation. 

 

The bond holders, many of them Americans, would be the real owners of this utility and their profit would 

be the millions paid to them from the pockets of Saskatchewan people in interest charges. People say to me, 

“But the Power Corporation sold us power at cost under the CCF, that‟s why they made little or no profit.” 

Mr. Speaker, what is cost? It would cost one man $20 to do a job and another man could do exactly the same 

job for $20. If the SPC wastes money 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

416 

 

through inefficiency or lack of sound business practices, no one gains. Costs go up, in fact everyone loses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the last three years the Power Corporation has, through a more businesslike approach 

and through improved use of manpower, been able to reduce its costs and show a substantial profit for he 

first time in its history. We are aiming for further improvements and I am confident we will attain our goals. 

We can‟t give the people, Mr. Speaker, better service, we can‟t give them lower prices, we can‟t declare a 

dividend unless we do actually show a profit. During 1966 we took a significant stride to bring improved 

service to present customers and added service to new customers. Last year alone, the SPC brought natural 

gas to 8,000 and electrical services to over 6,000 new customers. We also changed the former gas policy 

with its built-in restrictions and were thus able to launch our three-year gas program to serve over 10,000 

new customers in 85 towns. Nor, Mr. Speaker, were out native people forgotten. Our Indian people have not 

been forgotten. By the end of May of this year we will have brought electricity to 24 Indian reserves. I would 

ask the House to note that in 20 years our humanitarian friends, the socialists, brought power to only three 

reserves. In less than three years we served 21 reserves, seven times as many as our socialist friends did in 20 

years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Liberals take action while the socialists talk. But as I said, Mr. Speaker, we are still 

trying to improve service, the service that we give people, and we will soon be embarking on a major 

reorganization of the electrical system. Following the successful reorganization of the SPC in the winter of 

1965-1966 into separate and distinct gas and electrical systems, the SPC will shortly embark upon a new 

phase of reorganization of the electrical system. This new phase is not only designed to increase efficiency 

even more, but to give the various regions of our province better representation in the conduct of their affairs 

as far as the Power Corporation is concerned. 

 

Briefly, the province will be divided into five distinct areas, roughly equal in proportion to the number of 

customers and each with a major centre as its headquarters. Each of these five areas will have its own 

electrical system manager and each with a measure of responsibility designed to permit them to conduct 

most of the affairs of that area without reference to the Regina head office. In the North, the area 

headquarters will be at Prince Albert. In the central portion of the province, headquarters will be based at 

Saskatoon. In the southwest at Swift Current and in the east at Yorkton. The fifth area will be in Regina and 

the surrounding district. 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

417 

As a matter of fact the SPC doesn‟t propose any new buildings to accommodate the new area headquarters. 

Each of these cities already has office buildings and adequate service and storage facilities. What it does 

propose is to give the new areas considerable autonomy over their electrical affairs and to permit them to 

speed up applications and service to an extent not possible under the old centralized headquarters system and 

also to permit them to give far better localized service to the most important people of the electrical system, 

their customers. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that the new management people will be dawn from the 

ranks of our present staff. We know that the only way we can build and maintain a sound progressive Power 

Corporation is through the dedication and the work of SPC employees of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, starting with Mr. Dave Furlong, the General manager, and including the entire staff. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while the dispute that ended in last fall‟s strike is still not settled and undoubtedly has 

left some scars, the vast majority of the people who keep the gas and the electricity flowing are a good, 

conscientious group of people who recognize their responsibilities and who meet them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, we have paid and we will continue to pay fair wages and provide the best 

working conditions possible for all our employees because we recognize their value and we recognize their 

contribution to the Power Corporation and to this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to an area of public concern where we have to some extent 

all failed. I refer to the way we have treated our Indian and Métis people. In this Centennial Year we worry 

about the problems of our two founding races, and well we should, because we must find an answer if we are 

in fact to be a strong and united nation. But what about the founding race, our Indian people? They have 

been, Mr. Speaker, the forgotten people and we must all share some of the responsibility. In an effort to help 

these people our government formed the Indian and Métis branch. We gathered a group of dedicated people 

and asked them to help our people of Indian ancestry find jobs and to act as liaison between them and our 

white society. This branch has done an outstanding job both in community counselling and job placement. 

Mr. Allan Guy, the MLA for Athabasca, proved a tremendous help in getting this branch organized and into 

action. They placed over 1,000 native people in jobs with both government and industry. And, Mr. Speaker, 

while we now this is a good start we also must admit that we have only scratched the surface of this problem. 

I am told there are some 6,000 Indian people able to hold jobs, another 6,000 Métis, all 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

418 

 

of whom are either unemployed or under-employed. Most of this group have very little formal education and 

little or no technical training. So what has happened is that we have hired the qualified Indian and Métis 

people but the vast majority of these people have been left with little to do and little hope for the future. 

Another problem, Mr. Speaker is getting our native people to hold a job once we have placed them. 

 

A study of this shows that while some of this is their own fault, all too often they are pushed out because of 

lack of understanding or even discrimination. To change this situation we are launching a program to give 

our Indian people a new opportunity. We will ask the government, Mr. Speaker, we will ask the Crown 

Corporations and private business and industry to do more than just hire a few qualified native people. We 

are going to ask them to take responsibility for their fair share of the unqualified Indian and Métis people 

who to this point have been left without much hope. This means that we will have to bend the rules a little. It 

may mean setting easier standards for Indian people for awhile and no doubt it will mean training on the job 

and a much more sympathetic approach by everyone from the fellow worker, the foreman, and the managers. 

 

The Indian and Métis people themselves will have to cooperate because we can‟t help them if they are not 

prepared to come part of the way and help themselves. I am happy to announce, Mr. Speaker, that we are 

receiving the full cooperation of the Indian and Métis organizations. We have had many meetings with these 

groups and last week we made an agreement with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians through their 

president, Mr. Walter Deiter, to have them act as a liaison between the government and the Indian and Métis 

people to launch this new program. Mr. Speaker, we want to take government officials from all departments, 

personnel managers from our Crown corporation and the key men from business and industry. We want to 

take them out where our native people live so they will see and get to know this problem first hand. We want 

to take all the information of all the programs, federal and provincial, that are now available to these people 

right out to the grassroots, so our Indian and Métis people will know that we are in fact trying to help them. 

Our hope, Mr. Speaker, is that every significant employer in Saskatchewan will recognize their responsibility 

in this problem and not wait for the government to do all the groundwork but will go out and recruit our 

native people directly and then lean over backward to help them fit in. I hope our unions will play a role in 

giving these people a better break and a new chance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Indian population is growing very rapidly and I suggest to this House that they will not long 

continue to live as second class citizens. We all have a heavy responsibility to share with them our great 

prosperity and make them actual partners in Confederation. 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

419 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in a few minutes we will be voting on the Throne Speech and there is no doubt the 

Opposition will vote against the motion. Let there be no mistake. When they do they will be voting against 

such things as the extension of crop insurance, citizens safeguards, disclosure of credits, legal aid to 

indigents, they‟ll be voting against the Opportunity Caravan, they‟ll be voting against the extension of 

homeowner grants. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they will be voting against a host of programs that have been 

designed to help our people and to keep Saskatchewan moving ahead. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not hard, no, it is hard as a matter of fact to understand how the Socialists can 

do this and still live with their conscience, but it is impossible to understand and he‟s not here — how the 

Leader of the Progressive Conservatives (Mr. Pederson) can do this. How time after time he can vote for the 

socialists like a tame NDP back bencher makes you wonder about the future of the Progressive Conservative 

party in this province. You know, Mr. Speaker, maybe if we moved his seat over to the right of the socialists 

he might get back on the free enterprise trail and give the Saskatchewan Progressive Conservatives some real 

hope for the future. You know, Mr. Speaker, the opposition an rant and rave, the can wriggle all they want, 

but not one of them has actually attacked the Speech from the Throne. Down deep most of them are just as 

proud of the new Saskatchewan under Ross Thatcher‟s leadership, I think, as we are. They are a little 

reluctant to admit it, they send most of their time attacking the Premier‟s trips outside of this country, in fact 

down in the United States in his successful attempts to obtain new capital, new industries, new jobs, new 

prosperity for Saskatchewan. And when he goes down there who does he talk to? They said, “Oh, he talks to 

the capitalists, he talks to business people” — that‟s what they said — “He talks to business people.” Isn‟t 

that a terrible thing? He talked to people who own utilities. Well, Mr. Speaker, who should he talk to when 

he is trying to get industries in here? To the Socialists, there are not very many of them down there? If he 

want to get capital invested in Canada and in Saskatchewan, he‟s got to talk to people who have got the 

capital. He hasn‟t attacked Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. He has attacked the socialists and the 

socialist government, because one of the things the Americans or the English, or the French or the Italians or 

anyone else who has a dollar to invest wants to know is that that dollar is going to be safe for them to bring 

into the province or into the nation. They an go into the United States, they can go to the rest of Canada, they 

can go to a great many places in the world and they can invest their money under governments that believe in 

giving private enterprise a fair chance. So why, why in heaven‟s name would they come to the only socialist 

province, the only socialist jurisdiction in North America? They wouldn‟t, Mr. Speaker, and they didn‟t, so 

they have to be assured that Saskatchewan people are finished once and 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

420 

 

for all with that very disastrous and unfortunate socialist experiment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province has done one thing, he pulled the people out of their slump, an dif 

these people across here left one terrible legacy, it was the mentality the depression mentality that they left to 

the people of Saskatchewan. You‟ll never find a group of people anywhere in Canada that talk about the 

depression or the dirty thirties more than our socialist friends opposite. Talk to them over the back fence, 

listen to one of the speak, inside of five minutes they will have you back in the dirty thirties. Why? That‟s 

when they became a party, that‟s when they came out of nowhere, that‟s when they started. They still haven‟t 

got the dirty thirties out of their mind. Well, that‟s fair enough, if they want to live in the past. But what did 

they do? They left a cloud over this province, they kept our people‟s heads down, they talked gloom and 

doom and disaster. Mr. Speaker. During the last 29 or 30 months, under the leadership of Ross Thatcher, the 

people of this province have thrown off that gloom and doom. They have their heads up and their chest out 

and they know that we people in Saskatchewan are a proud people and we don‟t have to seek security first. 

We don‟t have to seek socialism. We have the greatest natural resources to be found anywhere in the world. 

All we have to do to really enjoy our great prosperity, is to hold up our heads and realize this is one of the 

great places in this country, this nation. We need to have the faith in the individuals that we in the Liberal 

Party have always exhibited and to have faith in our natural resources and the bounty of this province. Mr. 

Speaker, that is what Ross Thatcher has done, that‟s why these people attack him, that‟s why they are afraid 

of him, that‟s why they know they will never get back into power. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech confirms what the people of this province wanted to 

hear, that there is ahead another great year for this province and I take pleasure in announcing the fact that I 

will support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I always have to admire the Minister of Natural 

Resources, the Member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart). He‟s terrific when it comes to fast footwork, and I 

can‟t help but admire him for that, you know, But when he set himself up as an expert in regard to 

conscience this is a bit of a different thing. Now I haven‟t noticed any demand for the Hon. Minister from the 

heads of any great churches to get him as an advisor for the conscience of a nation or a 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

421 

church or anything like that at all. I would suggest to him that when it comes to matters of conscience we 

will be even more able to look after our problem than he will be to look after him. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Now he also complained about the socialists always talking about the 

dirty thirties. Most intelligent people throughout the world remember something about their history, even 

about their mistakes. It is only pretty ignorant and arrogant people that insist on forgetting those mistakes 

and of course those people who are reactionary in their outlook, those people who support capitalism are the 

people who would like to forget everything that has been a breakdown in the operation of that system. I don‟t 

blame my honourable friends opposite for being miffed a bit when anybody reminds them what happened in 

the so-called dirty thirties. We weren‟t responsible for it. It was the forebears of philosophy of the people 

sitting on your right, Mr. Speaker, who were responsible for the mess that we had at that time. 

 

Now, I would like for a minute to deal with some of the questions raised by the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron). He talked about the surface rights in regard to the drilling of oil wells. He talked 

about it as if it was a problem which he found and had to do something about, and it, of course always is a 

bit of a problem. But I would like to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that up until 1964 there was actually very 

little complaint in respect to surface rights. The complaints developed since that time and they developed 

because of changing circumstances and factors. But there was a board to decide cases, to arbitrate, and we 

had in 960 four cases referred to the board, eight in 1961, only two referred to the board in 1962, only 11 in 

1963, and then it begins to go up and we get 14 in 1964 and it goes on up in 1966 to 48 cases referred to the 

board. I admit there was a problem which developed soon after the present government took office. And it 

wasn‟t something that we left to them. I am glad that they appointed a commission. As a matter of fact on 

occasion when I had people complain to me about this question before I left that office, I said that anytime a 

substantial number of people really wanted further investigations I would be happy to recommend to my 

colleagues that a commission be appointed to investigate this. That offer was never taken up while I was 

there. 

 

Now they got the report of the commission and the Liberal government beats its chest and says, “We don‟t 

talk, we act,” but they weren‟t very fast to do very much about it. He said the report was in the hands of the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), I think he said the day after or something like that or three days after. 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

422 

 

Well, the report is dated November 12 and this copy of the report arrived in the office of the Leader of the 

Opposition on November 25, not November 15. 

 

MR. CAMERON: — It‟s a small point, but I said two to three days after they were printed. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — I‟ve not much time left, Mr. Speaker, and I have a lot to say and I 

must get on with it. I hope that I won‟t be interrupted. Now on the 30th of the month there was a meeting and 

I believe it was attended by the Minister and by the Member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood). The Member 

for Swift Current didn‟t have a copy of the report at that time, was promised it and got it a few days later. 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the Liberal government isn‟t nearly as strong or nearly as fast in its 

action as we would be led to believe if we listened to the Members who are here. Now I hope that they will 

get busy and do something and get a fair and workable system and I think they shouldn‟t forget everything 

that was done in the past. There was a lot that was good but undoubtedly there is room for improvement. 

 

The Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) didn‟t like the idea that we complained because some of 

our resources had been given away. And certainly they have, I think unnecessarily. This is a matter of 

judgment, it is purely a matter of judgment whether the deep oil well would have been drilled at 

approximately the same time whether or not these incentives were there and no proof can be produced to 

show either way. This is a bargaining business. The government is the trustee, is responsible for the 

resources of the province and for making the best out of it. If the government is stampeded into giving terms 

that are too easy, prices that are too low, the people of Saskatchewan are going to pay. And it could very well 

be that over the next 20 years because of these relaxations in the terms in regard to our resources, the people 

of Saskatchewan could be out many millions of dollars. 

 

In regard to telephones the Minister said something referring to remarks made by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) in this House. The Leader of the Opposition when he made his statement he had a 

new item in the Star Phoenix of January 17, 1967, and it is headed, “Telephone Owners Hit with Additional 

Charge.” In this article it says: 

 

“The boost in rates effective with the March billing means both Saskatchewan cities will be paying 

the highest rates on the prairies.” 

 

Now if it wasn‟t true, why didn‟t the Minister (Mr. Cameron) get out a comparison to show that it wasn‟t 

true, but this was the information that got out. Again the article says: 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

423 

“Rates in both Alberta and Manitoba are lower.” So if there was anything wrong in the comparison it was the 

fault of the publicity given by the Minister, not any fault of the Leader of the Opposition in this respect. 

 

Now I would like to come back again to deal with some of the remarks made by the Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Steuart). One of the first things he talked about was the growth of educational facilities in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. One of those facilities, of course, was the university. Well I have in my hand here 

a photostat of a new item that was published in the Globe and Mail, just February 11, 1967, a few days ago. 

It is written by Grant Maxwell, the dateline is Saskatoon and one paragraph reads: 

 

“Capital outlays for building in 1967 are estimated at $12,500,000 compared with $13,000,000 in 

1966. The decrease indicates the university is trying to comply with Premier Ross Thatcher‟s request 

for some slowing down in all construction.” 

 

There you have it. When the need is there we are not doing enough in this line and certainly should be doing 

more. 

 

Now the Minister also said, “We Liberals like to be judged by our actions.” Mr. Speaker, that‟s what is going 

to happen. They are going to be judged by their actions or their lack of actions and all that smart talk that the 

Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Steuart) and others of his party can do in this House won‟t count for very 

much. What is going to count is what you do throughout the Province of Saskatchewan in regard to service 

for the people of this province, what you do in regard to taxation. Another thing that will count too to some 

extent is what the Premier says about the Province of Saskatchewan, not just here when he is in his seat in 

the House but when he goes out on his trips. We don‟t complains about the people he talks to when he goes 

out of Saskatchewan. That isn‟t the point at all. We don‟t complain that he does go out. We do complain 

about the stories that he tells about Saskatchewan, about the way he blackens the reputation and name of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and he certainly does that pretty well. 

 

The Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Steuart) mentioned the population question. I hope I don‟t have to 

go through that again. It has been proven and demonstrated by the figures, official figures on the record, that 

in all the history of the Province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the great term for actual absolute loss of 

population was while we had a Liberal government in this province. I hope you‟ll forgive me for referring 

again to the dirty thirties, but from 1936 to 1945, all of the Liberal government except one year, the 

population of Saskatchewan went down, down, down. After 1945 we started holding our own and gradually 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

424 

 

began to increase and get back up to the population that we had in the past. Actions count, we‟re not gaining 

as fast now as we were before. But actions count, and you can talk until you are blue in the face but it won‟t 

do you any good because people know too much about the situation. 

 

The Minister gave quite a story about the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. He said we have taken power to 

20 Indian reserves and the socialists only took it to three Indian reserves in 20 years. Does the Minister not 

remember what there was in Saskatchewan in the way of electrical power in 1944. I know he‟s young but he 

isn‟t quite that young. He knows that what had to be done before you could take power to anybody was to get 

a system organized, was to get generating facilities built and to get lines built. He knows that was a big job 

so that all of our people over the province would have power accessible. If he complains because the Indian 

reserves did not get power he should take a look at the Federal Government. Both Liberal and Conservative 

government there have neglected in a disgraceful way the welfare of the Indian people of Canada. They are 

the people that have the promise responsibility and this is just another case, Mr. Speaker, where we started a 

good program and it has been picked up by the government. They are doing something about it, they are 

beating their chests and making out that this was a brand new idea of theirs. No such thing. You see, actually 

this government took over the Province of Saskatchewan when all kinds of good programs were started. 

 

Now I just got the answer to a question or two. I can quote the answer anyway, Mr. Speaker, even though I 

can‟t lay my hands on the paper that was tabled today. I asked what the cost of the road was to connect No. 2 

Highway with the Hanson Lake road, that is Highway No. 165, and over $2,000,000 was the answer I got a 

few days ago. We hear a lot about the great mines that are in the North, so I asked what amount of 

concentrate was hauled over this road and I got the answer and it was a few thousand tons. I am always glad 

to see a mine even if it is only a little one in operation. I asked, Mr. Speaker, how much royalty the Province 

of Saskatchewan got out of this mine. Nil, nil. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Who is the Minister that put that in? 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — And after building the road and after doing all of this, then we get no 

royalty out of it at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a speech all prepared and I am going to have to dispense with the first 12 pages, so we are 

now on page 13. I promise you, Mr. Speaker, and Hon. Members that I‟ll keep these and use them again, so 

don‟t be too happy about it now, because I want to deal just for 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

425 

a minute or two with this trip of the Premier and his speeches on Saskatchewan. Among other things he said, 

“Dozens of oil companies pulled up stakes and moved out.” Now my hon. colleague, the Member of Hanley 

(Mr. Walker) dealt with this but I happen to have in my hand a Government publication here and it is called 

the Chronological Record of Mining Events in Saskatchewan, the Hon. A.C. Cameron, Minister — J.T. 

Cawley, Deputy Minister and it is dated 15th of February, 1966. It has some interesting things in it. The first 

thing I see of real interest that I wanted to take time for right now is that in 1940 there were 330 barrels of oil 

recovered from a well in the Lloydminster field, the first oil production in Saskatchewan. We have got to 

give the Liberal Government credit for having the first oil production, 330 barrels but there was no more 

until after there was a CCF Government. We go to 1945 and there was a first commercial oil production. We 

go to 1946 this was in those days of stagnation you know, Mr. Speaker, 1946 potash was discovered in 

Verbata No. 2 well at Unity; 1947 the south main shaft of the Hudson Bay mining and Smelting Company 

was completed to 4,075 feet in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That year there were new producing oil fields in 

Lone Rock. Then in 1948 we instituted the Prospectors Assistance Plan. The No. 3 shaft of the Hudson Bay 

Mining and Smelting in Saskatchewan was deepened to the 3,270 level. In 1949 Prairie Salt commenced 

production at Unity in May. In 1950 Eldorado Mining and Refining announced plans for a 500 ton mill and 

news of another shaft in Saskatchewan near Flin Flon. In 1951 Coleville No. 1 discovered gas in the 

Coleville-Smiley area. Huskey Phillips,  Brock No. 1 discovered gas. Coleville No. 1 discovered gas in 

September. Fosterton No. 1 discovered oil in the southwest of the province in December 1951. A new oil 

producing field, Coleville - Smiley in 1951 and the first potash exploration permit was awarded that year to 

Western Potash Corporation. I could go on reading all these items for every year. In 1952 the Saskatoon 

pipeline was constructed. These are in the years, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier tells the people of the 

United States that there was nothing doing, everything was chased out. When anybody says that we don‟t get 

capital in, that a CCF Government couldn‟t get capital, what do you think these things were built with? 

Sawdust? Good money, good money that people invested in it, this was the capital that came in. Gunnar 

found uranium at Beaver Lodge in 1952, the Wapella Oil Fields. There were new oil producing fields at 

Fosterton, Eastend, Hoosier, Midway, Wapella. Now I am glad to hear that the Minister was able to 

announce one oil field today, but I had the privilege of announcing lots of them. It‟s a great pleasure to be 

able to do that and I don‟t deny him that pleasure. Well, then we go down the list and we find that in 1952 

there were some 7,000 claims recorded in the Athabasca area. And Uranium City was surveyed, designated 

and laid out. New development. The province was booming. In 1953, we had the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation building a pipe line 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

426 

 

from Brock to Saskatoon to bring natural gas to the city of Saskatoon; Oil discovered in the Mississippian 

formation in 1953; the South Saskatchewan pipe line built; millions of dollars invested in this line to bring 

the oil form Fosterton to Regina. 

 

The Eldorado Mining and Refining Company started production of uranium in that year, and there was a 

whole list of new oil producing fields. And there were about 14,000 mineral claims taken and recorded in the 

Lake Athabasca area. 

 

We come to 1954, you have Rix Athabasca Uranium Mines going into production and a first unit operation 

in production at Brock in the Viking Sand unit. The Mid-Saskatchewan Pipeline, the Gunnar Mine going 

into operation, Nicholson Mines, and the Hudson Bay Mining Smelting Company commencing a shaft at the 

Coronation Mine, southwest of Flin Flon. And again a new list of oil producing fields. National Exploration 

opened a new uranium mine. The first water-flood or secondary recover took place in 1955, and it was very 

interesting to see this water-flood program initiated and commenced in the province of Saskatchewan. This 

means in some cases we will get two or three or even four times as much oil form a field as we would if 

there was no water-flood undertaken. 

 

Then in 1956 the Potash Company of America started the shaft at Saskatoon. And to go on, P.C.A. at 

Saskatoon commenced production of potash in 1958. Steelman gas storage cavern at Melville completed. 

And then Standard Chemical Limited, that is Kalium commenced potash solution mining test at Belle Plain 

in 1960. 

 

And so on I could go to the end. But it is too late to make any more of that speech today, Mr. Speaker, but I 

do wish that all Members of this House when they go outside of the Province of Saskatchewan could be 

proud of their province and its accomplishments. I know, I know that accomplishments were made before 

1944. I know something about the work of the pioneers. We should be proud of that and I don‟t like 

responsible people telling stuff that reflects on the history and activities in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

I‟m not going to vote for the address because I don‟t believe in all of the things that are in the Speech form 

the Throne. I vote against it because I have no confidence in this Government and the sooner we have an 

election and get this Government replaced by another one, the better. 

 

At 5 o‟clock p.m., Mr. Speaker interrupted the proceedings under Standing Order 30(4) and put the question 

on the motion. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 30 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher    Loken    Leith 

Howes     MacDougall   Radloff 



 

February 15, 1967 

 

 

 

427 

McFarlane    Grant    Romuld 

Boldt     Coderre   Weatherald 

Cameron    Bjarnson   MacLennan 

Steuart     Trapp    Larochelle 

Heald     McIsaac   Hooker 

Gardiner (Melville)   MacDonald   Coupland 

Guy     Gallagher   Gardner (Moosomin) 

Merchant (Mrs.)   Breker    Mitchell 

 

NAYS — 25 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd     Willis    Wooff 

Hunt (Mrs.)    Whelan   Broten 

Wood     Kramer   Larson 

Nollet     Dewhurst   Robbins 

Walker     Berezowsky   Pepper 

Brockelbank (Kelsey)   Michayluk   Brockelbank 

Blakeney    Smishek      (Saskatoon) 

Davies     Link    Pederson 

Thibault    Baker 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of 

Natural Resources (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That the said address be engrossed and presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such 

Members of the Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION RE: ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker I move, seconded by Mr. Cameron, Minister of Mineral Resources: 

 

That when this House adjourns on Wednesday, February 15, 1967, it do stand adjourned until 2:30 

p.m. on Friday, February 17, 1967. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:11 o‟clock p.m. 


