



















































Hansard: February 02, 1967


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

 

Thursday, February 2, 1967. 

3:10 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the sixth day of 

January, 1967, for the meeting of the Fourth Session of the Fifteenth Legislative Assembly of the Province 

of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the Private Secretary to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three fifteen o’clock 

p.m. today, Thursday, the second day of February, 1967. 

 

3:15 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and having taken his seat upon the Throne, was 

pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: - 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Fourth Session of the Fifteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

During 1967 people in every part of Canada celebrate the 100th Anniversary of our Confederation. 

 

Above all, we celebrate the achievement of Canadians, in welding this giant land into one of the worlds great 

nations with unparalleled opportunity. 

 

My Government, with hundreds of communities and individuals across the province, will join in a series of 

events to celebrate this historic landmark. 

 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

 

The past year has been the most prosperous in our province’s history. 
 

Incomes of both our farmers and those working in industries, have surpassed all previous records. At the 

same time, we have enjoyed virtually full employment. 
 

My Ministers will continue to make every effort to speed the industrial expansion that has occurred, thereby 

broadening the economic base of our province. 
 

AGRICULTURE 
 

Saskatchewan’s crop was the best on record, and our farmers are realizing the highest returns ever. 
 

My Government intends to press forward with its efforts to promote the rapid diversification of our 

agricultural industry through a number of measures. 



 

February 2,1967 

 

 

2 

You will be asked to approve additional expenditures on community pastures in many parts of the province. 

 

You will also be asked to approve a measure to extend the brand inspection program to new areas of the 

province. 

 

The giant South Saskatchewan project is now nearing completion. 

 

My Government will put forward proposals regarding irrigation and fodder supplies, to gain maximum 

benefits from this great resource. 

 

My Ministers also propose to extend the settlement of new agricultural areas of the province. 

 

Construction will continue on the veterinary college at Saskatoon, in order to protect the investment of our 

people in the livestock industry. 

 

My Government will ask for your support in expanding crop insurance, so that many more farmers will be 

able to obtain this form of protection. 

 

COST OF LIVING 

 

Although the standard of living of our people has risen continually in recent years, my Ministers are 

concerned about substantial increases in the cost of living. 

 

They have therefore co-operated with the governments of Alberta and Manitoba in establishing a 

Commission to study living costs on the Prairies which will recommend steps to keep costs at a reasonable 

level. 

 

CITIZENS’ SAFEGUARDS 

 

My Ministers will place before you a white paper dealing with the protection of the rights of citizens in 

today’s society. You will be asked to approve legislation providing safeguards of those rights. 

 

Bills will be put forward dealing with: 

 

Disclosure of cost of credit; 

Unconscionable transactions; 

Mortgage Brokers; 

The sale of securities; 

Legal aid, and compensation for victims of crimes of violence.  
EDUCATION  

My Ministers attached prime importance to the education of our people.  
Over the last several years, my Government’s grants to both school boards and the University of 

Saskatchewan have increased substantially.  
My Ministers will seek your approval of further large expenditures in order to continue meeting the needs of 

education. 



 

February 2, 1967 

 

 

3 

TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING 

 

The rapid industrial expansion of our province has created a high demand for skilled workmen, which will 

increase even more rapidly in the next five years. 

 

Great strides have already been taken toward expansion of facilities for trades and technical courses. 

 

Construction now under way at the Institute in Saskatoon will ultimately provide accommodation for double 

the present enrolment, including the Central School of Nursing for that area of the province. 

 

Additional steps forward were taken with the establishment of an advanced technical training centre at 

Weyburn and a composite high school in Regina within the past year. 

 

In order to meet the demand, and in order to provide sound opportunity for retaining our young people in the 

province, you will be asked to approve large expenditures for technical and vocational training. 

 

OPPORTUNITY CARAVAN 

 

You will be asked to appropriate funds for an "Opportunity Caravan" - a mobile counselling and job referral 

service which my Government will shortly establish. 

 

My Ministers hope to utilize this program in order to make training and job opportunities available to 

citizens in all parts of our province - particularly in rural areas. 

 

FREE HIGH SCHOOL TEXTS 

 

In the forthcoming academic year, free texts will be provided for students up to and including, Grade Ten. 

 

FRENCH LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION 

 

You will be asked to approve legislation clarifying the use of French as the language of instruction for a 

period of one hour a day in schools, where this is desired by the school boards. 

 

YOUTH PROGRAM 

 

My Ministers inform me that the response to the programs of our Provincial Youth Agency has been 

encouraging. You will therefore be asked to approve an expanded effort by this agency in the year ahead. 

 

ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE ARTS 

 

In recent years my Government has made significant progress in making training in the arts available on an 

increasing scale to our citizens. You will be asked to approve increased expenditures in the year ahead for 

this purpose. 

 

You will also be asked to approve expenditures for the establishment of a residential school of the arts in the 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 



 

February 2,1967 

 

 

4 

LIBRARIES 

 

During the past year my Government established a Commission to study the adequacy of library facilities in 

our province. You will be asked to approve increased grants to our libraries to bring standards to a higher 

level. 

 

HIGHWAY SAFETY 

 

My Government is very much concerned with the deplorable traffic record established by motorists in 

Saskatchewan during the past number of years and is determined to take positive and constructive steps 

designed to reduce accidents, injuries and deaths on our roads. 

 

To this end you will be asked to approve amendments to The Vehicles Act designed to provide better control 

over the operator, his equipment, and further provisions for the safety of the motorist and the public. 

 

You will be asked to approve enabling legislation in respect of the high school driver training program. 

 

You will be asked to approve enabling legislation with respect to a driver re-examination program. 

 

You will also be asked to approve enabling legislation concerning compulsory vehicle inspection. 

 

You will also be asked to approve measures which will increase penalties for certain driving infractions 

under the Criminal Code of Canada and The Vehicles Act. 

 

HOMEOWNER GRANTS 

 

My Ministers were happy to be able to provide a large measure of relief to taxpayers in the past year through 

Homeowner Grants. This assistance will be continued in the year ahead. 

 

You will also be asked to approve legislation broadening the categories of citizens eligible for this grant. 

 

MUNICIPAL ASSISTANCE 

 

My Government will continue to provide increased assistance to local governments through the program of 

enlarged grants initiated last year. 

 

RURAL TELEPHONE SERVICE 

 

In the coming year, telephone service will be extended to a number of rural areas of our province which 

hitherto could not be economically served. 

 

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCER CO-OPERATIVES 

 

You will be asked to approve legislation designed to assist agricultural producers to increase their income 

through co-operative action. 

 



 

February 2, 1967 

 

 

5 

HOSPITAL SERVICES 

 

The rising costs of hospital services are of growing concern to governments at all levels. These increases 

have been necessitated by the construction of new hospital facilities, improved medical services and higher 

wage levels. 

 

You will, therefore, be asked to consider ways and means of finding additional funds to support this vital and 

expanding service. 

 

DENTAL PROGRAM 

 

My Ministers inform me that the number of dentists practising in Saskatchewan showed an encouraging 

increase in 1966. However, many more dentists are needed. In recent years, a number of major programs 

have been undertaken to attract and retain dentists in our province. 

 

You will be asked to provide large sums for dental education bursaries. Steps are being taken to accelerate 

completion of the dental college at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

My Government will continue to expand our incentive program to encourage dentists to locate in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

PENSION BENEFITS LEGISLATION 

 

Legislation will be placed before you to more effectively regulate private pensions plans, and to give 

portability to a number of plans common to other provinces. 

 

CIVIL SERVICE PENSIONS  
You will be asked to consider legislation that will correct inequities in the pension plans of additional civil 

servants who have retired on pensions now inadequate because of rising living costs.  
SENIOR CITIZENS HOMES  

My Government has worked diligently to alleviate the problems facing our senior citizens by increasing the 

accommodation available to them.  
You will be asked to again approve large grants for construction of housing and special care homes for our 

older citizens. 
 

INDIANS AND METIS 
 
My Ministers believe that a solution must be found to the growing problem of providing training and 

employment for our citizens of Indian ancestry. 
 
They propose, therefore, to solicit the support of private industry in the provision of more employment 

opportunities for these people. In this, my Government intends to continue to provide leadership through the 

large-scale employment of these people in government service. 
 

INDIAN LAND TAXATION 
 
You will be asked to approve legislation that will provide 



 

February 2,1967 

 

 

6 

for the refunding by municipalities to Indian Bands, a portion of taxes collected on reserve lands leased to 

others than band members. 
 

POLICE SERVICES 
 
A new contract with the Government of Canada for the policing of the province by the Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police has been negotiated. 

 

My Government will continue to extend the service of this police force to a larger number of towns and 

villages of the province. 

 

CORRECTIONS ACT 

 

You will be asked to approve legislation that will provide guidance, retraining and treatment to criminal 

offenders. 

 

WATER POLLUTION 

 

My Ministers inform me that serious problems of water pollution will arise if preventive measures are not 

taken. 

 

You will therefore be asked to approve legislation to provide authority to the Saskatchewan Water Resources 

Commission to combat pollution of our waters. 

 

WATER SUPPLY PROJECT 

 

You will be asked to approve large, new sums to continue my Government’s multi-million dollar scheme to 

supply water to communities and industries south and east of the City of Saskatoon. 

 

NURSING EDUCATION 

 

My Government will also seek your approval of legislation to complete a nursing education program for 

students of nursing.  
SALE OF SPIRITS  

You will also be asked to approve the establishment of additional outlets for the sale of liquor in centres now 

without such a service.  
FEDERAL-PROVINCIAL FISCAL RELATIONS  

My Ministers inform me that failure to arrive at a satisfactory agreement in recent Federal-Provincial fiscal 

negotiations has placed serious strains on the public finances of the province.  
CONCLUSION 

 
I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full confidence that you will favorably discharge your 

duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:25 p.m. 

 


