



















































Hansard: February 21, 1967


516 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

13th Day 
 

Tuesday, February 21, 1967. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

. 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Before the Orders of the Day I would like the House to join with me I 

welcoming a fine group of students from Crystal Springs high School. They are led here by their 

teachers, Miss Lily Orton, Mr. Ike Gillard and one of the parents, Mrs. Ted Sjostrom. The bus drivers 

are Herbert LaRoche and Nick Hawreschuk. They drove in 200 miles this morning to tour the fine city 

of Regina and I‘m sure their trip here today will be educational and a very pleasant one. I also want to 

wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M.P. Pederson (Arm River): — I would like to join with the Member from Kinistino and all Hon. 

Members in welcoming the group from Crystal Springs as well, and particularly because my sister and 

niece happen to be in this group. I have had many years of acquaintanceship with this general area that 

these young people come from, and like the Hon. Member and all Members hope they have a very 

pleasant visit with us this afternoon. 

 

Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to the fact 

that there is in the west gallery, two groups of students from the city of Saskatoon, one from the Alvin S. 

Buckwold School and the other from Buena Vista and I know that Members will want to join with me in 

welcoming them to Regina and to the Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I would again like today to welcome and introduce to 

you, and through you to Members of the Assembly, another group of students. I believe they are sitting 

in the west gallery; there are 42 in number and they are, as I said yesterday, another portion of the Grade 

8 class from the Junior High School in Weyburn which has a total of some 200 in is class. Today this 

groups is accompanied by their two teachers, Mrs. McLeod and Mr. Fletcher, and again their bus driver, 

Mr. Reg. Tait. I know that all Members will join with me in expressing our desire that their visit with us 

proves pleasant and profitable and continues throughout their journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome to this Assembly a 

group of students from Lampman High School and the Lampman United Nations Club. These students 

have come some 130 miles 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

517 

to Regina and have seen the Legislative Buildings and the City and I‘m sure they are having a very 

educational tour. They are accompanied by their bus driver and their teacher. I‘m sure that everyone in 

this Assembly wishes them well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with I 

would like to welcome on your behalf and on behalf of the other Members in this House, a group of 

approximately 120 students from the A.E. Peacock High School in Moose Jaw. They are accompanied 

by their teacher, Mr. Walkerchuk, and I want to extend a particular welcome to them because the 

Peacock High School is situated within about 2 blocks of my home. I had the good fortune to attend the 

Peacock High School a number of years ago, and my oldest son will be attending the Peacock High 

School next year. I know that all Members will want to join with me in wishing them a very rewarding 

day and that they will have a pleasant trip back home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE: WHITE PAPER ON CITIZEN’S PROTECTION 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day, may I direct a question 

to the Attorney General (Mr. Heald). Is the Government making available in unlimited quantities 

without cost copies of the White Paper on Citizen‘s Protection? 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald: — No, the Government printed 5,000 copies which are being distributed to various 

organizations in the province, municipalities and so on, various consumer groups who are setting up a 

distribution list. I personally arranged and paid for copies of the Citizen‘s Protection Code to go to every 

member of my own constituency, but I paid for the cost of it myself. I would like to table a bill, the bill 

received from the Printer in the sum of $247.86 so these aren‘t the Government‘s. But if the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition would like to suggest to me that other groups be put on the list, this would be 

fine. We‘re in the process of mailing them out. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I would much rather distribute something else free of charge or otherwise. Does this 

explain perhaps why the White Paper considers that the history of Saskatchewan stats in 1964, if it is 

going to use this thing? 

 

Mr. Heald: — No, Mr. Speaker, I noticed the other day the Leader of the Opposition was speaking in 

Saskatoon. He said the White Paper was printed on blue paper and he thought it was a red herring. I 

think the only thing that will be red after a while is his face when we put this through the House. 

 

QUESTION RE: ORDER FOR RETURN NO. 6 

 

Mr. J.H. Brockelbank (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I‘m glad to see that the Government is smartening up 

because I want to ask them a question. Just about at 



February 21, 1967 

 

518 

the beginning of the session I asked a written question in the House. I asked for the returns up to the end 

of January, I think it was, of all the different kinds of taxation and I‘m sure the Hon. Premier and 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) wouldn‘t miss that. When it came up it was changed into an Order 

for Return. Now I know the Treasury Department has the accounts right up to date on all their receipts, 

and I would like to know why the delay in not getting that information. 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Well, I suppose it has to go around to all the Departments. I 

don‘t even recall the question but I‘ll assure the Member he will get it before the end of the session. 

 

QUESTION RE: FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND TECHNICAL TRAINING 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to ask the 

Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) a question of whether the Government has entered into an agreement 

with the Federal Government in respect of vocational and technical training and also in respect of 

apprenticeship. 

 

Hon. G.J. Trapp (Minister of Education): — No new agreement has been signed to date. 

 

QUESTION RE: FUTURE PLANS FOR SASKATCHEWAN HOUSE 

 

Mr. E. Whalen (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner). In view of the current rumours regarding its 

sale, can the Minister advise the House of future plans for Saskatchewan House? 

 

Hon. J.W. Gardiner (Minister of Public Works): — I must say I haven‘t heard any rumours. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Thatcher 

(Provincial Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair, and the amendment thereto by Mr. 

Blakeney (Regina West). 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, my first remark this afternoon must be addressed to the 

schoolboys and girls in the gallery. I want to associate myself with the Members who have welcomed 

these groups this afternoon. I certainly hope that their stay will be a welcome one and that it will be an 

educational one. If there is anything that I say in my remarks this afternoon that they might think is 

rather uncomplimentary about the people who sit to your left, Mr. Speaker, I hope that my friends in the 

gallery will realize that this is my duty as an elected Member of this Government, and further, Mr. 

Speaker, if my friends in the gallery, these young boys and girls, have any political ambitions I wouldn‘t 

want them to… 

 

Mr. I.C. Nollet (Cutknife): — On a point of Order, is the 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

519 

Hon. Member addressing this House or addressing the gallery. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Yes, I am, Mr. Member from Cutknife. Mr. Speaker, the Member for Regina West, 

(Mr. Blakeney) yesterday afternoon addressed most of his address to his air audience and I‘m only 

addressing the first 20 or 30 seconds of my address this afternoon to the students in the galleries. It is not 

very often that these students get a chance to come in here. I hope that they enjoy the proceedings and, 

as I said a moment ago, I hope that if I say anything uncomplimentary about my friends to your left that 

they will realize that this is my duty as a Member of the Legislature. On the other hand if they hear some 

uncomplimentary remarks made from the Members on the left, they will take it for what it is worth 

coming from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker,. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — When I adjourned the Debate yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I had commented 

on some statements that had been made by the financial critic, (A.E. Blakeney) the Member for Regina 

West, in his remarks Friday afternoon or yesterday afternoon. And in the few minutes left to me this 

afternoon, I ant to deal further with some more of the remarks that he made while he was speaking on 

this Debate. I want also to refer to some of the things that the Budget that was brought down the other 

day by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) promises to the people of Saskatchewan. It was quite 

noticeable, Mr. Speaker, from the remarks made by the financial critic yesterday when he had all the air 

time that was allotted in this House, one hour and fifteen minutes I believe, and all the other time that he 

wanted to speak that he didn‘t speak too much about the Budget. This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I do 

intend, in the few minutes that I have on the radio time and in this Debate after some 30 minutes 

yesterday, to say something about what this Budget has to offer. For example, after talking at some 

length on education, on school grants, the University, technical and vocational training, there was one 

small but quite noticeable omission in the remarks of my friend from Regina West. He forgot to tell this 

audience – his air audience and this House – that this year this Government will be spending 

$101,282,000 on education, that after subtracting the Federal reimbursements, this year this Government 

will be spending over $90,000,000 on education, Mr. Speaker, just about double the $45,000,000 our 

NDP friends spent on education five years ago. Mr. Speaker, almost double the $49,000,000 that our 

NDP friends spent their last year in office in 1964. He talked about the Liberal Government reneging on 

our promise of setting education as a top priority. He didn‘t tell his listeners that when his party spent 

the $45,000,000 it represented just under 26 per cent of the total budget, that the Government spent in 

that particular year, and that this year with a much larger Budget, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is 

spending 30 per cent of its total budget in the Department of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — And Mr. Speaker, I‘m sure this was most interesting to his air audience, but it would 

have been much more interesting if the little act had been televised when he put on this little bit of a 

dialogue between George and Ross and Ross and George and George and Ross and Ross and George. 

Well, Mr. 



February 21, 1967 

 

520 

Speaker, he was trying to make the point that the Minister of Education had a terrible time with the 

Provincial Treasurer when he was bargaining for more money for school grants. Well, despite all the 

things that he said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, he still didn‘t prove anything because after we look at the 

actual figures on the school grants, even if we take the figures that were presented by my friend from 

Regina West after he said that the school grants estimate had been padded, if we used those figures, Mr. 

Speaker, it still amounts to about $62,00,000 for school grants. If we use his figures which were wrong, 

but even if we use his figures, Mr. Speaker, the last full year of the CCF Socialist Government in this 

province, they spent $37,634,000 in school grants. I don‘t know if it was Johnny Burton or which one of 

his experts it was that found the percentages or arrived at the percentages that he used on one occasion 

in his remarks yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, but the fact of the matter is this, that in their last year 

of office with a smaller budget, when the cost of education was smaller than it is today, they actually 

paid for 44 percent of the total cost of education. In 1967 and 68 we will be paying almost 50 percent of 

the total cost of education when education costs have risen considerably since they were in office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Mr. Speaker, no matter what way he tried to put it the fact remains that in their last 

year of office which was their best year in respect to grants to schools and help in the field of education, 

they paid on an average of $166 per pupil in this province in school grants. This year, Mr. Speaker, we 

will be paying $66 more or $230, an increase of 40 percent in our first three years in office over the best 

year that the NDP had in the field of education. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what did the Member say about university grants? I believe, if I quote him right, he 

said something like this, ―That the previous Government had two cardinal principles that it adhered to in 

dealing with the University.‖ the first one was the autonomy of the University, that his Government 

never interfered with the operation of the University and the second cardinal principle was that the 

Government provided the money. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very statesman-like statement, particularly 

coming from my lawyer friend from Regina West. But let‘s just check the record, Mr. Speaker, for the 

accuracy of this statement. In the best year, the last year the Socialists were in office they provided 

$10,600,000 to the University of Saskatchewan. I am not even going to bother to refer back to the 

average of what they gave in all the years that they were in office. It is too pitiful to even repeat. Mr. 

Speaker, this year we will be giving the University of Saskatchewan $28,000,000. He was only out, Mr. 

Speaker, the gentleman from Regina West and the financial critic was only our 180 per cent in this 

particular case. 

 

And then he talked about technical schools and technical and vocational education. This, Mr. Speaker, is 

where he suggested that the Liberal Government had hit a new low. He painted a picture of boys and 

girls trying to get into technical and vocational institutions and the doors were closed because this 

Government had decided they weren‘t going to bother looking after the boys and girls who needed 

technical or vocations education. I made mention yesterday afternoon in my remarks what the record of 

this Government was in this respect, 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

521 

only in the statistics that I gave of the number of students that attended two vocational schools that were 

in operation when the NDP were the Government of this Province. And that, Mr. Speaker, was a pretty 

good comparison. It was 2,303 in the best year of a Socialist Government compared to 3,310 last year, 

or an increase of 50 percent over the best year that the socialists were in office. And this, Mr. Speaker, is 

without saying anything about the new Technical and Vocational School in Weyburn that was opened or 

the Comprehensive School that was opened in Yorkton and will be operating on a vocational and 

technical basis very shortly and the other vocational and technical comprehensive schools that will be 

opened in this province in the not too distant future. 

 

In opening his remarks, mps the Member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) opposed the Budget on 

three counts. First of all he said taxes were too high. Secondly he said not enough was being spent on 

services to our people, and third, he said the Government had started deficit financing. I have a copy of 

the Saskatoon Star Phoenix and I forget just how it is that he has described this, but it is rather a 

deplorable act. He called it short-term opportunism and long-term folly, and I think that he suggested 

that we were getting back to the days of the Liberal 30‘s. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‘m going to review these points just for a moment or two. As far as taxes are 

concerned, I mentioned something yesterday afternoon about the Hospital Revenue Tax and I don‘t 

intend to repeat myself on that this afternoon. I would like to repeat just one or two things, particularly 

in respect to the medical care and hospital premium, and I mentioned this yesterday afternoon. The 

medical care and hospital premium is something that my friends on the other side of the House take 

great exception to. As for the Lady Member for Regina West (Mrs. Hunt), I remember her when we 

were sitting in the Opposition standing on this side of the House and asking that the Government not 

have a medical care and insurance head tax at all; and I remember her Leader at that time, the former 

Premier of this Province, (Mr. Douglas), saying that we should have a medical care head tax, but it 

should bear a small relation to the total cost of medical care and hospitalisation in this province. And in 

1962 when my friends, the former Government of this Province, set the tax at $72, Mr. Speaker, it 

covered about 33 percent of the total cost of medical care and hospitalisation. They think that it‘s too 

high today, but Mr. Douglas, in whom I‘m sure none of them have any question of confidence, said that 

it should bear a small percentage of the total cost of hospitalisation. Today, it only bears 20 percent of 

the total cost of hospitalisation and medical care. That $72 that we pay today which we paid five years 

ago under a Socialist Government covers 20 percent of the total cost. Five years ago it covered 33 per 

cent or a little more than 33 percent of the total cost of hospitalisation. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat 

what I said yesterday afternoon about hospitalisation and the hospitalisation tax. We know the record of 

our friends who sit to the left. In every election after the hospital plan was introduced in this House they 

lowered the rate, the head tax before an election and they raised it after an election. They did it in 1963 

and no doubt they intended to put it back up where it should have been in 1964. They didn‘t get the 

opportunity to do it and they‘ve been crying ever since. 

 

I said something the other day about the liquor and tobacco tax and all I‘m going to say at this time 

about the liquor 



February 21, 1967 

 

522 

and tobacco tax my friend from Regina West was crying about the elderly gentleman who was retired, 

who couldn‘t afford to buy tobacco for his pipe – Mr. Speaker, that tobacco and liquor in my books are 

luxuries and anybody that can afford to use them can well afford to pay taxes. I think that if there‘s one 

thing that should be taxed and taxed well it‘s luxuries and surely tobacco and liquor are luxuries in this 

country. 

 

And he talked about the gasoline tax and the motor licence tax. I don‘t want to repeat everything that I 

said yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, in respect to the gasoline tax and the motor licence tax, but I do 

want to say this, that in the last year of a CCF Government they spent just two thirds as much on 

highways in this province as they collected in gasoline and diesel tax and motor licences. We increased 

the gasoline tax one cent per gallon last year and paid double this amount in increased grants to the rural 

municipalities of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — Further to that, Mr. Speaker, we spent millions of dollars more on our highways 

system than we collected in motor vehicle licence and gasoline tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my friends have had a lot to say about some of the other taxes; no doubt more of them will 

have more to say about the over-all taxes in this province since we became the Government. I want to 

say at this time that there hasn‘t been a year since 1944 that the revenues of this Province haven‘t been 

higher than the year before, and as long as this province grows and prospers and the gross national 

product rises there will be more increases in revenues derived from taxes. But in the 20 years that my 

socialist friends were the Government of this Province, not only did they raise more money from taxes, 

they increased the rate of taxation and, Mr. Speaker, this is something that this Government has put in 

reverse. For the first time, Mr. Speaker, since 1940 people are paying a smaller rate of taxation than they 

were in the past. You know, just in one instance of the 20 percent reduction of the sales tax it is going to 

amount to $12,000,000 in this particular Budget. 

 

Now my friend from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) talked something about a cut in services. I have 

already dealt with education. this is one that he spent a great deal of time on. He didn‘t say anything 

about health. The last full year of a CCF Government that Government budgeted $48,000,000 for health. 

 

This year we are spending $66,800,000 on health services in this province, an increase of $18,000,000 

or over 30 per cent. In highways, he didn‘t say too much about that. I wish I had more time, Mr. 

Speaker, but I see my radio time is about gone. But he didn‘t say anything about the $22,800,000 they 

spent in their last full year of office as compared to $49,500,000 that we will be spending this year. I 

know that there have been statements made from people on the opposite side of this House in the 

debates last year and out in the country and no doubt they will be made again that this Government is 

just taking the money in bucketfuls and handing it to the contractors in this province. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I got some information this morning from the Department of Highways that puts the lie to that statement 

and I‘m not going to have time to use it this afternoon, but I can assure you that I am going to give it to 

somebody to use at some later date in this Debate. Last year, Mr. Speaker, this 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

523 

Government moved almost three times as many cubic yards of dirt as our Socialist friends moved in 

their best year when they were the Government of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — What about equalization grants? Now this is a service to the people of this province 

and if services were cut, then this must be a service that was cut. What‘s the record of the Liberal 

Government in respect to equalization grants to the municipalities of this province? Mr. Speaker, this is 

a rather laughable one. You know the way the former Government used to use the municipalities? Well, 

there used to be the odd $300 or $500 or $700 special grant provided the majority of the council were of 

the right political stripe. They took a blood test first, Mr. Speaker, I saw that in my own constituency. 

Mr. Speaker, even some of their CCF councillor friends appreciate the way this Government treats the 

rural municipal people of this province. This year, Mr. Speaker, from a paltry $600,000 that my 

Socialists friends gave in equalization grants in their last year in office we have increased this to 

$24,000,000 or a net increase of 400 per cent. My friend from Regina West was only out 400 per cent in 

this particular field, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about Natural Resources? Well in Natural Resources, Mr. Speaker, - and this is surely a service to 

the people of this province – in their best year they spent $5,965,000. This year $9,000,000 an increase 

of about 50 per cent. There is one more point I would like to cover – I will have to cover it very quickly 

for I am already infringing on the air time of the Minister of Municipal Affairs – and that is the last point 

that the Member tried to make in respect to deficit finance. Mr. Speaker, I covered this quite thoroughly 

yesterday. 

 

He mourned the fact that this Government had seen fit to amortize part of the Budget, $6,500,000 in 

highway spending. Well I went to the trouble, Mr. Speaker, of reading the financial statements for the 

fiscal years ended March 31, 1965, and I find out that on 11 occasions after 1948 that my friends, who 

deplore this action, did it 11 times from 1948 until 1964. That was in respect to highway building, Mr. 

Speaker, but they didn‘t have a four-lane program and on two more occasions they did it for public 

buildings, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Leader Post reported me this morning – and I‘m not accusing 

them of reporting me wrongly, but there were so many items in here that they reported – that I said that 

in 1961 there was $5,000,000 amortized. In 1961 there was actually $10,000,000 amortized. They sold 

debentures in two different issues. In fact they amortized just about half of their highway budget that 

year, Mr. Speaker. And my friend from Regina West deplores the fact that we have started deficit 

financing by trying to cover up our capital highway spending. We are doing this with a small proportion 

of our total highway budget, Mr. Speaker, and that is to be used in four-laning. Surely, Mr. Speaker, that 

puts the lie to most of what the Member from Regina West said yesterday afternoon. Mr. Speaker, he 

tried to oppose this Budget on three counts. Tax increases, reduction in services, deficit financing. He 

struck out completely on the first two, Mr. Speaker. No, he made a fly ball to first base and the first 

baseman caught it and he ran hard to get to first base and he fell flat on his face, and he looked worse 

after he got up than if he would have struck out on the third count. Mr. Speaker, this Budget gives to the 

people of this province what this Government said this Government would 



February 21, 1967 

 

524 

do back in 1964 before the election. I can tell the Members of this House and the people of 

Saskatchewan that this Government is not going to be judged by the remarks that are made by my 

friends from the other side of this House; by irresponsible statements like those made by the Member for 

Regina West. I am certain that this Government will be judged on its record of performance. Mr. 

Speaker, I am happy to support this Budget and I will oppose the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for Member as Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, to speak in this Budget Debate. It is the third time that the Provincial Treasurer has brought 

down a budget that reflects major increases for most municipal programs. This Budget demonstrates, 

again, the firm desire of this Government to substantially increase our assistance to local governments in 

the province. Not only has our Provincial Treasurer succeeded in balancing the Budget for the coming 

year, but he has done it in the face of real difficulties, increasing public health costs, increasing 

education costs, reduced funds from Ottawa. And yet he has done it without bringing in any tax 

increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now the combined figure for the Budget in Municipal affairs and the Municipal Road 

Authority this year adds up to $23,354,230.00. The best year that the Opposition had for the combined 

budget figures is pretty paltry by comparison, Mr. Speaker. It adds up to $10,295,791.00. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Even if we take out the $8.5 million dollar vote for the homeowner grants program, 

we are still ahead by close to $5 million dollars over the best efforts that they could produce in their 

years of office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Yesterday, the Honourable m from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) drew my attention to 

the fact that something over 200 of our smaller villages in the province were getting smaller every year. 

I think this statement, Mr. Speaker, clearly shows what we on this side have said for many times over 

that they are only now beginning to get their heads out of the sand and look around. Where has he been 

all these years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Out in the country we have known for years that the smaller centres were growing 

smaller. Only today, though, or yesterday, has he begun to express concern about this! After they have 

initiated and encouraged school centralization and other services, after that same party chose to try and 

implement the country system and jam it down the throats of the people, after that same party, (when he 

was Minister of Public Health), 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

525 

tried to introduce a plan to close down the small hospitals, now he issues a solemn warning to this 

Government that we had better watch out for our small hamlets and our small centres which are 

withering away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now it is true that some of the smaller centres are growing smaller, but it is also true 

that most people in those areas and other areas in the province, recognize and accept this trend in the 

present growth pattern of the province. Towns of 1,000 and over on the other hand are growing as never 

before and we are certainly helping these communities with some of their problems. Just for an example, 

the Government last year assisted in paying part of the cost of paving main streets in a total of 10 cities, 

39 towns, and 11 villages in this province. Five million dollars were expended in this program last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now, 54 communities in the province have been given financial aid last year to install 

water and sewer systems. Most of these communities, I remind my honourable friend, were the smaller 

communities, the villages and smaller towns. This year we will begin a policy of providing direct 

financial assistance to those smaller communities who wish to install a plastic sewer system. We also 

brought in a policy in 1964 when the now Senator A.H. McDonald was Minister of Agriculture, to 

provide technical assistance and materials at cost to those hamlets to install water systems. And yet, as I 

say, my honourable friends opposite are still asking what we are doing for the smaller centres. Now, his 

other remarks were somewhat similar, equally invalid, and I will not refer to too many of them. 

 

One of the most important factors, Mr. Speaker, why the Provincial Treasurer has been able to give us a 

balanced budget this year, and at the same time increase expenditures, has been the increased business 

and industrial activity that is taking place in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — This is due, very largely, to the efforts of this Government and to the efforts of the 

Premier, in particular. 

 

The assessment information for 1966 provides a real indication of this growth that is taking place in our 

province. We‘ll take mining assessment, as an example. Outside of the Northern Administration District, 

mining assessment increased last year by eight million dollars, an increase of 13.5 per cent in one year. 

And if you will apply an average mill rate to that, it means another half million dollars in local taxes to 

our local governments from this one increase alone. Next year we predict the increase to be even greater, 

as more of these mining developments come into operation. 

 

And of course, mining is only one segment of the total industrial economy of the province. The rapid 

development in other sectors is clearly shown by another fact from the assessment figures. Total 

assessment in the cities of the province 



February 21, 1967 

 

526 

lat year increased by almost 52 million dollars. I suppose it is fair to say that some of this is due to the 

trend toward more and more urbanization. The fact remains, however, that this added industrial 

assessment is coming to the province and is resulting in a broader tax base, not only for the Provincial 

Government, but for municipal governments as well. 

 

The workload of the Community Planning Branch in my department last year is ample testimony to the 

fact that our urban centres are growing, and growing rapidly. Despite continuing difficulty in securing 

professional staff we had a very busy and productive year. Among the major items that were handled 

were development plans for Estevan, Esterhazy, the Battlefords and Moose Jaw, as well as a housing 

study in Prince Albert. 

 

Now I‘d like to turn for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to a subject of importance to all of us. One that 

was referred o by my Opposition friend (Mr. Blakeney) yesterday, mainly the general subject of housing 

in this province. 

 

Many statistics can be cited to show that housing starts were definitely down last year in Saskatchewan. 

It is true that tight money has had a severe effect on the housing sector of the entire construction 

industry, not only in Saskatchewan, but all across Canada and the United States as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — C.M.H.C figures show a 28 per cent decline in starts in Saskatchewan last year. 

However, when you look at those figures they apply only to urban centres of five thousand and over. It 

was due largely to a drop in starts on apartment units in the cities, and there was also severe drops in 

housing starts in the city of Regina. And as the m of Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) said yesterday, there is 

still no shortage of single-family dwellings in the city of Regina. Now, at the same time, C.M.H.C. has 

other statistics available that show that dwelling completion in the rural areas and small urban centres 

below five thousand last year in Saskatchewan, were up by 14 per cent from the year before… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — …as contrasted to Manitoba and Alberta, who were down quite considerably. Also 

dwelling starts in our rural areas and smaller centres last year were on a particularly with 1965. Probably 

our greatest need in housing today in this province is more apartment type units for the growing number 

of people who wish to live in apartments, and more units to accommodate the people of lower income. 

 

Now last year, Mr. Speaker, Members will recall that we passed The Housing and urban Renewal Act in 

this Legislature. Basically it gives us the authority to enter into agreements with municipal governments 

and the Federal Government to do a number of things: to create low rental housing, either subsidized, or 

economic rental; also to create housing on our own; to enter into urban renewal agreements and to enter 

into so-called land assembly projects. So you might well ask, what has happened as a result of us 

passing that Act? I would like to refer first of all to the Land Assembly Program. Now this is a program 

that 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

527 

provides for the purchasing of land and the pre-servicing of lots, building lots, in urban communities. 

these are paid for at the time, on a cost-sharing basis – seventy-five per cent, Ottawa; twenty, the 

Province; five, the local municipalities. and of course these costs are repaid when the lots are sold. Now 

there is another obvious advantage to this program, in that the local communities involved here do not 

have to issue debentures to provide for the servicing of lots in their community. We have 165 such lots 

now being developed in the town of Unity and the town of Shaunavon. We have another twelve to 

thirteen hundred in twenty-two more communities throughout the province under negotiation for 

development later this year. It‘s a long lists: Allan, Canora, Delisle, Humboldt, Indian Head, Lanigan, 

Nipawin, Redvers, Saskatoon, Shellbrook, Viscount, Watson, Birch Hills. Carrot River, Foam Lake, 

Hudson Bay, Langenburg, Lloydminister, Prince Albert, Rosetown, Watrous, Wynyard, a real long list 

of communities that are taking advantage of the program initiated last year and emphasized by this 

Administration. And I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this program alone will substantially assist in 

increasing housing starts next year in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — This is a program, incidentally, that was available to the province for many years 

prior, and only one or two communities ever took advantage of it under the administration of our 

Socialist friends opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now as well as in the field of land assembly, we have been involved in creating 

housing in certain areas of the province, primarily in the resource communities. Last year we 

constructed, or have under construction at the moment, about thirty homes in the town of Esterhazy. We 

have built twelve more for Government employees throughout the province. We have thirteen houses 

underway in the Green Lake area, three of them for the enlarged farms that were established in that 

district. Over forty units were constructed by the Department of Natural Resources in the Northern 

Administration District for, Métis people. This year we will continue our program for the Métis in the 

northern parts of the province. We will also be prepared to create another seventy-five or more houses 

throughout the province with emphasis on the resource communities. I am thinking of such towns as 

Lanigan, Outlook, and any other centre where the need becomes apparent. But, broadly speaking, Mr. 

Speaker, we believe that the creation of housing units for the general public should be left to the private 

enterprise sector of the economy. Now, with the recent announcement that C.M.H.C. will make loans 

available, speculative loans, to builders, early in April and with the proposed changes in the Bank Act, 

we think that private enterprise will meet this need next year, in this province. On the other hand 

housing for resource communities, housing for northern areas, housing for the lower income people, will 

receive the greatest emphasis from this Government. 

 

Now what about public housing, Mr. Speaker? We have heard a lot about it from our friends opposite. It 

is not a program again that‘s new to this province. Presently we have 595 units of public housing, either 

subsidized or economic rental. We are also working in conjunction or in connection with another twelve 



February 21, 1967 

 

528 

or thirteen such projects throughout the province in another variety of centres. We have twenty units 

under way in Prince Albert, eighteen in Melville, and a total of 246 further units under negotiation to be 

built later this year, we hope. We intend to go to at least 300 of such units this year, which marks a 50 

per cent increase in the initiation of such units in the province. I should point out that when our Socialist 

friends opposite left office, there were 414 such units in Saskatchewan, and yet they have been crying, 

of course, that our public housing program is insufficient and insignificant. now, the problem of housing 

for people of low income is certainly not a new issue, Mr. Speaker. It was here when they left office. 

 

With the plans I have outlined here to you today, I think you can easily see that this Government has not 

been idle in the general field of housing. While our friends opposite have been crying, we have been 

quietly taking step after step to help the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn the next portion of my remarks to the 

Municipal Road Assistance Authority and the Budget in this department for the forthcoming year. We 

have a total of over eleven and a half million dollars in this Budget this year, the largest amount ever 

voted by any Government for rural road assistance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — A total of five and a half million dollars for grid road construction is the highest that 

has ever been recorded in this program before. And you might be interested to know, Sir, that in the 

current year we provided assistance on the construction of eleven hundred and some miles of grid road, 

oilfield access and resort road, constructed in the province by municipalities, towns, villages and 

L.I.D.‘s. The total constructed network of grid roads today, adds up to something over thirteen thousand 

miles. As well as this, we have approved over 3,500 miles of extensions to that system throughout the 

province. However, for all intents and purposes, all of the roads that will go to make up that system, 

have now been designated and allocated as such. 

 

Now, this brings me to an announcement of the Premier in his Budget address, namely, that the 

Government will be prepared in future to assist municipalities in another very important category of 

municipal roads, namely main collector roads or so-called feeder roads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — At the Provincial-Municipal Conference that was called here in 1965, this request was 

made to the Government at that time. When the executive of the S.A.R.M. approached the Cabinet 

earlier this year to discuss their resolutions with us, this again was one of their priorities at that time. It is 

just another request, Mr. Speaker, that was made at that Conference and has been renewed since, that 

this Liberal Government has granted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

529 

Mr. McIsaac: — We granted it because far too many of our rural people are still without the service of 

an all-weather road to enable them to get out to a highway or to the grid road, whatever the case may be. 

This announcement will commit the Province to assist on a program that will definitely help to rectify 

this situation in the years to come. It assures the rural municipalities that the Province will continue to 

provide assistance on municipal road construction for many years to come. And it comes at a time also, 

when many of them are finishing their grid road program. Not only that, it will enable the municipalities 

to better plan the future road work in their municipality, with the knowledge that these main collector 

roads will be eligible for construction assistance. This year to get the program underway, it will be 

available to those municipalities who have finished their grid road construction, and who have 

conducted a traffic study to map out the roads that will be eligible. The standards and criteria will be 

announced later on. But, generally speaking, the program will be much similar to the grid program 

policies now in effect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — For years, Mr. Speaker, our Socialist friends opposite sat by while the school system 

of this province and many more services became more and more centralized. They did not at any time 

pay sufficient attention to providing the necessary assistance, necessary financial help, to our 

municipalities to enable our rural residents to get a decent road out to get their children to school, or to 

get to town themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — With the assurance now that the Province will assist in these collector roads and the 

main school bus routes in the province, municipalities now will be able to put greater emphasis on roads 

to individual resident ratepayers. And it certainly is this Government‘s objective to hasten the day when 

all rural residents can travel to their farm homes on all-weather roads. 

 

As another step in our desire to improve road services to the people of the province, we will continue to 

assist in represented-construction of some of the early grid roads built in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — At the beginning of the program, the first roads built were frequently adjacent to, and 

often those roads that ran through, a small urban centre and continued on out to the highway. Today, 

more than ever before, it is vital that these connecting roads be up to good standards, because practically 

all of the services to these small centres is now provided by various trucking lines. This year the 

Government will allow an increase of 15 per cent in our share of the cost of reconstructing these roads, 

over and above the normal share provided. In no case, however, will the Province‘s share exceed 80 per 

cent but in most cases it will run up to and very close to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 21, 1967 

 

530 

Mr. McIsaac: — This additional assistance will be confined to the represented-building of municipal 

roads which are not over five miles in length and which link communities of at least 300 or more in 

population, to an existing highway. Traffic on most of these roads indicates that they should be rebuilt to 

28 feet in order to allow for eventual oiling and dust proofing. Now on the subject of resurfacing and 

dust-proofing, Mr. Speaker, last year we assisted ten rural municipalities with a total of just over 50 

miles o dust-proofing and resurfacing. We assisted in many ways: by helping them to draw up the 

contract, by providing technical advice and by providing an additional 15 per cent on the cost of these 

programs. 

 

Salt stabilization was the main form of surfacing used with a couple of stretches of oiled road and lime 

stabilization as well. It is still a little bit too early to measure the results, as to the longevity or the 

durability of this program, but results and comments are encouraging to date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Last year, for the first time, this Government also assisted municipalities in snow 

removal, and this year the budget for this program has been increased from two hundred and fifty to 

three hundred thousand dollars. This again will be available on a shared basis up to our maximum of 

roughly $6.00 per mile, on all grid roads and school bus mileage in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Last year, also for the first time, Mr. Speaker, this Province assisted municipalities in 

maintaining the grid roads. The great majority of our municipalities took advantage of that assistance. 

Funds here were provided on a matching basis up to a ceiling of $85.00 per mile. This year assistance 

will be continued at the same level as last year. And I think the result of this program is obvious to 

almost anyone who drives in any of the rural areas of the province. The grid roads are looking better, 

they have looked better all summer in almost all cases. And municipal men are telling me that this 

winter they are only now coming to appreciate the advantages of this policy, with the shape they have 

the roads in for the winter. One more example, Mr. Speaker, of Liberal action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Perhaps, the most successful of all municipal programs that we have introduced and 

expanded, has been the major increase in equalization grants referred to earlier by my colleague from 

Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher). I would just like to give you two or three examples to demonstrate what this 

means to the municipalities of the province. And of the three that I chose, one is in my own side of the 

province. It happened to be the municipality of Biggar, constituency of the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). this municipality, R.M. #347, received a cheque for ten thousand, five hundred 

and some dollars, no strings attached, in the early part of the year, which is in itself the equivalent of 

four mills in tax saving to the people of that municipality. If you add this to what they had available on 

snow removal and grid maintenance grants, it brings the 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

531 

total of new money available to that municipality of over 13,000 dollars this year. What did they have 

before? $3,792. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — In the north, there is another example. I have chosen the R.M. of Shellbrook, #493. 

This year that municipality received a cheque for eleven thousand, five hundred and some dollars; direct 

cheque, which represents to them a mill-rate saving on their assessment of about seven mills, Mr. 

Speaker. Now previously, they received a mere $1,849. One final example from the constituency of 

Wadena, on the eastern side of the province, R.M. #367. This year by direct cheque in equalization 

grant, this municipality received $9,246.00, and the other two programs to them, grid maintenance and 

snow removal, brought the total new money available to them up to almost fifteen thousand dollars. 

Now what did they get in previous years, Mr. Speaker? $880.00… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Better examples could be found, but these are typical of the general picture. I am very 

pleased again to see these grants increased this year from two million to 2.4 million dollars, a major 

increase of 20 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Just another demonstration that the Province Treasurer did not lose sight of his 

priorities when he was preparing his Budget. These grants were distributed on a new formula and further 

refinements will likely be made this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I would like to spend a moment or two on the assistance that is available to the urban 

communities of the province. The Hon. Member from Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) indicated yesterday 

that we are doing very little for the urban communities and would like to see us do more for Regina, in 

particular. I would just like to reiterate here that the urban centres have not been forgotten. We‘ve spent 

five million dollars in this program of paying part of the cost of paving main streets last year, as 

compared to one million dollars in their last year of office. So I would suggest to the m from Regina 

West, if he wants more money from Regina, he should be talking to his friend for Regina East, the 

Mayor, (Mr. Baker). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — The city of Regina can obtain 50 percent of the cost of the Pasqua Street ring road 

development if they wish to ask the Government for it. They have been promised financial assistance 

from this Government for the Tuxedo Park urban renewal scheme and it is there any time they want to 

proceed. Our share of the auditorium is there for them too, if they want to get on with the job and make 

up their minds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 21, 1967 

 

532 

Mr. McIsaac: — I would almost suggest to my friend opposite, The Mayor, that he add another point to 

his ten-point program… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — …or is it a seven-point program this year, I just forget. Namely that he take more 

advantage of the program this Government has for him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — We were criticized yesterday for not establishing a municipal debenture fund, by the 

same party that flatly refused to do it when they were in office, a few years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, this Government last year did purchase 5.6 million dollars in local 

debentures, the highest amount ever purchased by the Province in any one year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — And there is more I could say on this subject, but I will leave it for a later debate. Now 

I have a few other remarks that I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, but I see that my time is short. I 

would like to comment on the homeowner grants. However, I will leave that to one of my colleagues, 

later in this debate. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this debate, I would like to first 

comment on the fine statesmanlike manner in which Mr. Woodrow Lloyd (Biggar), has conducted 

himself. He makes us proud to be Canadians. His sincerity and ability will again make him Premier of 

this fine province, some day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: —I also want to congratulate the m for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) for the wonderful 

job he did yesterday, as financial critic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the people of my constituency for placing their 

confidence in me to be the standard bearer for the next Province election. I can assure the people of my 

constituency that I will treat them all with the same degree of fairness. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

533 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, I ant to congratulate the high schools of my constituency for the large 

number of students that visited the Legislature while the House is in session. It certainly is a fine gesture 

on their part and is certainly appreciated by myself. Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of the 

House, that this year we have had a fine ski resort, that had its official opening this year, the Minatinas 

Ski Resort, one of the finest in the province. A little more money spent up there by the Province 

Government would certainly be well appreciated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — At this time I would like to make a few comments about the Department of Highways. 

I want to thank the Minister of Highways, (Mr. Boldt) for continuing the work on No. 3 from Melfort to 

Birch Hills. This project was started under the CCF Government and is proceeding very slowly, but I 

think eventually it will get there. I hope it will continue until it is finished. The recapping of a section of 

Birch Hills to St. Louis last year was well appreciated I must say, but only because of two years of bad 

neglect, something had to be done. Now in regards to No. 20 from Humboldt to Domremy, under the 

CCF Government we had two patrols doing a good job of maintenance. When the Liberals took over 

they were going to save some money, so they took one patrol off. This highway got so badly neglected 

that in the fall of 1966 the present Government saw fit to replace the patrol on this stretch of road, only 

after serious damage had been done to the grades, Mr. Speaker, and a serious loss of money to the 

taxpayers and a rough road to drive on. 

 

On the question of the Wakaw cut-off to Saskatoon, I know that a lot of people in my constituency are 

interested in this stretch of road. I want to read the question that was placed on the paper by myself. I 

asked the following question of Mr. Boldt (Minister of Highways): ―Was the field work done in 1966 on 

the location of the so-called Wakaw cut-off from No. 5 Highway east to Saskatoon to No. 2 Highway?‖ 

The answer is ―no‖. So I want to say that when the Government wants to proceed with this project that 

it‘s going to have my whole-hearted support. 

 

Now speaking about education I think I can better make my feelings known by reading a letter that 

appeared in one of our local papers. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to read this letter from my local paper, 

The Wakaw Recorder, Feb. 2, 1967. 

 

  Dear Sir 

 

The citizens of the St. Isidore School District were shocked by Mr. Steuart‘s speech given over 

television a few days ago, boasting that the Department of Education had spent seventy million 

dollars in the past years for auditoriums and other recreational activities. We were shown children 

playing ping-pong, basketball, etc. 

 

Yet, here in St. Isidore, we have 250 pupils and ten classrooms, one of those being an old 

schoolroom 100 feet away from the main building, with no toilet facilities or water. Another class 

had to find refuge in a small 22‘ x 10 ½‘ typing room. 

 

  The local board wrote to the department asking for the 



February 21, 1967 

 

534 

  construction of two classrooms. The request was denied on the grounds that there was no money. 

 

  Would things be redressed if we made this a political issue? 

 

            Jean Gaudet, 

            Bellevue, Sask. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this letter speaks very well of how the Government is spending its money. I haven‘t 

got anything against auditoriums, but I certainly think that the children of Bellevue should be 

accommodated at least with decent classrooms. There again I want to point out that what this 

Government is working on is on well-planned news releases, TV programs, a lot of bragging, no action 

and using veto power to control expense. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the 

Legislative Committee for driver safety. 

 

A lot of work has been done and I want to say it is the kind of work that I appreciate a great deal. A lot 

of work has been done and a lot remains to be done. As I said a moment ago, I am a strong believer in 

Legislative Committees as long as the Government will pay attention to them. One finding of the 

Committee is that alcohol is involved in the vast majority of accidents. So, let us look at what this 

Government has done since it came to office. Bearing in mind that we in this province collect over 

$19,000,000 of liquor profits and less than one cent out of every dollar of liquor profits is spent for the 

Bureau of Alcoholism. This year we had all kinds of accidents. This year we had a compulsory 

arbitration running into an aeroplane. Mr. Speaker, I was never able to find out whether the aeroplane 

was on the ground or in the air when it happened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Accidents are on the increase and first of all I want to point out what this Government 

has done since it took office. The first year of office, it reduced the money per student for driver 

training. Then it reduced the money for alcohol education. And then it put on a program of pushing 

liquor. Fourthly, it slapped on a penalty for being under the age of 25, which created a lot of resentment 

amongst many good drivers. Well, let me tell you what should be done since the Government is bent on 

a program of pushing liquor. I am not quarrelling about liquor outlets, but we should have a better 

program of alcohol education to help the victims of alcohol. When we look at the liquor profits of 

$19,000,000 a year and an alcohol education program of less than one cent for every dollar of liquor 

profits, it‘s a dirty shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the sales of liquor, $52,000,000 a year, one 

million dollars a week, $143,000 a day or $6,000 an hour and if they want it down to a minute, it‘s $100 

a minute. I think we should provide a better program to help those who need help. I am against 

punishing the drivers that are under the age of 25 just on account of their age. I have nothing against 

dealing with the offender, one way or the other, but I am opposed to punishing young drivers who are 

trying their best, regardless of their age. Last year the record 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

535 

of this Government and through its programs of cutting education in the first years we had the results – 

279 people killed, 56 more than in 1965. I hope that the Government will have a close look at what it 

has done in the past. When the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp) gets on television and makes a very 

pious report that it is going to do something about helping the alcohol education and driver education, I 

hope that it‘s a sincere effort. Now the provincial increase in accidents is about 11 per cent higher than 

last year. The national average has not changed very much, so there‘s your record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, talking about the population of this province, I‘m sure that this House has heard a lot about it, but 

I want to point out a few facts as it relates to my constituency. For example, the RM of Kinistino for the 

years 1961-66 had a drop of 453 persons. The RM of Invergordon according to the municipal report had 

a drop of 425 persons from the year 1964 to 1966, in two years. Young people are not only leaving the 

farms, but they are leaving the province faster than we have ever seen in the past 10 years. The cost-

price squeeze is squeezing them out. I maintain that our young people are unable to start financing 

farming and unless they inherit a farm, they cannot get established. This is a go responsibility at both the 

Provincial and Federal level. Considering that most farmers today are over the age of 50, this is a serious 

situation, Mr. Speaker, and something should be done without delay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give you another good example here of prices out of control. I‘ve got two bills 

here for machinery parts. They were bought in Saskatoon, one was bought on October 27 and one on 

August 19. For a GK2676, a chain - $13.55 in one place, and in the other place was GK2676, the same 

number - $19.17, a difference of $5.66 on one chain alone. Now this is a good example of price out of 

control. I maintain that we need a Price Review Board to lay the blame where it belongs. The big crop 

that we had last year is being gobbled up by the unbridled rising cost of farm machinery, farm supplies, 

high interest rates, high power bills, higher telephone bills and higher taxes. 

 

Another situation that is developing in this province is the farmland being purchased by people who do 

not reside in Canada. This should be investigated without delay and steps be taken to protect our young 

prospective farmers. 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — Heavy Water MacDougall. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — We‘ll keep you for another day. This session is like many other sessions. I‘ve heard, 

we can hear the Government promoting hatred between farmer and labourer. But I want to warn the 

farmer and labourer that they should not be fooled. It‘s an old Liberal trick to divide and rule. It‘s a very 

typical one. And I want to refer to the Saskatchewan Economic Review and point out to you from this 

report – the last one put out by the Government. It‘s the statistics for 1963 and it showed the difference 

between the farmer and the labourer as far as wages are concerned. In 1963, out of 36,553 returns, the 

average farmer netted $4,789. As compared with the employees, out of 136,907 returns the wages 

averaged $4,069, about $600 less for the employees than for the farmers. Now that is of those who have 

filed returns. We have other professionals here, doctors and surgeons; out of 596 returns their average 

income was $23,673 and yet the Premier the other day said they are asking for more money and he feels 

maybe they‘ve got a case. Well I‘ll tell 



February 21, 1967 

 

536 

you the farmers and the labourer have a case and it is not by trying to split them and trying to fight 

amongst each other that they are going to buy this thing much longer. 

 

I can recall the Vancouver strike. The Government at Ottawa let the problem fester as long as it could 

but when the Farmers Union and the Labour Union started to get together, what did the Federal 

Government do? They flew to Vancouver, they couldn‘t get there soon enough because here were 

farmers and labourers getting together, and when they do get together, believe you and me it is going to 

be serious for these boys across the way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — The boys and the girls that are in the labour force are our sons and daughters. Why 

should we tech them to hate? But it pays off on the other side and that‘s what they like to promote. I 

want to tell you that in this House they say they are well represented by farmers. On this side we, the 

CCF, have 11 farmers and on the other side there are 10 Liberal farmers, according to how they are 

registered with the Clerk of the Assembly. 

 

Now I would like to say a few words about Medicare. My time is moving on pretty fast. I want to say 

that I heard the Premier complain about Medicare on several occasions. Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, the 

Premier has never accepted Medicare. Deep down inside he‘s still kicking in the doors of the 

Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — This plan will not be accepted and successfully operated by people who work so hard 

against it. The sooner Medicare is back into the hands of the people who brought it into this province, 

the better off it‘s going to be. 

 

Now there is another thing that I want to mention and I don‘t want to run overtime, I want to 

congratulate the former speaker for being right on the nose. I want to say that as far as the Natural Gas 

Program, we are opposed to higher prices, but the village of Hagen would take gas if the Government 

wants to give it to them, as soon as they sign for it and even at the higher price. When we form the 

Government again, we will square the thing up with them. 

 

Now I want to bring to your attention the problem of the Saskatchewan River, the problem that was 

created by the control of the water of the Saskatchewan River Dam. There‘s a letter here that was sent to 

the Hon. Dave Boldt and, as my time is too short, I cannot read the entire letter. But I hope that the 

Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) will consider the problem that it has created in winter and in summer 

for the people living along that river, the people who have land on both sides – the ferries are not 

operating successfully in the summer time and in the winter time the ice is flooded with water – and they 

are unable to cross it. I hope that they will have a look into this matter and see that these people who live 

along the Saskatchewan River on both sides will be properly accommodated. The Government should 

get in touch with the municipalities involved and make sure that this matter is dealt with. 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

537 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the grid roads program. There are two roads in my 

constituency where the magic words were pronounced by the Premier ―was a grid road, now a 

highway.‖ They had a meeting at St. Brieux and they had all the liquid assets of the Liberal Party there. 

They said ―Well, you waited 20 years for this – the road from Muenster going through St. Brieux is now 

a highway.‖ You know you can have a lot of highways built that way in such a hurry but the CCF 

couldn‘t do it that easy. I‘d say that if you are going to take these roads over, let‘s have a realistic 

program that the Government take them over and look after them and build them up. 

 

Now, how about snow removal, winter maintenance grants and the grants to school bus roads? I‘d say it 

is a step in the right direction. But let‘s have a realistic program. At the Local Government Conference, 

Mr. McIsaac, the Minister of Municipal Affairs said that it would take at least $200 a mile to look after 

these roads properly. Well, it came up with a fifty-fifty formula using $85 which works out at $170. This 

is not realistic. Let‘s get on with the program. It‘ll be supported by the municipalities, but work it out on 

the same formula as the grid roads were worked out and I‘m sure that the municipalities will accept it. 

 

Now my time is up, I have many other things to deal with, but I want to thank you for being so kind as 

to let me speak as much as you did. I want to tell you that before I sit down. You can see by my remarks 

that I will not support the motion, I will support the amendment. 

 

Mrs. M.A. Hunt (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, this Budget I understand is the swan song for the 

Province Treasurer in that capacity and if the kind of election rumours that are floating around prove 

true, it could possibly be the swan song of the Premier also. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Hunt: — However, I would like to congratulate the Province Treasurer on the energy and the 

clarity with which he delivered his address. Now, as usual, for the Premier, the Budget was punctuated 

very freely with political propaganda. I didn‘t count how many times the word ―Socialist‖ was heard in 

that Budget, but it was with great frequency. I am not blaming the Premier for this because whenever he 

stands up to speak, be it on the hustings or be it in the Legislature, in Saskatchewan or in other parts of 

Canada or in the United States, be it in a political gathering or a non-political gathering or a convention, 

there is an automatic gadget in his brain that starts playing the old record, his theme song, ―Stagnation 

and Ruin under the Socialists.‖ Any similarity, Mr. Speaker, between that record and the true facts is 

purely coincidental. Now this is a very large Budget, Mr. Speaker, the largest ever introduced in this 

House. If the ability to spend money is a criterion of a good Budget, then the Province Treasurer gets the 

Oscar. Of course, Mr. Speaker, this is not the only important measure of a Budget, in fact, it‘s not the 

most important measure. It is how the money is spent and if it is actually going to be spent for the 

purpose for which it was voted, that‘s the real test of a budget. 

 

Members of this Legislature will recall that, when the Pub- 



February 21, 1967 

 

538 

lic Accounts were perused this year, we discovered that many projects that were announced in the 

previous Budget and announced in the previous Budget and announced with a good deal of fanfare and 

were printed in the estimates, were not proceeded with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Hunt: — The money wasn‘t spent. Seventy-five per cent of approximately $120,000 voted for 

education, voted but not spent; and as previously pointed out, for every dollar of this money that was not 

spent, we lost $3 in Federal funds; and young people had their educational opportunities lost or 

postponed. Where is that $100,000 that was budgeted for the base hospital last year in the Budget, but 

not spent. Eighty-five per cent of the $11,000 for the Sanatorium in Saskatoon, budgeted, but not spent? 

The Province Correctional Institute in Regina, $1,000,000 budgeted – 75 per cent not spent? Northern 

Housing – over $100,000 not spent. Recruitment of badly needed health personnel – 70 per cent not 

spent and I could go on and on. So, Mr. Speaker, we are going to have to wait until the new Public 

Accounts appear before we will be sure how many of the things announced in this Budget will actually 

be carried out and it isn‘t until then that we can pronounce final judgement. 

 

I must also congratulate my colleague (Mr. Blakeney), the financial critic on his magnificent address 

yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Hunt: — As he proceeded, the further he went, the more downcast the people opposite looked. In 

fact when he was finished, there wasn‘t very much left to cheer about. Of course, there were things in 

this Budget which we welcome and which we certainly will support. But there were also many 

important things which we hoped to find in the Budget that didn‘t appear. Now, Mr. Speaker, whatever 

else can be said about our Premier, no one can fairly criticize him for being an overly modest man. 

When he was speaking of the performance of other governments, he talked about the deficit in Ontario 

and Quebec and even oil-rich Alberta and the sales tax in Manitoba. As I listened to him, I was 

reminded of the Pharisees in the olden days who instead of praying ―Father forgive me a miserable 

sinner,‖ stood up in his place and prayed, ―I thank thee Lord that I am not as other men are.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Hunt: — Now if the Provincial Treasurer had raised the sales tax to five per cent and turned the 

additional revenue over to the municipalities to reduce the burden of the property tax, the total tax bill – 

and that is what really counts – would have been no more and perhaps less than under the present 

circumstances, as the influx of tourists which we expect during the Centennial Year would have helped 

to pay part of that shot/ of course I realize it is very much nicer for the Government when they can place 

the blame on someone else for raising taxes. When we were the Government, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. 

Premier was always accusing us of crying to Ottawa, ―Why don‘t you do it yourself?‖ You would hear 

that from over there time and again. Well, Mr. Speaker, who‘s crying to Ottawa now? 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

539 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mrs. Hunt: — This Budget is just full of loud wails to Ottawa and copious tears are shed all over its 

pages about the shabby treatment Ottawa has given us. Now, I admit there is some reason for complaint, 

but I do wish that the Premier would quit saying that the loss of equalization payments was due to a 

change from a have not province to a have province. He likes to pretend that since the Liberal 

Government came to power, this province has changed from a poor relation suddenly to being a rich 

uncle. Well of course, our financial critic certainly punctured that balloon and left it pretty flat. As 

pointed out to the Premier, time and time again this reduction in our equalization payment was entirely 

due to a change in formula and not related at all to a have or have not province. There is one thing I 

should congratulate the Hon. Premier on and that‘s the clever psychological technique he uses regarding 

taxes. long before the Budget was introduced, he hinted broadly across the province and in the throne 

Speech as well that increased taxes were in store for us. Then when the Budget forecast no general 

increase, he hoped to hear a sigh of relief and get an extra pat on the back. There were ominous hints in 

that budget, Mr. Speaker, that further tax increases will be necessary soon. Would it be possible, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Premier is waiting until after the election to increase taxes; that is, if he should by any 

change get in again? Surely he wouldn‘t do a thing like that. 

 

There were some peculiar things in this Budget. It was hailed by the Provincial Treasurer as a balanced 

budget but it appears that this was a misnomer. as our financial critic pointed out in his excellent address 

– I must again congratulate him – this is in reality once more a deficit Budget. Certain shenanigans and 

new accounting methods were used to make it appear balanced, and the financial critic explained those 

very carefully. When you borrow from other sources, borrow from Peter to pay Paul as he did to balance 

the Budget, you cannot fairly say that it is a balanced Budget. Mr. Speaker, I was reminded of certain 

TV commercials by finance companies, telling people who were in financial difficulties ―Borrow money 

from us – borrow more money from us and get out of debt. We‘ll consolidate your debts and get you out 

of trouble.‖ this of course is exactly what the Hon. Premier did. But when finance companies advertise, 

like the Premier, they neglect to state what the extra cost would be by using this method. And in the long 

run you find yourself in a worse position than before. This statement appears in the Budget, Mr. 

Speaker: ―In preparing the 1967 Budget, I have kept several factors in mind‖ and listed first is this one, 

―The promises made by the Liberal party in the last election.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how about the promise to include prescribed drugs under the Medical Care Plan? I 

can find no suggestion of this in the Budget. I didn‘t expect the Government to introduce a full-scale 

drug program at this session, but I had hoped that at least it might make a modest start in this direction. 

In the light of its solemn promise, it should have at least included the necessary and the pain saving 

drugs for terminal cancer patients who leave the hospital to spend what may prove to be their last days at 

home with their families. While they are in the hospital, as you know, the drugs are covered and when 

they leave, these necessary drugs may run into a staggering bill. And then there are others with long-

term illnesses requiring expensive drugs where the cost involved becomes actually catastro- 



February 21, 1967 

 

540 

phic. We could have expected that at least these two categories would have been covered. They weren‘t. 

What about the geriatric centre that was to be built in Regina? What about the fact that they were going 

to pay fifty per cent of the education tax in Regina? Not done. What about their promise to exempt 

children‘s clothing from the sales tax? Didn‘t happen, did it? 

 

It didn‘t happen, did it: I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Treasurer forgot to read over that 

list of Liberal election promises when he said a paramount consideration in preparing his Budget was 

election promises made in 1964. 

 

I want to say another work about the base hospital in Regina. You‘ve heard a lot about it over the years. 

This was an election promise of the CCF Party as well as of the Liberals, to build it at Provincial 

expense. I want to remind the Members opposite that it was a CCF Government that was responsible for 

appointing Drs. Agnew and Hartman to study the hospital needs in Regina and the vicinity, both present 

and future needs. Before that election the final report was almost ready and we were prepared as soon as 

it was ready to go ahead. If a CCF Government had been in office, that base hospital would have been 

completed or nearing completion by now. In the meantime three years have been wasted by the Liberals, 

while the shortage of hospital beds has become increasingly acute. Every year, Mr. Speaker, we‘ve 

asked questions in this House about the hospital and were given the impression that plans were 

underway. I have noticed, Mr. Speaker, though, that whenever this hospital was mentioned, the previous 

Health Minister (Mr. Steuart) began to get uneasy, to squirm in his seat, and start a process of loud 

heckling to divert attention. I know now the reason why. Although we were assured that the project was 

going ahead and actually $100,000 was in the Budget for it last year, it seems that there has been no 

decision made to build that hospital at all. 

 

When the Premier announced the base hospital the other day, I was amazed when he said, and I‘m 

quoting, ―This morning, remember, this morning, the Executive Council decided to build a base hospital 

in Regina at Province expense.‖ Now what do you think of that? 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, whenever we make a suggestion on this side of the House that calls for action, 

I heard it from the Hon. Premier again today, the stock answer from the Government side of the House 

is that old cry, ―20 years.‖ ―You had 20 years to do it and why expect us, why ask us?‖ 

 

What they are saying in effect, Mr. Speaker, is that anything the CCF failed to do when they were in 

office just isn‘t worth doing. Now that‘s a very backhanded compliment I admit, but it‘s no valid answer 

for lack of action. 

 

May I remind the Government that it has been in office for almost three years. Many changes have 

happened since then and many new and pressing needs have arisen in that time, so that it‘s a very poor 

answer to cry, ―You didn‘t do it. Why should we?‖ 

 

The Premier states in this House again and again that he goes neither right nor left. He drives right down 

the middle of the road. Well, Mr. Speaker, it‘s time he quit blocking the highway. People who insist on 

driving in the middle of the road are a real traffic hazard. 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

541 

There was a substantial decrease in social aid costs in 1966. This is because of the high rate of 

employment all across Canada and also including Saskatchewan and of course this was to be expected. 

 

We, on this side of the House, contrary to suggestions from cross the way, have always believed and 

insisted that able-bodied people should work if jobs are available, rather than being on social aid and 

we‘re glad to see that unemployment is at a low figure. 

 

But in relationship to escalating costs, Mr. Speaker, I feel that for people who are unemployed because 

of physical or mental incapacity or other reasons that are adequate, their social aid payments should 

have been raised more than they were. I don‘t think that this class of people should have to suffer great 

hardships during an inflationary period. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the question of housing which is something that has interested me 

very greatly for a long time. I was very interested in the remarks of the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

(Mr. McIsaac) on housing, and I congratulate him on the fact that he is looking at this problem and he is 

trying to make some advances along the line of housing. I would tell him that a great many of advances 

were made prior to his coming into office, which he didn‘t mention. Nevertheless I want to say that I am 

pleased that he is interested in this field. 

 

One of the greatest areas of unmet need, Mr. Speaker, in Canada and in Saskatchewan is the provision of 

housing for lower and even moderate-income groups. And when we are speaking of consumer 

protection and the rapidly escalating cost-of-living, there is no area that needs more investigation than 

that of housing. Buying a home, or perhaps renting a home, is for most people, the largest single 

investment they‘ll ever make in their lives. And when you consider the cost of building material, the 

tremendous increase in the cost of privately owned lots, the 11 per cent tax on building materials and the 

increased cost of interest on mortgages, you find that the average family is pretty well priced out of the 

market for housing altogether. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was simply appalled when the Federal Government announced that interest rates on 

National Housing mortgages were raised from 6 ¾ to 7 ¼ per cent. This was inexcusable, indefensible 

and certainly inflationary. I know the explanation that was given at the time, Mr. Speaker, but it 

certainly was not convincing to me and it was not convincing to the Economic Council of Canada, 

because this action flew directly in the face of the advice of the Economic Council of Canada. They 

stated, ―The Federal Government in the face of increasing shortages of housing in Canada is over-using 

the provision of housing as an economic regulator.‖ 

 

When the economy needed slowing down, the first thing the Government has done is to take measures to 

restrict home building; but, as the Economic Council pointed out, ―This does not solve the basic 

economic problem as the resources that go into homebuilding are not necessarily those which could 

relieve pressure in other parts of the country.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, this off again, on again, supply of money available for housing makes for lack of stability 

in the housing industry. It means that qualified and skilled personnel, who 



February 21, 1967 

 

542 

are all too few, goodness only knows, turn in discouragement and frustration to other fields of 

employment, and that fewer and fewer people want to train as electricians and plumbers, carpenters, 

people that we need so badly in this field. And this action has been taken in spite of the crying need of 

homes for Canadians. 

 

Let‘s look for a moment at the housing situation in Canada today and in our own province as well. Mr. 

Nicholson, the Minister in charge of Housing stated that there are 100,000 families living in housing 

conditions that are simply appalling. This, Mr. Speaker, is an understatement. I think it‘s inexcusable 

that this should be the case in one of the richest countries in the world. He admits that N.H.A. has failed 

dismally in providing homes for low and even moderate-income families. He said this a year ago, and 

the situation is even worse now. 

 

Housing starts were down across Canada 23 per cent in 1966, Regina was one of the worst – 42 per cent. 

and it was down at a time when it should have been up considerably to keep abreast of the backlog. 

 

Michael Wheeler, President of the Canadian Welfare Council, states that there is a present shortage of 

300,000 homes in Canada and during the next five years, Canadians will need 180,000 homes, just to 

take care of the backlog, to say nothing of new requests. Yet during 1966, the money for housing dried 

up and was diverted to other channels. He states, ―As long as housing depends on the conventional 

market for funds, it will be impossible to match the building to the needs, ―because in times of greatest 

need, money will desert the housing field and gravitate to areas of more profitable returns. This, of 

course, has certainly been borne out in 1966. 

 

I stated, Mr. Speaker, that low and even moderate-income families have been priced out of the market. 

C.M.H.A. figures support this claim. The average borrower from N.H.A. had a qualifying salary of 

$6,800. Last year 85 per cent of N.H.A. loans went to people with incomes of $10,000 and over 

$10,000. I was very shocked at the average rise in the cost of N.H.A. homes, from $16,478 a year to 

$17,402. It seems a very high average cost for N.H.A. homes. I don‘t think it‘s that high here. 

 

But compare the figures I have just given you with D.B.S. figures showing that 60 per cent of the people 

in Canada earn incomes of $6,000 or less than $6,000 a year. A very small amount, less than five per 

cent, has gone into homes for lower income people. Now without the increase in interest rates, it‘s 

obvious that the lower and even the middle-income group were priced out of the market. The annual 

increment or increase in housing is caused now by marriages of people between the ages of 20 and 24. 

They are the fastest growing group in our population and for the most part, they are in the lower or 

middle-income groups. At this age, of course, they are very highly mobile. New jobs come up, 

automation makes homes. And they are almost non-existent, in Saskatchewan, and most of Canada. 

Moderate and low rental homes is a most pressing need at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the biggest factor in the cost of a home is interest payments. Let‘s look at the dollar and 

cents cost of interest for a moment. Even at 6 ¼ per cent the interest on a $15,000 mortgage brings the 

total cost of the principal and in- 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

543 

terest to $29,500, almost the original cost of the cost of the home. But on a $15,000 home at 7 ¼ per 

cent and a 25-year mortgage, the interest alone is $21,000. To increase that interest up to 7 ¼ per cent 

means an added cost of $3,000 to $5,000 on a home. And the Home Builders‘ Association puts the 

increased cost very much higher than that. But on the $15,000 home with a 30-year mortgage, the 

interest alone comes to $21,800 and I think that‘s fantastic! 

 

When you consider that N.H.A. loans are insured and the lending agency runs no risk, if there is a loss 

the loss is born by the Government, not by the lending agency, then I say a 7 ¼ per cent interest rate is 

not interest, Mr. Speaker, it is usury. 

 

Only those with high enough incomes can qualify for N.H.A. loans. If they have to depend on other 

sources interest rate may run from 7 ¾ per cent to 8 ¾ per cent. And this was when N.H.A. loans were at 

6 ¾ per cent. Real estate experts believe that the raising of the N.H.A. rate will force conventional loan 

rates even higher. Now the reason given by the Federal authorities for increased interest rate is that there 

is a virtual withdrawal of private long-term investment funds from the residential mortgage sector. They 

blamed this situation on the fact that lending agencies could get higher interest rates elsewhere. 

 

There is no guarantee, Mr. Speaker, that raising the rate to 7 ¼ per cent will make more money 

available. Banks resist long-term loans and lending institutions can get more than 7 ¼ per cent. This 

action may only serve to force conventional interest rates even higher. Remember the purchasers of the 

home must not only pay interest and principal but also the cost of utilities, ever increasing municipal 

taxes, insurance, repairs, and so on. So who can afford to pay 7 ¼ per cent interest and buy a home? Is 

Mr. Sharp‘s idea actually meant to increase money for housing, or is it an extension of his tight money 

policy to restrict rather than to expand housing. 

 

If the Federal Government is unwilling or unable to direct a fair share of mortgage money into the 

housing field and at reasonable rates, then, Mr. Speaker, instead of penalizing home buyers by 7 ¼ per 

cent mortgages, C.M.H.C. should make money available directly to the prospective purchasers at lower 

interest rates, even if some subsidy is involved. C.M.H.C. can obtain money at much lower rates and 

thus bring down the cost. Otherwise the backlog of housing, together with new demands is going to 

become a national catastrophe. 

 

Already, Mr. Speaker, the Immigration Department is warning immigrants coming to Canada with 4 or 

more children and without an assured income of $7,500 or over to stay away from Toronto, Hamilton, 

Windsor, London and Vancouver because of the acute housing shortage in those cities. 

 

Of course, as housing becomes scarcer, rents go up. And all of this adds substantially to the high cost of 

living. A good home, Mr. Speaker, is an investment in health and stability for the most important unit in 

society and that is our families. Inadequate and slum housing is a cancer in our society. Are we going to 

perpetuate this by ineffective action on housing on all levels of government? That is the case at present. 

 

Another mater which I have raised before in this Legislature is the skyrocketing cost of building lots in 

our cities. 



February 21, 1967 

 

544 

Land speculators are increasing the cost of housing by many thousand of dollars. The president of the 

social Planning Council of Toronto stated that the price of land is rising even faster than building costs 

and labour costs and faster than any other item in our civilization, and that lack of planning and 

restrictions is an open invitation to land speculators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I ask the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) to listen particularly, this is an 

area where Province responsibility is involved. I cited instances in this House last year where city-

owned lots in Regina had sold for around $500 and privately owned lots in the same area are now selling 

for around $4,000 or more. I am told that in Toronto it is difficult to find a lot for less than $10,000. This 

is highway robbery and it should be stopped. 

 

I suggest again to the Government and I do hope that it will listen this time, I suggest that it should buy 

up land on the periphery of our cities and resell it at cost as new housing areas are developed. Our cities 

are expanding rapidly. Land is expensive now, but it‘s going to be a great deal more expensive a few 

years hence, as many other cities have found much to their sorrow. Cities haven‘t the borrowing power 

to do this, Mr. Minister. Already the Local Government Board is refusing much-needed projects because 

the borrowing power of our cities is strained. 

 

Remember, this action would help not only the homebuyer, but the taxpayers generally. In any new 

housing development, land must be set aside for schools, parks, and playgrounds, fire halls and so on. 

Substantial funds could be saved if action is taken now. I do urge such action. 

 

I would ask the Government to make a vigorous protest to Ottawa about the protest to Ottawa about the 

increased interest rate on N.H.A. mortgages and ask it to make a large sum of money available through 

C.M.H.C. at lower interest rates at present. I notice that, the Hon. Mr. Sharp has said that he‘s going to 

review these interest rates in March. Now is the time to protest before it‘s too late and before we may 

hear of another interest rise. 

 

Housing, Mr. Speaker, is primarily a matter for Provincial jurisdiction. Although much of the financing 

can be done by Ottawa, I am urging our Provincial Government to promote an educational campaign to 

stimulate more interest all across this province in the housing problem that exists in Saskatchewan. I 

would urge it to take even more advantage of Federal legislation and to promote housing construction. I 

would ask that it try to meet with some contractors and try to encourage some more limited dividend 

housing projects in this province, and make a lot of money available for that. It makes for moderate rents 

and this is important. They should spur municipal authorities to construct more subsidized housing units. 

they need a little pushing here for the lowest income groups. 

 

I am pleased to see that the Government is planning to build some rental housing. This program should 

be accelerated because the need is so great. I suggest that it could give greater encouragement to 

compulsory-operatives to enter this field. It should also, Mr. Speaker, take a look at the neglected field 

of rural housing. A vigorous housing policy would do much to create jobs in this province and would 

stimulate industry to locate here, because adequate housing at reasonable rates is one of the 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

545 

things that people look at. It is an incentive to locate industry, if adequate housing is available at 

reasonable rates. 

 

And again may I say, Mr. Speaker, it is not only in the urban centres that we need help with housing. I 

have here the Munger report. It‘s a voluminous document; it‘s very detailed; I couldn‘t begin to discuss 

all the details; I‘m sure the Minister has seen this report and has studied it. It‘s well worth studying. 

According to that report, as they point out, rural areas and small towns are in a worse plight for housing 

than even city areas and that there‘s less financial assistance available to them. 

 

They state that the greatest unmet needs in housing and in public services in Saskatchewan are in rural 

areas. They suggest that the National Housing Act could be changed to reflect more adequately rural and 

urban differences with respect to site, design, and cost and financing. 

 

And they state that low income families who would qualify for subsidized housing, if they lived in the 

city, should be given a comparable subsidy so that it would permit them to occupy better homes in their 

own community. 

 

They point out that the tendency of ongoing programs is to stop just short of reaching rural people in the 

greatest need for housing and that this much be recognized and remedied before public housing can 

accomplish what it‘s intended to accomplish in the housing field. 

 

New programs are needed. I recognize some of the problems about rural areas, the fact of the movement 

into towns and cities the fact of declining towns. But that doesn‘t mean that there aren‘t many areas 

where a bigger program of housing could be undertaken in rural areas. The report finishes by saying that 

a significant number of rural people are now living in the environment of poverty and squalor and this 

provides justification for new lines of public action. 

 

There‘s plenty of information in this report which I know calls for vigorous action on the part of the 

Government. In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, may I say this. During the years the CCF Government was in 

power, huge capital expenditures were made to bring services and facilities to our people. Generating 

capacity was quadrupled. Power stations were built at Estevan, Saskatoon and Squaw Rapids at very 

great expense. Electrical power was brought o all towns and villages and a vast program of rural 

electrification was carried out. 

 

Great pipelines were constructed and natural gas was delivered to all major cities and towns. Our worn-

out highway system was practically entirely rebuilt. A grid-road program was instituted and millions of 

dollars were spent on grid-road assistance. Telephone service was greatly extended and a microwave 

system built across the Province. 

 

Sewer and water programs for towns and hundreds of farms were instituted and assisted financially by 

the Government. Millions of dollars were spent on building grants for replacing worn out schools that 

had been badly neglected during the lean years. 

 

The University Hospital was built at a cost of 20 million 



February 21, 1967 

 

546 

dollars and our per capital hospital bed capacity was increased until we had the highest rate in Canada. 

 

Geriatric centres were built and municipalities and charitable organizations were given large grants to 

construct and to help maintain senior citizens‘ homes. Government grants were provided for subsidized 

housing in several areas. And of course, the small hospital at Yorkton was nearly completed. 

 

On top of this big program the staggering load of debt that hung over the Province when we took office 

in 1944 was virtually wiped out by the CCF Government. 

 

I state these things for one purpose. I want to remind you that many of these large capital expenditures 

will not have to be repeated for some years to come. And as a result of these tremendous advances, 

made under the CCF, money should now be available for the equally important field of housing, 

especially increased housing for senior citizens and active participation in public housing programs. 

 

Legislation was passed, as the Minister mentioned, last year to permit the Government to enter the 

housing field directly. We asked for this legislation for years and it didn‘t come until last year. It 

provides for a wide scope of action as well as major financial assistance from the Federal Government. 

There is a challenge here, Mr. Speaker, a challenge for our Provincial Government and it‘s a challenge 

that should be met. And there could be no more worthy Centennial project than a vigorous housing 

program for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for reasons I have stated and for reasons so well outlined by our financial critic I will 

support the amendment but not the Budget. 

 

Mr. Whelan (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, I must congratulate the Premier and Provincial Treasurer 

(Mr. Thatcher) on the manner in which he delivered his Budget address. Our financial critic, my 

colleague from Regina West as usual gave a debating exhibition second to none. His effectiveness was 

evident on the faces of Members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‘m proud to be associated with the Hon. Lady Member (Mrs. Hunt) who has just taken her 

seat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — She is a credit to our party, to Saskatchewan, to Regina, to all people in public life. I 

regret very much that she has decided not to contest the next election. She certainly has served the 

people of Saskatchewan very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget will not solve the problems or meet the needs of the people whom I represent. 

My riding, Regina North, which I am proud to represent, is a typical cross-section of an expanding 

Saskatchewan city. No one within its boundaries is considered wealthy; they are either in the middle or 

low-income group. 

 

They vary from newly married couples to senior citizens. Their problems and their needs call for 

legislation and Govern- 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

547 

ment action to combat the cost of living, to do something about the cost of insurance, to promote traffic 

safety, to increase the income of hospital works, and to provide educational facilities for secondary 

school students. The cost of living has destroyed the pay cheque to some degree and forced those on 

limited incomes to eat less expensive foods in order to exist. Little money is spent on entertainment and 

clothing is made to do by patching and remodelling. Often the only source of money to pay debs has 

been the high-pressure finance companies who have been allowed to operate unimpeded during the past 

year. This has been the case for a long time but there is hardly any explanation that I can make to my 

constituents, on behalf of the present Government, to those who have borrowed during the past years 

and who have been forced to pay 20 per cent, 23 percent, 25 per cent interest rates, when the party on 

this side of the House introduced a Bill one year ago for the disclosure of interest rates but that Bill was 

headed off and boarded by helpful Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Small luxuries, like an odd glass of beer, or the use of a telephone, economies that a 

low-income person can hardly afford, will disappear under the Liberals. The price of beer, the price of a 

telephone, the failure to disclose interest rates condemn this Government. In no way can I, as an 

objective representative, interpret policies of the Government as in the best interests of my constituents. 

 

However, there is no more obvious neglect of the consumer than the unjustified increase in the cost of 

living due to the increase in insurance rates in the city of Regina. We are told that there is competition in 

the insurance business, but where is it? There is such tremendous competition among the insurance 

companies that the rates are all the same, the coverage is all the same, the deductibles are all the same. 

When the Government opposite was elected, one paid 25 cents per $100 for three years for fire and 

extended coverage insurance in Regina. You now pay 35 cents per $100 for three years. The policy you 

bought before was a $25 deductible policy, now it is a $50 deductible, except for fire, lightning and 

smoke. If a door is blown off by wind and it costs $52 to repair, the insurance company pays $2 and the 

consumer now pays $50. Before, you could delete the $25 deductible on a policy for a $10 flat fee. No 

longer is this possible unless you pay a very high rate under a different type of policy. We believe in 

competition. We‘re so strong for competition, they say, that we now write exactly the same policies as 

everyone else, to the detriment of the consumer in the city of Regina. 

 

Last year in this House I said that in some areas insurance rates would be increased 50 per cent. 

―Socialist arithmetic‖, I was told. All you have to do is buy a policy. I suggest to any Member of this 

House who wishes to, that he buy a personal property floater policy in the city of Regina. The standard 

rate for that policy, prior to the competitive, moneymaking attitude of Members opposite, when 

protection was the motive, the price was $40 for $6,000 coverage. In a single family dwelling $6,000 is 

an approximate average for personal property coverage. Six thousand dollars will cover the average 

household furniture, appliances, clothing, books, tools, jewellery, fur costs for an average family. This 

cost under the previous Government, $40, was 



February 21, 1967 

 

548 

arrived at as follows: $7.50 per $1,000 for the first $4,000, or $30; $5.00 per $1,000 for the next $2,000. 

This came to $10 for a total of $40 for three years coverage. 

 

What is the rate now? The rate now, Mr. Speaker, is $11 per $1,000 for the first $5,000 for a total of 

$55, and $6 per $1,000 after that. So for the average $6,000 coverage, the cost is $61. This increase from 

$40 to $61 for $6,000 worth of coverage is an increase of 52 ½ per cent. And if you apply the rate to a 

$5,000 policy, the cost is $55; before it was $35. This represents an increase of 57 per cent. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Shame, shame. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — If you rent a house in Regina and want coverage on a single unit dwelling and you 

want the coverage for personal property, this is the coverage that you buy. If you live in your own home 

and you want your belongings completely covered, you buy a personal property floater. This is an 

increase of 52 ½ per cent or 57 per cent in the cost of all personal property floater policies in the five 

and six thousand dollar bracket in Regina City. There are thousands of them. 

 

This is what the Government opposite, is doing about the cost of living for consumers, but the people 

who are paying 52 ½ per cent more or 57 per cent more for their policy are in for a real shock if they 

have a claim. The deductible before was $15 and this applied to such a claim as mysterious 

disappearance. The deductible has been raised to $25. If you lose an overcoat for instance, well, $25 

that‘s about what a used overcoat would be worth. This protection is extremely limited, as you can see, 

and makes the difference often times between having a claim and not having a claim. It applies to such 

items as bicycles; it applies to radios left in cars. A great number of claims are in this area, and in this 

area the deductible has been increased 66 2/3 per cent from $15 to $25 thereby reducing the coverage. 

 

But the worst and most unbelievable blank in the personal property floater – and this is a coverage that 

has sold thousands of policies particularly in the Hillsdale and Whitmore Park areas of Regina – was the 

section in the old policy that protected the insured from a flood caused by a back-up of the drainage 

system. Anyone who lives in Regina is well aware of the flash floods which cause back-ups. 

Government Insurance built a reputation and gave to people in Hillsdale and Whitmore Park particularly 

protection from this possible hazard. This clause has been struck out completely, and in policies written 

during the past year, it was left out. So, if someone comes home from a holiday and finds their furniture 

floating around in the rumpus room – and this can happen as I am sure the Hon. Member for Regina 

South is well aware – there is no insurance under this competitive new personal property floater. But the 

price is up, the deductible has been increased by 66 2/3 per cent, the sewer back-up clause has been 

completely removed. The price has been increased 52 ½ per cent, and they are making money. And if 

the unprotected consumers of Regina south have a flash flood between now and the election date, and 

they have these policies covering their personal property, I predict that there will be a new Member for 

Regina South. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

549 

Mr. Whelan: — There is a rumour among the insurance people all over Regina that the Government has 

realized that it is politically vulnerable in this area, and they are thinking in terms of putting the sewer 

back-up clause in the contract again, to protect the constituents who might possibly have flooded 

basements, for an added 10 cents per $100. Therefore, on a $6,000 personal property floater policy, if 

they put this clause back, you will pay an additional 10 cents per $100 and your personal property 

floater policy will cost you a total of $67 and there is the higher deductible than in the old policy of $40 

which you bought back in 1964. The personal property floater policy with this new clause in it, with the 

clause for the extra 10 cents, would now cost you $67 for $6,000 coverage, or $60 for $5,000 coverage 

with less protection. A 67 ½ per cent increase in the price for $6,000 or 71 per cent increase for $5,000 

coverage in the price and a higher deductible. 

 

The agents themselves are not hurting the consumers because the commission, Mr. Speaker, for a jubilee 

policy has been reduced from 30 per cent to 25 per cent, so the consumers who are buying the protection 

can‘t blame the agents. 

 

One farmer after another has told me of the fantastic increase in his farm home policy. People who have 

cottages have repeated to me the increase in their rates and the lack of coverage. With limited coverage 

and a 52 ½ per cent or 57 per cent increase in cost for a personal property floater, it is no wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office is making money. But, Mr. Speaker, the 

consumer is being ignored, as a matter of fact he is being punch in the teeth. Every customer in this city 

who buys insurance is being charged unduly for his insurance. The minute the party on this side of the 

House is elected, the insurance rates charged by SGIO will be established by the people of the Province 

of Saskatchewan in accordance with the loss record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Rates and policies will be written by the people of Saskatchewan and not by the free 

enterprise insurance buddies of the Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to turn for a moment to traffic safety. Time after time, 

Government officials have appeared on television lamenting the fact that two million dollars per month 

has been spent on highway traffic accidents and death benefits and injuries. We are told that drivers 

themselves are to blame, but pouring millions into highway traffic accidents without considering a 

fraction of the expenditure for prevention, is as illogical as trying to bale out a bath tub without turning 

off the tap. 

 

Something has to be done to prevent accidents. The record of Saskatchewan for traffic accidents last 

year was the worst that it has ever been. None of us can be proud of the fact that 226 people died in 

1965, and according to the latest statistics, 282 died as a result of traffic accidents in 1966. The people 

who died weren‘t ready to die; a few were elderly people, some 



February 21, 1967 

 

550 

of them were young housewives, some were young children, some not old enough to have completed 

elementary school; some had University degrees, some were farmers, many were fathers with children. I 

have interviewed some of those who lost a member of their family in a traffic accident. There are 58 

Members in this Legislature. Almost five times our number were killed on the highways of 

Saskatchewan last year, and the increase over 1965 was almost the total number of those seated in this 

Assembly. 

 

What do we get? What sort of answers are we getting? We have Cabinet Ministers appearing on TV 

twisting their hands and talking about two million dollars per month paid out for damage in traffic 

accidents. There are a number of programs I suggest that we might try. first, we have to have research 

facilities, properly staffed and financed, and when I say properly staffed, I mean spending an 

infinitesimal amount compared to the losses due to traffic deaths and injuries. But properly staffed to 

find out: was it the driver? was it the vehicle? was it the highway? was the driver drinking? was he 

asleep? Present research facilities that are available are not satisfactory, they are inadequate and 

inconclusive. To talk about prevention deaths on our highway without adequate research is like blindly 

prescribing soda and water without examining the patient. 

 

Last year SGIO Automobile Accident Fund paid $140,000, or thereabouts, according to their statement 

for driver training. That was in the year 1965. We are told in the press and on TV by the Minister of 

Education (Mr. Trapp) that $200,000 will be spent this year. Since the $140,000 will probably not be 

made available for driver training, this means an increase of $60,000 for driver training, if what the 

Minister of Education has been saying on television is correct. We are going to be taxed to the tune of 

$200,000 or more, but we are going to spend only $60,000 more on driver training. 

 

Statistics show that 17,000 young people in our schools become 16 and are eligible for driver training 

each year. Others who should take driver training, who are outside the schools, older than 16, would 

probably run the total to 20,000. We are going to train them for $10 each – this means 20 hours in the 

classroom and hours behind the wheel of a compulsory arbitration. If the figure quoted is correct, $10 

isn‘t adequate - $20 isn‘t adequate, as a matter of fact the students themselves are questioning the 

proposal. It is unreasonable and not the least bit feasible to suggest that a driver-training program can be 

undertaken for the figure that is being quoted. There are those who will present facts and figures to show 

that the minimum amount to cover the program would be $40 per student. At the present time it is 

obvious that the parents will have to foot the bill and that those for whom driver training is most 

essential, will not necessarily receive instruction. 

 

Driver training should be made compulsory. The reason for this is quite evident. At the present time 

those who take training have fewer accidents and fewer violations. Those who don‘t take training on a 

voluntary basis are the violators. Although they think they are good drivers, their record proves they 

need the training. 

 

Anxious to explain away feeble efforts to prevent highway deaths, there are those who try to hide behind 

the platitude of more cars and more miles. We should not forget that roads are supposed to be built 

better, that vehicles are supposed to be better and that we could train the driver. 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

551 

Let us look for a moment at the more-cars-more-roads excuse. If we can‘t do anything because there are 

more miles driven by more cars, then following this reasoning, the cure would be to prevent people from 

driving and limit the miles they drive. Anyone knows that this is impractical, unreasonable and not 

feasible. The Government has to face up to the fact that there are more cars. That we do travel more 

miles, and starting with these facts, we have to work on programs that will prevent accidents, injuries 

and deaths on the highways. Driver testing, driver improvement clinic and vehicle testing are all 

programs that will help save lives. 

 

In the Province of British Columbia, outside the city of Vancouver, 10 per cent of accidents are caused 

by vehicle defects such as bad brakes, defective steering, etc. In the city of Vancouver, where vehicle 

inspection every six months is compulsory, four per cent of the accidents are caused by vehicle defects. 

This six per cent reduction represents lives saved. 

 

There is a need to provide bursaries also for the study of safety engineering of cars and farm tractors. 

These funds should be made available in order to put to work these young people in our universities who 

are engineers in order that we may have them study these problems. In the area of tires, automobile tires 

alone, there is a need for safety standards. There are no research facilities to provide the information, no 

one knows how many deaths have been caused because automobile tires were defective. The entire 

vehicle itself has to be engineered from a safety point of view. Our Government in purchasing vehicles 

can insist on minimum safety standards. 

 

But there is one area that must have immediate and special attention and that is the area of the drinking 

driver. In many countries it is considered a social error to offer anyone driving an automobile a drink of 

liquor. In the Scandinavian countries, anyone driving a vehicle can have no more than .05 per cent 

reading of alcohol in the blood stream. Research and public acceptance may eventually lead us to 

exactly the same percentage that a large percentage of our accidents are caused by the use of alcohol. It 

is imperative that we do something, immediately, to prevent anyone with .08 per cent alcohol in their 

blood stream driving a vehicle in the Province of Saskatchewan. I am well aware of the fact that 

enforcement of this has some legal complications. There are some people who would wait until the 

Federal Government acts. My confidence in the Federal Government‘s ability to act promptly has long 

since been shattered. As a matter of fact, hundreds of people could be killed on the highways while we 

wait for Federal legislation in this field. It is, therefore, my firm conviction, and I have good legal 

company in this respect, that there are legal methods and legislation that can be brought into play on a 

province basis that will prevent someone driving who has .08 per cent alcohol in his blood. The person 

who drives in this condition is a danger to everyone on the highway, and a hazard to himself. Strict 

enforcement in this area, together with driver training, vehicle testing, and driver testing, could cut down 

the tragic deaths, and reduce the two million dollar expenditure every month that we have heard about so 

continuously and so often. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public is out of patience with a Government that continually gripes about traffic 

accidents and continually presents increases in traffic deaths but sits idly by and only wrings its hands. 

Unless this Budget has written into it 



February 21, 1967 

 

552 

substantial figures for research, driver training, and control of impaired driver, then I say the 

Government opposite is shirking its duty and is failing to protect citizens who drive an automobile on 

our highways. One dollar spent on traffic safety may save $10 in vehicle repairs, $50 in wages and it 

may save a life. A compulsory arbitration can be replaced, injuries can heal, but if a life is lost, it cannot 

be replaced. Saskatchewan needs a highway safety program complete in every detail. This is not an 

unnecessary expenditure, it is a financial investment; it is a life and death matter, a matter of 282 deaths 

in 1966 – an increase of 55 over the number of deaths in the previous year. 

 

There are certain people in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, who cannot meet the cost of living, whether it 

is because of increased telephone rates, increased prices for food, clothing or rent. These are the people 

who have had the lid put on them, and I mean the legislative lid put on them. They are the people who 

work for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, members of the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers 

union; they are the people who work in the hospitals. Everyone knows it is difficult to get hospital staff, 

everyone knows that hospitals are short-staffed and as a matter of fact some wings of our hospitals have 

been closed because of such a shortage and a shortage of money to pay the staff adequately. but now the 

lid has been put on these people and while the manufacturer and the owner of the corporations who 

manufacture foodstuffs can raise his price at will, these people are being coerced and subjugated by 

legislation, vicious legislation which forbids them the right to bargain collectively. Suddenly we will 

find that our hospitals cannot operate because there is no staff, because the staff will not stand for the 

second-rate position to which they have been relegated. They will quietly leave and when that happens, 

full credit and full blame should be laid at the doorsteps of the Members opposite. 

 

The homeowner in my riding has other problems as well. If his children want to attend a technical 

institute and the young people in the secondary schools in Regina North have indicated that two-thirds 

of those who do not plan to go to university would like to attend a technical institute, there is no 

technical institute for them in Regina and no space available for them in Moose Jaw. The Regina 

Chamber of Commerce has recommended a technical institute for Regina and set its reasons in a letter 

dated April 19, 1966, to the Premier. I quote some of them: 

 

Industrial expansion is contingent upon a number of factors of which the availability of skilled 

personnel is a major consideration. 

 

Another, 

 

The present facilities in Regina consisting of technical high schools and the evening classes do not 

adequately fill the needs. 

 

Another reason, 

 

Residents of Regina, seeking pre-employment training or up-grading their skills, are considerably 

inconvenienced by being obliged to travel to other cities in the province for their training. This 

geographical block can result in many persons not undertaking training. A technical and vocational 

training institute in Regina could provide trade training in addition to courses in a var- 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

553 

   iety of vocations, vocations which are not now sufficiently available in the province. 

 

But the Government opposite, Mr. Speaker, has fiddled and fooled with the educational opportunities of 

young men and young women who live in the homes in my riding. If they want to go to university, 

grants in this area have not kept pace with university grants in other parts of Canada. Tuition fees have 

been raised. In my riding the possibility of secondary school graduates attending university is becoming 

more remote each year the Liberal Government is in power. 

 

In the Budget Speech the Premier brags about cutting down on social aid and social welfare 

expenditures. Well, Mr. Speaker, recipients of social aid and social welfare are still here. Elderly people 

still need attention, still need care and nursing homes, but where the former Government paid for this, 

now assets are seized, investigations are made and relatives are forced to sign. It is no wonder there is a 

reduction in the payment being made for social aid. Foster mothers are forced to compete with the 

tremendous rise in the cost of living and are inadequately compensated. There is a desperate need for an 

increase in the payments for the care of foster children. Increases because of the rise in the cost of living 

have been made in other provinces, but, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Government does not have 

these humanitarian instincts. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, it has been a long, long time in Saskatchewan history since people who needed an 

elementary school were denied such a school. But this has happened in Regina. The School Board 

agreed that this building should be built, the people were prepared to put out the money, but six, seven 

and eight year old children were denied an elementary four-room school in the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that Regina residents are putting up approximately $35 per capita in 

gasoline tax – this totals approximately $4.5 million – the main arteries used through the city, such as 

Pasqua Street are a desperate hazard, and the over-taxed people of Regina are asked to put up 50 per 

cent of the cost to build connector roads between Highway No. 11 and Highway No. 1, in spite of the 

fast that they put up $4,500,000 in gasoline tax. Now, Mr. Speaker, apparently it is all right to build a 

four-lane highway aimed at a cattle ranch west of Moose Jaw, but the desperately over-loaded, 

dangerously narrow artery which is Pasqua Street in Regina, is completely ignored. The combination of 

its narrowness and the railway crossings adds up to a serious traffic condition. when you consider the 

contribution in gasoline tax made by Regina Citizens, this is outright discrimination and callous 

indifference. The situation was bad in 1964, the traffic on this artery has doubled since then, and the 

population in the area Pasqua Street serves has increased rapidly, and yet the problem is completely 

ignored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to ask me to vote for this Budget would be asking me to vote for an outrageous increase, 

an unjustified increase in insurance rates, an unwarranted increase in telephone rates, and unjustifiable 

increase in the cost of living. It would mean endorsing a sit-tight, do-nothing traffic safety program, 

endorsing an Education Department that refuses a technical institute, that raises university fees and a 

Local Government Board that vetoes construction of elementary schools. Mr. Speaker, it would be a 

vote to endorse payment by relatives for 



February 21, 1967 

 

554 

senior citizens who are unable to look after themselves, and confiscation of their estate if they are 

mentally ill. It would be failure on my part to represent the hundreds of young people, senior citizens 

and residents of my constituency whose family needs have been ignored by the Government opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am opposed to the motion; I shall support the amendment. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this Debate, I find 

myself in a rather awkward position. In gauging my time to enter debate at the beginning of the session 

on Wednesday, I find a peculiar pattern developing. I find that the people in the Opposition are 

challenging the Government on this Budget and the people in the Government are not responding to the 

challenge. Now this could lead me to some speculation in a couple of areas. One, the Government 

Members are not answering the challenge because they are interested in getting out of the House. Now 

for what reason I don‘t know. the other would be that they can‘t support the Budget. They can‘t put 

themselves in the position of supporting the Budget and I‘m talking about the backbenchers and not 

talking about the Executive Council. Now such a magnificent Budget as put forward by the Provincial 

Treasurer should have provoked enthusiastic support from the backbenchers and judging by the 

dispirited attack put forward today by the Honourable Member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) it‘s 

evident from his remarks and others on that side of the House that our debaters are striking at the very 

faults of this Budget and I think they are doing a very good job. I must congratulate the Honourable 

Lady Member from Regina (Mrs. Hunt) for her brilliant and well-brought-out and well-delivered 

address this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon City): — I cannot let this opportunity go by without saying something 

about the Hon. Member for Regina West (Mr. Blakeney) who acted as the financial critic. I think he did 

a magnificent job and I‘ll be looking forward to hearing him in further debates. Mr. Speaker, as I said, I 

was gauging my time to speak tomorrow about the beginning of the session and for that reason I would 

be leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 RE: MUNICIPAL LOAN AND DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington) moved, seconded by Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon City): 

 

That this Legislature recognizes the difficulties being experienced by local governments in the sale 

of municipal debentures and urges the Government of Saskatchewan to investigate the feasibility 

of establishing a Municipal Loan and Development Fund to assist with the purchase of municipal 

debentures. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, for several months now local governments have been experiencing difficulty in 

obtaining the necessary credit and this is the reason that I have presented this Resolution on the order 

paper because I feel that it is a problem which needs 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

555 

attention and which this Government is ready to take action upon. In many cases projects have been 

built but the local government now finds itself unable to sell the debenture issue in order to refinance 

temporary credit at banks and through credit unions and so forth. Mr. Speaker, in many cases local 

governments have gone ahead with local public works, approval granted from the Local Government 

Board. The program was usually financed for a short term at the bank. Now, we find, Mr. Speaker, 

months later in many cases when the debentures are printed and offered for sale that the Local 

Government Board is unable to attract buyers. However, Mr. Speaker, this is a situation which not only 

prevails in this province but occurs across Canada. A substantial list could be made of projects which 

have been deferred due to the lack of ability to obtain the necessary funds by financing. 

 

The problem of inflation and the rising cost of living in the past year has been an acute one. This 

situation of course calls for action to reduce spending in the areas where these rising costs are most 

prevalent. This, Mr. Speaker, obviously in the past year has been the construction sector of the economy. 

The result is that action must be taken to spread this construction over a greater period of time. The most 

effective way to do this of course is the use of higher interest rates and therefore a reduction of credit 

available. This involves a monetary policy of the Central Bank and our friends opposite, the NDP would 

like to make us think that there is some way that you can have easy credit and not have inflation at a 

time when we hit full employment. This of course, Mr. Speaker, is absolute nonsense because no one 

has yet devised a method of checking inflation and having easy credit at the same time. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to emphasize in speaking to this Resolution that the Local Government Board has been doing 

a good job under the circumstances. 

 

However, I have presented this Resolution because I feel that now is the time for a new type of action to 

be taken that would, Mr. Speaker, help improve the method in which local government finances are 

made available. Such a plan, I am convinced involves three objectives. The first is funds must be 

available at a reasonable rate of interest, the second is that funds are available and must be available on a 

continuous basis, and the third is that credit cannot be over-extended beyond what can safely be repaid 

by the local government that has borrowed the money. The previous Government, Mr. Speaker, has 

talked long and loud about this matter, but when they were in office during their years previous to this 

Government they did absolutely nothing to improve the situation. 

 

I would like for a few moments to review the functions of the Local Government Board because as a 

group they have been coming in for some very undue criticism. The Board is constituted as an 

independent three-man Board appointed by Order-in-Council for two years and is eligible for 

represented-appointment. It has been doing a good job with the facilities it has to operate with, but in 

this respect there is room for improvement to add to the staff and the facilities which they now have. I‘d 

like to emphasize mps that the Board develops its own policy and in general accepts responsibility for it. 

In this respect it is the Board which develops the policies and it is not the Province Government. The 

Opposition had time after time attempted to confuse the thinking on this question and has attempted to 

place the policy decisions at the level of the Government and this of course, Mr. Speaker, is untrue. I 

would again like to emphasize 



February 21, 1967 

 

556 

it is the Local Government Board that has been determining the policy in regard to credit in this 

province over the past number of years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to elaborate for a moment on what the Board‘s policies are, and how a 

new plan may be of some assistance to the municipalities that need credit so badly. The new plan would 

not alter to a very great degree the purposes of supervising credit for which the Board was set up. For a 

period of time now, money for various projects has been difficult to get and this is admitted by 

everyone. But first, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that this money is being difficult to get is that the 

cost of money is high. And the cost of money is high because there has been a need to check the 

inflationary pressures that have been quite prevalent, particularly in the construction industry. The 

second reason, Mr. Speaker, for the Board‘s present policy is that there are some areas in Saskatchewan 

where debt has been rising at a tremendous pace and there is a need for levelling off borrowing and a 

very great need of caution. The third reason for the present Board‘s policies, Mr. Speaker, is that there 

has been a tremendous backlog of debentures built up. This at the very minimum was 25 to 30 million 

dollars and in actual fact was higher. During the present period which may be called a period of caution 

which started last summer, the backlog has been reduced substantially. It is the feeling of the Board that 

interest rates were too high for any further borrowing and therefore any projects other than those of an 

urgent nature should be postponed. The Board now feels that this is a temporary situation and it looks 

forward to the future with optimism. A sign of improvement is that the Government of Canada bond 

interest rates are now lower. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the foregoing that I have mentioned illustrate some of the problems that the Local 

Government Board must face. They also indeed illustrate the need of some type of municipal financing 

which will ensure a supply of credit at reasonable rates for developing municipal projects. While there is 

a drastic need for such a plan, it would have to be of considerable magnitude to supply the required 

funds. Borrowing I am told would be estimated at approximately $50,000,000 per year. Saskatchewan 

municipalities now have approximately $240,000,000 borrowed and this is expected to rise to probably 

in the neighbourhood of $500,000,000 over the next ten years or so. It has been suggested that if the 

Province – and this is suggested in many quarters – borrowed all of the required money on behalf of the 

municipalities that a lower rate of interest could be obtained. This, however, would only involve the 

Province accepting the responsibility of the debt instead of the municipalities. The result would be that 

the Province‘s credit rating would be jeopardized to a certain extent. In effect, Mr. Speaker, what this 

would do would be a load on the Province‘s credit rating rather on the credit rating of the municipalities. 

 

I‘d suggest, Mr. Speaker, that one of the best ways that a fund may be set up is that the Canada Pension 

Plan funds be used for this purpose. At present, Canada Pension Plan funds are being used in the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and in Government Telephones. However, the use of Canada Pension 

Plan funds, while it would impose an obligation on the province to repay it, would be a different type of 

obligation than would credit borrowed by the Province from individual investors. I say this because the 

funds that would be necessarily repaid to the Federal Government would, Mr. Speaker, in the case of a 

catastrophe to the 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

557 

Province or a situation developing in which repayment is difficult, probably be renegotiable over a 

period of years. This would in effect place a lower burden on the Province‘s credit rating, because I 

sincerely believe that the Province‘s ability to repay over the longer term is very good. On the other 

hand, the Province if it borrows the necessary funds from private investors, when these funds become 

due the Province must meet the obligation on that specific date. Therefore, I think the use of Canada 

Pension Plan funds has a great advantage that it would place less burden on the Province‘s credit rating 

because there would be a better opportunity for renegotiation of repayment, if such was necessary. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, our society has been placing increased emphasis on the use of credit. Governments 

have set up all sorts of types of credit; for example, the Provincial Government has a policy in 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, the Farm Credit Corporation, the Federal Agency 

set up to develop credit and there are certainly many, many other instances in which credit is made 

available for all sorts of business, for farming and for practically any type of operation. Then, surely, 

Mr. Speaker, it follows that the Government should develop a plan that would supply a continuous flow 

of credit at reasonable rates of interest to our local government. And in developing such a policy, I 

would suggest that this policy still involves the local people to the greatest degree. We should still 

develop the local bond market as much as we can because I‘m sure that we all are convinced that we 

must involve as much local participation as possible and that it is very important that we sell as many 

bonds on the local market as possible, because this is one source of funds that, by encouraging 

Canadians to invest in their own province and in their own country, we help to retain our resources 

under Canadian control to the greatest degree. It is also necessary that a good deal of this money still be 

raised at the local level simply because this is a source of funds within the province which should be 

tapped and which would be difficult to secure elsewhere. I suggest, therefore, Mr. Speaker, that this type 

of a plan still ensure that the local government, that is requiring the source of credit, still be required to 

sell a certain portion of the bond issue. This of course is presently done and should be continued. This 

year the Provincial Government did materially assist local governments. As the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) said this afternoon the Provincial Treasurer bought approximately 5.6 million 

dollars worth of local bonds. This of course was the greatest amount ever. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that this Resolution is before this Assembly because there is a critical need for a type of plan 

that will involve credit at a stable interest rate over a period of time so that local government projects 

can be planned in advance and can be ensured that they will not be partly constructed or partly 

developed and then find them in a situation with no money. Today our local governments are providing 

many of the important services that are provided by governments. In the fields of health, education, 

recreation and the general servicing of property, water and sewer, streets, sidewalks and so on, it is the 

local government that is still supplying the service to the people of this province and this country. 

Therefore, I urge that the Government at the very most opportune time develop a plan that will ensure 

that the supply of funds to local governments be on a continuous basis at a reasonable rate of interest so 

that all projects that are so important to everyone in the field of services provided by local governments 

would continue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 21, 1967 

 

558 

Mrs. Sally Merchant (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, as the seconder of the motion I would be very 

happy to speak on our particular case in the city of Saskatoon that we are greatly in need of some 

measure like this considering the vast expansion and the necessity for services up there, but I would 

prefer to speak at another time, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 RE: RAIL LINE ABANDONMENT 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose) moved, seconded by Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to maintain through appropriate means 

a liaison with the new Canadian Transportation Commission to ensure that the effects of rail 

abandonment on Saskatchewan communities are minimized, and that the transportation network 

that evolves will meet the long-term requirements of Saskatchewan‘s changing and expanding 

economy; and to make available the services of such province government agencies as the 

department of Municipal Affairs and the department of highways to attempt to provide adequate 

alternative transportation and communication facilities to local communities that lose rail service. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the issue of rail rationalization or rail abandonment continues to be of concern to 

the citizens of many areas in this province. In 1965 and again last year we debated Resolutions in this 

House that urged the Government of Canada to permit no abandonment of rail lines that are essential to 

the communities that they serve, and further that the power of the branch rationalization authority be 

broadened to include mandatory public representation. The Bill C120 about which we were concerned at 

that time has been replaced by Bill C231 which has been dealt with by the Government of Canada and 

has become law. The original Bill C120 was found to be entirely unsatisfactory. The Bill failed to 

emphasize the rationalization approach to the problem and ignored the social and economic 

consequences that would follow abandonment. The only criteria for abandonment were railway 

operating costs. The responsibilities of the Rationalization Authority were limited to a determination of 

the timing of abandonment of any line. The people of Saskatchewan and the people in the west generally 

disagreed with this approach. Representations by this Province and other Provinces, mainly the western 

Provinces and the Maritimes were made to Ottawa voicing disapproval of the branch land legislation in 

Bill C120. Objections to the legislation were also set out in Saskatchewan‘s policy statement which was 

made public in February 1965. Mr. Speaker, I‘m going to table the policy statement of the Government 

of Saskatchewan on Bill C120 which is dated February 3, 1965. As a consequence of these several 

representations, the Federal Government introduced Bill C231. 

 

The legislation contained in Bill C231 in so far as branch line abandonment is concerned is a vast 

improvement over the terms of the previous Bill. The new Bill provides the means for orderly 

abandonment of uneconomic branch lines in the province. 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

559 

Mr. Speaker, this is a start toward allowing the railways to improve overall operating efficiencies. It is 

also a start toward reduction of costs which will lead to the final elimination of the $110,000,000 

subsidy which is now being paid to the railways. In general, Bill C231 emphasizes the concept of 

rationalization in the whole question of uneconomic branch lines. Also, the area approach method of 

studying rail lines is introduced. As an example of the area study, I would imagine that the whole area 

lying west of Saskatoon between the North and South Saskatchewan Rivers might be used in such a 

study. My understanding is that all transportation media in that area will be reviewed in order to 

determine the economic effects of abandonment of one or more of the branch lines in that area. A third 

important provision of the new Bill C231 is to provide opportunity for everyone concerned to be heard. 

Our Resolutions of 1965 and 1966 and our Government‘s subsequent action in this regard have borne 

fruit. I wish at this time to table a submission by the Government of the Province of Saskatchewan to the 

House of Commons Standing Committee on Transport and Communications, dated November 1, 1966. 

The latter submission, which I have tabled and which is public information, provides ample proof of this 

Government‘s concern with this legislation. 

 

This submission which has been referred to by our good friends Opposite as being anaemic, perhaps 

requires some explanation. Prior to the preparation of the November 1 submission, the Government of 

Saskatchewan met and consulted with the major Saskatchewan organizations of the Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipal Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Agriculture. Now, it may be understandable that Members opposite would think that 

anything this Government might do in this regard would be called anaemic, but it is hard for me to 

understand that they would consider that anything that three above organizations have considered and 

have approved would be called anaemic. The presentation of the Saskatchewan submission was made by 

the Saskatchewan Counsel in Ottawa, referred to by the Leader of the Opposition as an Ottawa lawyer. 

This man ably represents Saskatchewan‘s interests in Ottawa. He‘s a product of Saskatchewan and he is 

as well-informed on the question of transport legislation as anyone else in the country. What pleases me 

particularly, Sir, is that this man that they refer to as that Ottawa lawyer is the same man that the 

Members opposite when they were Government had as their representative in Ottawa dealing with 

transport legislation. 

 

At any rate the proposed abandonment of uneconomic branch lines has created the feeling of uncertainty 

in many quarters of the province. We are concerned about future developments and the long-range 

planning of communities, elevator groups, government agencies and especially of the economic impact 

on our farmers. To try to counteract this uncertainty, the Federal authorities have submitted a plan 

whereby the prairie rail network is grouped into protected and unprotected lines. The protected lines are 

guaranteed to 1975. As an example of this I want to quote the Elrose sub of the CN. This was formerly 

proposed for abandonment by the CN but it is now on the protected list. There are unprotected lines, in 

fact over one thousand miles of them. These are lines which the railways may seek to abandon by the 

approval only of the Commission. As an example of unprotected lines, the Milden-McMorran and the 

Gunnworth-Matador subs of the CP were not proposed for abandonment earlier but are now on the 

unprotected list. The basic criteria for placing these lines on 



February 21, 1967 

 

560 

the unprotected list or on the unprotected list have been traffic and volume. Lines which have heavy 

traffic and for which there were either inadequate alternative rail facilities or where there were major 

readjustment problems were included in the protected network guaranteed to 1975. It‘s my opinion that 

the declaration of intent to guarantee and protect our major rail network is going to relieve anxiety in 

many quarters. I believe that an examination of the present rail network as it exists today reveals 

duplication of services leading to rail operation inefficiencies in some areas. I believe that we must 

accept the fact that some of our uneconomic branch lines are going to have to be abandoned in the 

interests of more efficient transportation of our grain to export markets. However, we cannot accept 

indiscriminate abandonment by the railways of whole large areas of our province. We must be 

concerned with the communities that may be isolated from rail connections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though Bill C231 embodies principles which we have advocated, there are still areas 

of concern. As Members know, Saskatchewan has over 1,000 miles of branch lines on the unprotected 

list. I believe that the Government of Saskatchewan agrees that the Commission establish before hand a 

uniform system of railway costing procedures and if necessary, the Government ought to be willing to 

participate in any hearing that may be held. One of our difficulties in the past in arguing about whether a 

branch line is economic or uneconomic has been the difficulty of arriving at a true railway cost figure 

for that line. 

 

Also the Government of Saskatchewan believes that a standard set of criteria ought to be established at 

the outset, to be applied by the Commission when investigating individual abandonment proposals. 

Now, these criteria have reference to the total sum of the factors that will affect communities that are 

going to lose or may lose their local rail services. We believe that we have staff in our Province 

Government Departments who are familiar with the problems and who will certainly be able to advise 

the Commission about the criteria relevant to assessing economic effects that will accrue to a 

community losing local rail service. I‘m not suggesting that the Government of Saskatchewan should 

actively participate at the local level in abandonment proposals. What I do suggest is that a uniform set 

of ground rules, especially in regard to railway-costing practices and techniques, be established at the 

outset and that a uniform procedure be established for assessing the effect of loss of rail service at the 

local community level. In areas where abandonment may be necessary, I believe that departments of our 

Provincial Government will have a responsibility to attempt to minimize the effects as far as possible of 

abandonment by cooperating with the RM‘s to provide alternatives to the rails for moving the farmer‘s 

grain. Bill C231, section 314D states 

 

―In the exercise of its duties under section 314C the Commission may recommend to the railway 

companies the exchange of branch lines between companies by a lease, purchase or otherwise, the 

giving or exchanging between the companies of operating rights or running rights over branch 

lines or other lines of railway, the connecting of branch lines thereof with other lines of another 

company, and the abandonment of operation of branch lines in respect of which no applications for 

abandonment have been filed with the Commission.‖ 

 

We have a particular problem in the Elrose constituency. 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

561 

I want to speak to you for a moment about the village of Kyle. This is second from the last station on the 

Gunnworth to Matador sub. This is a town of about 450 people that will be hard hit if the rail services 

are taken out of there. But the new Act makes possible several alternatives. For instance it could be the 

building of a connector line from the CN at Whitebear to Tuberose which would be a distance of seven 

miles which would pick up the stub end of that CP line. Another alternative would be to tie the CP line 

to the Elrose sub of the CN at Wartime, and all this would mean would be the building of a Y. What I‘m 

trying to say, Mr. Speaker, and I think I have explained it, is that the new Act does make provision for 

several different alternatives in areas which may lose their rail service. I think that we are going to have 

to look at each one as it comes along. 

 

In summary, the Government of Saskatchewan is of the opinion that the principle of grouping the rail 

network into the two categories is logical in so far as the lines of lesser economic importance in the 

province are being considered first. This is not to say that these lines are not important to local users or 

that all unprotected lines will necessarily be abandoned. If proper procedures however are followed in 

assessing relevant factors, resulting social upheavals during the transitional period will be minimal. 

From time to time rumours will develop locally on the question of abandoning rail facilities; some of 

these rumours will have no foundation in fact at all; others will unfortunately be the result of improper 

untimely dissemination of information and due to local fears will quite probably be exaggerated out of 

all proportion to the actual fact. It is my hope that all parties concerned with this problem will exercise 

maximum restraint and diplomacy. I think that all Members must know that it is inevitable that certain 

rail lines are going to have to be abandoned and it is only through an unemotional and sincere approach 

to this problem by all parties concerned that maximum benefits will accrue to the province as a whole at 

minimum cost to the public during the transitional period. I believe that this Government‘s first 

responsibility is to make sure that the transportation needs of the province as a whole are met in as 

efficient a way as possible. The Provincial Government, I believe, has also a responsibility to the areas 

which may lose their railway services. 

 

Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the Debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Members will nave noted that Resolution No. 3 standing in the name of the Member 

for Regina West is substantially the same as that of the Member for Cannington (Resolution No. 1) 

which has already been moved, and on which debate has been adjourned. 

 

I would draw the attention of the Assembly to May‘s Parliamentary Practice, 17th Edition, page 399, 

wherein it is stated: 

 

―A motion must not anticipate a matter already appointed for consideration by the House, whether 

it be a bill or an adjourned debate on a motion.‖ 



February 21, 1967 

 

562 

I must, therefore, rule Resolution No. 3 out of order since the House, by adjourning debate on 

Resolution No. 1, has already appointed the substance of Resolution No. 3 for consideration at a later 

sitting. 

 

Nor is any Member deprived of the right of free speech hereby, because the identical subject matter of 

Resolution No. 3 is already under debate in Resolution No. 1 and any Member who wishes may speak to 

it providing, of course, that he has not already done so. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your ruling and I assume that the 

Members opposite will contribute to the effect of the implementation of that ruling by not holding 

Resolution No. 1 on the Order Paper unduly. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 4 RE: NEW TRANS-CANADA PIPELINE 

 

Mr. H.D. Link (Saskatoon City) moved, seconded by Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon city): 

 

That this Assembly, believing that it is not in the interests of the people of Canada to have any part 

of the proposed new Trans-Canada pipeline constructed outside of the territory of Canada, request 

the Federal Government to act so that the whole of the pipeline is located within Canada. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving this Resolution I am motivated by urgency of its contents. That this 

urgency exists is well known to many Canadians. I suggest to this Assembly that if the Federal Li 

Government at Ottawa carries out its intention of constructing this proposed Trans-Canada pipeline 

partly on American territory that they have once again sold out the people of Canada. For the benefit of 

the Liberals in this House let me for just a moment deal with the establishment of Trans-Canada 

Pipelines Ltd. Trans-Canada Pipelines was created by a special Act of Parliament in 1951. That Act in 

Section No. 6A provides that the Company may within or outside Canada construct pipelines provided 

that the pipeline or lines shall be located entirely within Canada. This latter phrase was not in the 

original Bill submitted to Parliament but was inserted by the House of Commons to ensure that any 

major pipeline built by the Company would be an all-Canadian route. In 1956 when the Company was 

building an all-Canadian natural gas pipeline it ran into difficulty in financing. To get the pipeline built 

in that year the Liberal Government of the day agreed to lend to Trans-Canada Pipelines Ltd. 

$80,000,000 for the building of the western section of the line and agreed to build the line through 

Northern Ontario itself, through the device of a Crown Corporation which it later sold to Trans-Canada 

Pipelines. In the first paragraph of the Agreement between the Government and Tans-Canada Pipelines 

is a phrase: ―and whereas in the public interest that the western section of the all-Canadian pipeline 

should be construction in 1956.‖ The Government of the day clearly thought that it was a matter of 

public interest to have the all-Canadian line. The Bill authorizing this Agreement precipitated the 

infamous ―Pipeline Debate‖: in 1956. The main backer of Trans-Canada at that time was the late Rt. 

Hon. C.D. Howe, then the Minister of Trade and Commerce. One of the most interesting paragraphs in 

the Debate was spoken by Mr. Howe in defence of 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

563 

the Bill. 

 

I admitted that it would be more costly than alternative plans but I said the added cost is one of the 

penalties that we must accept for Canadian nationhood. I remember my words: I said, ‗There is a 

price on Canadian nationhood.‘ If we always look for the cheapest way of doing things here in 

Canada, there might have been another state in the United States, but there very likely would have 

been no Canada. From confederation the people of Canada have been very jealous about accepting 

any monetary advantage that would in any way jeopardize the control by Canada over her own 

resources. 

 

It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that lately the Liberal Party has reversed its position on the control of our 

resources. The immediate issue before the Canadian people in the present pipeline controversy is 

whether or not Trans-Canada Pipelines Ltd. should construct a second natural gas pipeline from Western 

Canada to the United States. The proposed line would run south from Winnipeg crossing the United 

States border near Emerson, Manitoba, and represented-enter Canada just south of Sarnia, Ontario. The 

U.S. line, known as the ―Great lakes Project‖ would proceed south of Lake Superior and Lake Huron 

through the States of Minnesota, Wisconsin and Michigan. There would be provision for some of the gas 

entering this line at Emerson to be sold in the United States. The Federal Cabinet turned down the 

proposal on August 25, 1966. In doing so, the Prime Minister, in a press release on that date gave for 

some of its reasons, the following: He is quoted as saying: 

 

The basic point, however, is that once a 36 inch pipeline through the United States was 

established, it would almost inevitably become the main line. Additions to that system would be 

more economic than additions to the 30 inch system through Northern Ontario and the Canadian 

line would increasingly assume a secondary position as a line to serve the markets along its route. 

 

He went on to say: 

 

The Government does not believe it to be in Canada‘s best interest that the future development of 

the facilities for bringing Western Canadian gas to the Eastern Canadian market should be located 

outside Canadian jurisdiction and subject to detailed regulations under laws of the united States 

which are naturally designed to protect the interests of the United States citizens. 

 

The Prime Minister went on to say: 

 

This has been a difficult decision in a very complex matter. However, the gas transmission 

industry is a public utility on a vast scale and is important to Canadian national well-being. The 

development of its main line between West and East should, we believe, remain wholly under 

Canadian jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with the sentiments expressed by Mr. Pearson. I‘m equally certain that the people 

of Saskatchewan agree with these sentiments. Why the, some five weeks later, on 



February 21, 1967 

 

564 

October 4 did the Federal Government perform a complete about-face? Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

reasons given by the critics of an all-Canadian route is that it would be quicker and cheaper to build the 

line through the United States. Trans-Canada Pipeline claims that the united States route would result in 

a $75,000,000 saving in distribution costs over a 10-year period. However, what they have failed to tell 

us is that the National Energy Board has calculated that an all-Canadian route would, within the same 

period, create an income to this country of $700,000,000 to $1,000,000,000. Mr. Speaker, it would 

appear that the about-face of the Liberal Government on the pipeline case is just another manifestation 

of the Liberal party‘s policy of continentalism. Continentalism means the policy of working for 

complete integration of the Canadian and American economy. 

 

Continentalism is supposed to bring to Canada a higher standard of living, making us economically at 

least a part of the United States. However, there are no real grounds for believing that continentalism 

would do this. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we would remain merely an under-developed region within a 

larger area. There is no guarantee that integration would bring us more industry, more employment or 

higher incomes. Indeed, the opposite may be the effect. There are as you know already within the United 

States under-developed regions. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that Canada would become just another 

one of these. I believe in a policy of national independence. I am not an isolationist. I believe in as free 

an international trade as possible, and I believe in international compulsory-operation. But, Mr. Speaker, 

I also believe that continentalism will work against these policies. Continentalism by making us 

completely subservient to the United States will silence any chance for an independent voice in world 

affairs. The pipeline deal is a case where we are not working for true international compulsory-operation 

in any sense; we are merely integrating our economy with that of our neighbour to the south. In fact we 

are giving the United States Government through its agency, the Federal Power Commission, control 

over the transmission of natural gas between Canadian points. This I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is not 

compulsory-operation; it is really a potential source of conflict, and if there is a conflict it will be 

Canada who suffers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in an article which appeared in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix dated January 27 of this year, I 

find that the United States Federal Power Commission has scheduled new hearings on Trans-Canada‘s 

bid for lines south of the Great Lakes. The article goes on to say that a final decision is not expected 

until late this year. Mr. Speaker, this delay simply is not justified. Why should our country wait for a 

decision of a foreign country before it can transport Canadian gas from Western Canada to Eastern 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this Assembly tell the Federal Government that we are not satisfied 

with this arrangement. We should make it perfectly clear to the Prime Minister that we believe that 

Canadian gas should be transported through a Canadian pipeline on Canadian soil. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

In closing my remarks, Mr. Speaker, allow me to quote from an editorial which appeared in the Toronto 

Daily Star on October 6, 1966: 

 

When Prime Minister Pearson rejected in August a proposal by Trans-Canada Pipelines Limited, 

to build a natural gas pipeline from Manitoba to Ontario through 



February 21, 1967 

 

 

565 

The United States, it appeared that at last Ottawa was to assert the national interest in the 

development of our resources. The Government has now reversed its decision. Trans-Canada 

Pipelines is the big winner; Canada is the loser. Long-term national interests have been 

subordinated to immediate economic advantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with this editorial. I see no reason why, if we in this Legislature are really 

interested in the welfare of our country, we cannot all support this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Robbins (Saskatoon City): — I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. 


