



















































Hansard: April 01, 1967


1512 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

40th Day 

 

Saturday, April 1, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 9:30 o'clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS RE: ORDERS FOR RETURNS 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Government if I will get 

Order for Return No. 22 today. I was promised that yesterday. 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — You'll get it this morning as soon as I get a chance to get 

up there. There are three or four up there that I didn't table yesterday and I will be tabling them this 

morning and that is one of them. 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Can the Attorney General as Provincial Secretary 

in this capacity let us know the ones that are going to be tabled today? Has he got a list? 

 

MR. HEALD: — Well, I can't at the moment. As soon as I get a chance to get out I'll go and come 

down and provide you with a list. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — I would move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

Cameron: 

 

That notwithstanding any order to the contrary, the recesses at 12:30 o'clock p.m. and 5:30 

o'clock p.m. at this sitting be of one and one half hours duration. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 12:30 until 2:00 o'clock p.m. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 

 

At 5:14 o'clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having entered the Chamber, took his seat 

upon the throne and gave royal assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relive you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to thank 

you for, and congratulate you upon, the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence that 

the approval of the programs and plans presented to you will continue to provide the services necessary 

to the growth and development of our province. The legislation you have passed in the fourth session of 

the Fifteenth Legislature has been designed to both speed the development of those resources 

Providence has bestowed on us, and to ensure an equitable distribution of the fruits of that development. 

 



 

April 1, 1967 

 

1513 

Chief among the measures you have enacted have been a number designed to accelerate the agricultural 

development of our province's chief resource. 

 

You have also given approval to a number of measures geared to the protection of the rights of many of 

our citizens. 

 

You have approved the expenditure of an increased amount of funds to improve the facilities available 

to our young people for educational advancement. 

 

You have appropriated funds for establishment of an "opportunity caravan" which will provide a mobile 

counselling service for our youth throughout the province. 

 

In keeping with the ever increasing mileage of new highways throughout Saskatchewan, you have 

approved new legislation governing measures for highway safety. 

 

You have approved legislation that will correct inequities in the pension plans of additional civil 

servants who have retired on pensions now inadequate because of rising living costs. 

 

My Government has recommended, and you have approved, a program to speed the development of 

opportunities for our citizens of Indian ancestry. 

 

To meet the shortage of hospital beds in southern Saskatchewan, you have approved the 

recommendations of my Ministers with respect to the appropriation of funds for the establishment of a 

Regina Base Hospital. 

 

Finally, you have given approval to many measures designed to improve the lot of individuals in our 

province and make possible the fullest development of our resources. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the public service and 

assure you the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the session and wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Heald, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 

 

 


