




















































Hansard: March 10, 1967


 

 

1260 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Friday, March 10, 1967 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o'clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, thorough you I would like to introduce to all 

Members of this House, 83 bright young students, grade seven and eight students from St. Peters School 

in North Regina. They are located in the east gallery and with them today are their principal, Mr. Harold 

Ferner, their vice-principal, Mr. Foraie, one of their teachers, Mr. Scheschuk, and two student teachers, 

Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Ulrich. I'm sure all Members will join with me in expressing the wish that their 

stay with us this afternoon will be pleasant and educational. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to the Members 

of the Assembly, a group of grade eight students, 42 of them from Arcola School. They are seated in the 

Speaker's gallery and they are accompanied by two teachers, Mr. Olson and Mr. Sorestad. On behalf of 

Members of the Assembly I would like to extend to them a warm welcome and express the hope that 

their stay with us this afternoon will be both pleasant and educational. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that the Member from Regina 

East (Mr. Smishek) welcomed Arcola School. I think they are mostly in my constituency now, but I'm 

very pleased that he did and I want to extend a very warm welcome to them, some 42 in number and to 

the teachers, Mr. Sorestad and Mr. Olson. They are in the Speaker's gallery I believe and we hope their 

stay here will be most fruitful and that they will learn the workings of the Legislative Assembly, how 

our laws are made and see democracy in action. We want to wish them a pleasant stay and also I'd like 

to extend a warm welcome to the St. Peters School group as well. They are also from the good city of 

Regina. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, may I take this opportunity through you to 

welcome a group of students from the community of Yellow Grass, in the west gallery, 21 grade twelve 

students. They are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Wagner, by Mr. Newman and Mr. Jones. I would 

certainly like to point out that Yellow Grass is in the heart of the Soo Line, the great wheat country and I 

hope that their stay in this Assembly this afternoon will be an educational one. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.I. WOOD (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome and introduce to you 

 



  

March 10, 1967 

 

 

 

1261 

you and through you to the Assembly a group of students in the east gallery from grades eleven and 

twelve from the Hazlet High School. These students are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Ken 

Paterson and Mrs. Alkink, and their bus driver, Mr. Jorgenson. Hazlet as you may know is some 40 

miles mostly west of Swift Current and somewhat north. It is in a very good wheat growing area and 

they also grow some very fine young people in that area as well. These people have visited this morning 

the Kalium Chemical Plant out at Belle Plaine and they will be staying in Regina today and tomorrow, 

visiting the University and many other points of interest. I would like through you, Mr. Speaker, and on 

behalf of the Assembly to extend to them a very hearty welcome here this afternoon and hope that their 

visit with us will be both educational and entertaining. Thank you. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. I.H. MacDOUGALL (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to welcome a 

group of students here this afternoon from the most progressive constituency in the province, 

Souris-Estevan. We have a group here from Midale. I hope that their stay with us this afternoon will be 

informative and enjoyable. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, I would like this afternoon to introduce to you, Sir, 

and through you to all Members of the Assembly a group of 23 grade twelve students seated in the first 

three rows in the Speaker's gallery from the Lumsden High School in my constituency. They are 

accompanied here this afternoon by Mr. Tusure, their Science teacher and Mr. Coral, their Social 

Studies teacher. They have spent some time in the building. They had lunch here. They had a lecture on 

parliamentary procedure and now they are rounding out their day with an observation and a visit to the 

Legislative Assembly. I would like to just say to Hon. Members if I might, that if you haven't had an 

opportunity to see the fine new school in Lumsden, the fine new High School, it would be worth your 

while to just get off the highway, those of you who come from the north part of the province, get off the 

highway for two or three minutes and drive through Lumsden and observe this fine new plant. And there 

might be another advantage to doing that too because if you are being followed by the highway traffic 

patrol, it would give them an opportunity to get ahead of you, you could get off in Lumsden and perhaps 

you wouldn't catch them by the time you got to Saskatoon. That's for the particular benefit for the 

Member for Arm River (Mr. Pederson). 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. HEALD: — This is a fine school and this is a fine group of students and I would like to on your 

behalf, Sir, welcome them to the Assembly and wish them a safe trip home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the Hon. Member for 

Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) in expressing my appreciation of the visit from the students from the 

thriving little town of Midale. Midale and the area surrounding it is now since the redistribution of the 

constituency boundaries within the Weyburn 



 

March 10, 1967 

 

 

1262 

constituency. So I give them a special welcome and I believe that they are accompanied here by their 

principal, Mr. Allan Ryan, Dr. Clark Curtiss, and Miss Margaret Dulks. Those are their three teachers 

and their bus driver is Mr. Dennis Peterson. So I too, Mr. Speaker, I am sure am expressing the wish of 

all of you when we wish them a very pleasant and educational visit with us and that their journey home 

is safe. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the Members 

of this Legislature and to you, a group of students in the Speakers gallery from Arcola High School. I 

believe that this is the first time that a group has come to this Assembly from the Arcola High School, 

and I'm sure that they will find the proceedings here most interesting and I hope that they learn some of 

the democratic procedures that are employed here in this Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT RE: POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 

HON. D. BOLDT (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. Yesterday 

the Hon. Member for Hanley (Mr. Walker) rose on a point of privilege regarding the remarks I made a 

few days ago. He said and I quote: 

 

It will be observed therefore that not one syllable of the Minister's statement is true although 

seemingly he has access to documents which came into the hands of his officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I point out that as Minister of Welfare I knew what was going on in the Department 

and I had access to all documents if I so wished. I quoted from no file and I mentioned no names. I 

merely pointed out the attitude of the former Attorney General toward a citizen who needed and sought 

advice from the Welfare Department. It is true that the money was held in trust by the Welfare 

Department, not seized as was claimed. The only error I made was the amount charged which was not 

$200 but $250. Lawyers receive a fee of $25 from the Welfare Department for this kind of service and 

some don't even collect this small amount. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE: AMALGAMATION OF CP AND CN TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I'd like to ask 

the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) whether in view of the rumors of amalgamation of the CP and CN 

Telecommunications at Regina, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert and Saskatoon, any representation is to be 

made by this Government to the Federal Government to ensure that in any rationalization of services, 

the pension age of employees affected might be reduced, amalgamation staggered to balance staff 

turnover, and all other feasible steps taken to achieve an orderly transition without hardship to the 

employees. 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (MINISTER OF LABOUR): — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the honorable 

gentleman that 

 



  

March 10, 1967 

 

 

 

1263 

this Government does not act on rumors that probably originated from the other side of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. C.P. MacDonald 

(Milestone) that Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend the Child Welfare Act be now read a second time. 

 

MR. E.I. WOOD (Swift Current): — I see no reason why this debate should not continue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o'clock p.m. 


