



















































Hansard: March 17, 1967


 

 

1368 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

30th Day 

 

Friday, March 17, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF ST. PATRICK'S DAY 

 

MR. I.H. MacDOUGALL (Souris Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, as one of 

the non-Irish in the community I want to congratulate those of Irish descent on this day of St. Patrick. 

However, after listening to the comments of one certain Alderman Ryan last night and the snide remarks 

he made about the bagpipes, I must inform the House that it was my understanding that St. Patrick took 

the bagpipes to Heaven with him and this is the music these Irishmen will hear when they get there. I 

was always of the opinion that St. Patrick originally was a Scot; however, I went to some considerable 

trouble to find out just who St. Patrick was and where he came from. I find out that of all things St. 

Patrick was a Welshman. However, upon consulting the Encyclopedia Britannica again, I find that he 

was captured by the Irish in a raid on Wales as a youth of 16. He spent the next six years as a slave in 

Ireland and then escaped with a cargo of race hounds. As time went on he became a cleric. Then he 

decided that he wanted to go back and Christianize these Irish. I might say he was successful in his 

efforts to Christianize that wild race over there. So today we celebrate St. Patrick's Day and I wish the 

Irish well. I also wish that when we do get some of them in Heaven, if we ever do, other than St. Patrick, 

that they will be entertained with the bagpipes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. WHELAN (Regina North): — Mr. Speaker, on a day like this, an Irishman is bound to forgive 

a Scotsman for such comments. In our Centennial Year, as a Legislature, I think we should pay tribute to 

the Irishmen who helped develop Confederation. The influence of the Irish in politics in Canada during 

its first 100 years should be taken note of on this particular St. Patrick's Day. Aside from the fact that 

many Irishmen with names as Irish as Chubby Powers have made a great contribution in positions of 

Canadian leadership, many times the Irish influence provided the sparkle and the humor and the 

personality to make a person of other extraction more acceptable and more human, more approachable 

and more understanding, I think, speaking now of the Hon. Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. 

MacDougall). Politics is a natural for the Irish and just a wee drop of Irish blood in a German, 

Ukrainian, Scotch, Norwegian, Dutch, Welsh, English or any other politician makes him a wee bit more 

effective and wee bit more acceptable and a wee bit more charming. The influence of the Irish ancestry 

in 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1369 

the history of Canada can be found in names like St. Laurent, O'Shaughnessy, Hurley, some of them 

names that were Irish and belonged to people who spoke only French. Even in our own province we pay 

tribute to the Irish leaders in another era such as Haultain. 

 

One of the Fathers of Confederation from Prince Edward Island was a young Irishman, a protégé of 

Joseph Howe, and a journalist. Even at the age of 40 he had for many years been elected to the 

Legislature at Charlottetown. After he sat at the Quebec Conference and convinced himself that 

Confederation held the answer to Canada's problems, although he exercised the utmost eloquence with 

the aid of his newspaper, even then he failed to convince his own people that Confederation was good 

for Prince Edward Island. One misfortune after another best him; he was defeated in politics, his wife 

died of scarlet fever and his only son drowned in a boating accident. At an early age he died, a 

disappointed and bitter man. But his writings on behalf of Confederation were quoted for years and are 

part of the heritage of Prince Edward Island. And when we pay tribute to these people in this Centennial 

Year, we pay tribute to the people of Irish descent. To those who have sat in the Legislatures, in the 

House of Commons and to the Fathers of Confederation, perhaps one representative from Prince Edward 

Island, the fighting Irish journalist is a symbol of them all. My father often quoted this man and said that 

the things he said on behalf of Confederation, his arguments were convincing; they were good then and 

they are good now, even a hundred years later. I must insist that the Irish people are not clannish and I 

point this out, but these writings were the work of an Irish Father of Confederation and his name was Ed 

Whelan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WHELAN: — To all the Irish in Saskatchewan, to all the Irish political leaders, to the Irish who 

served Canada in many capacities in these last 100 years, congratulations and the top of the morning to 

them. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.I. WOOD (Swift Current): — Mr. Chairman, on the 17th of March I think that we are all Irish 

even if it is in wishing that we were. In regard to what the Hon. Member from Estevan has said 

concerning the bagpipes, I have it on very good authority, Mr. Speaker, that it was an Irishman who 

invented the bagpipes. They were given to the Scotch as a joke but they haven't seen it yet. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE: MEDICAL CARE REPORT 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1370 

ask the Minister of Health when we might expect the annual report of the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission being tabled in this House. Can we expect that report to be tabled before Bill No. 82 comes 

up for second reading? 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would hope so. I'll do my best. 

 

QUESTIONS RE: RETURNS 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 16 

 

MR. J.H. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, on this fine Irish morning I would like to ask 

the Attorney General or the Provincial Secretary if he will again look into this Return No. 16 in regard to 

the flights of the aircraft. It is now pretty nearly five weeks since the House ordered that information and 

that seems like an awful long time to get it. 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will look into this. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 18 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, just before the Orders of the Day, may I 

inquire of the Attorney General and ask him to look into the Order for Return No. 18 dated February 21, 

dealing with any contract between the Government and one E. Odishaw. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURNS NOS. 26, 35 and 36 

 

MR. C.G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago I asked the Provincial 

Secretary when I could expect Orders for Returns No. 26, 35, and 36. At that time he promised to look 

into the matter. I was wondering if he has any information for me this morning. 

 

MR. HEALD: — I don't have the Returns. I'll file them as soon as I get them. 

 

QUESTION RE: KILL OF FISH ON BUFFALO POUND LAKE 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I 

could put a question to the Minister of Natural Resources with regard to the report that there will be a 

100 per cent kill of fish in Buffalo Pound Lake, leaving behind of course a distinctly unsatisfactory 

sanitary situation and spoiling the resource in respect to the fish and recreation. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — That report was brought to my 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1371 

attention and I have asked the officials in the Department to give me some information on it and also 

what action, if any, they can take in this regard. It would be very regrettable if it does happen. I would 

ask the Member to let me take this as notice, and I will give him an answer on Monday or Tuesday, just 

as soon as I can. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF ST. PATRICK'S DAY 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Just in connection with some of the words that were said in regard to St. Patrick's 

Day, perhaps I might give the House the correct historical facts anent thereto: A certain smart English 

commercialist traded a recipe for whiskey to a Scotsman in return for a set of bagpipes. He didn't know 

what to do with the bagpipes so he foisted them off on St. Patrick on the grounds that they would 

produce good church music. St. Patrick was trying to learn to play them and in doing so he drove all the 

snakes out of Ireland. As a result of this, Ireland has no snakes, the Scots are still producing wonderful 

whiskey, the English are selling it and the whole world is the better for it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — May I join with all the Members in paying tribute to this wonderful race of people 

who have spread themselves out across the world and made a wonderful contribution to the political life 

of every country in which they have found homes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned to the Opposition last night that we would go into 

Committee of Supply and consider first the Department of Municipal Affairs. The Minister informs me 

that his officials need a bit of time today — they just got back from Saskatoon — to get these arranged 

and that they will probably be on this afternoon. The Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) would 

like to begin second reading on The Water Resources Commission Act and so my explanation is that I 

am going to ask the House to go into second readings. We will of course understand, if the Opposition 

wish to adjourn the debate on this Act because I didn't give them notice yesterday, that we would, but 

the Minister is anxious to launch this Bill and give the House his speech on the principle of it. Once we 

have done that, we will go back into Committee of Supply and we will then go into Welfare and 

Municipal Affairs will come after that. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. J.W. GARDINER (Minister of Public Works) moved second reading of Bill No. 53 — An Act to 

amend The Water Resources Commission Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1372 

move second reading of an Act to amend The Water Resources Commission Act, I would just like to 

spend a few moments, if I might, to deal with the problem with regard to water pollution and also of 

course with regard to the principle of this Bill. Water pollution is a world-wide problem and the problem 

is of a growing concern to all. Unless we are prepared to take some action to control the problem we 

could be faced with a serious situation. There is general recognition that our water resource is one of our 

greatest assets. It should be recognized as well that this resource should be protected from pollution in 

order that it can be used for other important purposes. This Government, indeed any government, would 

be failing in its responsibility if we do not live up to this public expectation. We in Saskatchewan are 

fortunate that as a young province and a young country we are able to profit from the experience 

elsewhere. Other countries and older provinces in Canada have confirmed that it is unwise in the long 

run not to insist on reasonable control of pollution. It is much easier and less costly to prevent serious 

pollution of our waters than it is to attempt recovery after the damage is done. This is why this 

Government undertook to investigate appropriate pollution control measures during the past year, and 

this is why we are recommending appropriate legislative changes at this session. Pollution control is an 

integral part of water resource management. Even abundant supplies of good water which we don't 

possess in southern Saskatchewan are of little value unless they serve the various uses of our modern 

society; therefore our control program will be implemented and it is an important aspect of our 

comprehensive water resource management program. 

 

I would like to review briefly the history of pollution control in Saskatchewan. Traditionally this control 

has come under health departments in all countries because the disposal of domestic sewage and 

industrial waste would have an effect on the safety of water for human consumption. Other agencies 

were of course interested in water quality, but until recently these interests were considered secondary to 

the health aspects. In recent times the water resource has been viewed from a multiple-use aspect. Since 

each agency has a particular interest in water for a specific purpose, it is only natural that the interests of 

one agency may not be compatible with those of other agencies. The modern approach to pollution 

control is to preserve and improve water quality for all legitimate uses through a regulatory agency 

without a specific interest in one particular use of water. Accompanying this trend has been a shift in 

emphasis in control policy from the mere abatement of pollution to one of prevention of pollution, the 

pollution control policy. In some parts of Saskatchewan as in other areas of the world, large quantities of 

water are being used for dilution of sewage. From an economic standpoint it is clear that this demand for 

water should be reduced before spending large sums on projects to bring additional supplies into the 

province. Water pollution can be briefly described as an improvement of the quality of water that 

adversely and unreasonably affects the suitability for domestic, agricultural, industrial, recreational, or 

other uses. A control policy must stress the desirability of minimizing pollution within 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1373 

practical limits to ensure maintenance of water quality. Unrestricted water pollution is costly. It can 

cause impairment to health, it can result in depreciative property values. It can impair quality to the 

extent that costly treatment is necessary before the water can be used. While the adverse effect of 

pollution is initially borne by individuals, it is eventually paid for by the whole society through 

reduction of the usefulness of the water resource and eventually the restriction of economic growth. 

 

The general objective of our pollution control program is to protect and enhance the capacity of water to 

serve the widest range of uses and in the most economical manner. The program must be positive. It will 

be directed toward preservation of reasonable water qualities and improvement as opposed to major 

commitment of water for waste assimilation. Efficient water use is encouraged and control measures 

will be restricted to those necessary to protect other uses. The program recognizes that the discharge of 

waste if suitably treated into our water courses is a reasonable use of our water resource if it is not 

interfering unduly with other uses. The existing legislation, The Water Resources Commission Act, as it 

now stands provides for control of pollution by requiring permits for the discharge of effluents. 

However, the existing authority of the Commission does not extend to the approvals of sewage treatment 

facilities or the sewage collection system. This authority has rested with the Department of Public 

Health. The existing authority gave the Commission, primarily a co-ordinating role vis-à-vis the 

responsibility of Public Health and the Department of Natural Resources. 

 

There is a major disadvantage in the present arrangement. The design and operation of the treatment 

plant determines the quality of the water in our streams but does not directly have a voice in the 

treatment facilities that determine this quality. The administration of a control program under existing 

legislation would be complex, cumbersome, and probably inefficient. We believe that these 

administrative problems can be overcome by placing all aspects of sewage and other treatment facilities 

under Commission control. This includes the sewage collection systems, treatment works and effluent 

quality. In addition to responsibility for approvals of sewage works, the Department of Public Health is 

responsible for the approvals of water works systems as well. Water and sewage works are inter-related 

systems. The source of supply and pollution control are closely related. All three aspects — water 

works, sewage works and effluent quality, fall within the speciality of sanitary engineering. It was 

logical therefore, to transfer the water works function to the Commission. This proposal is in line with a 

recommendation of the Montreal Conference on Pollution and Our Environment and I quote: 

 

In each province there should be established an authority or agency with full responsibility for 

the entire field of water management. 

 

In developing our program, the Government secured the advice of Dr. Berry, formerly chairman of the 

Ontario Water Resources 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1374 

Commission, and a noted authority in the field of pollution control. He cautioned against any program 

which envisaged a system of dual or multiple control. The amendments to the Commission Act proposed 

in this Bill are primarily for the purpose of transferring the authority for approvals of water and sewage 

works from the Department of Public Health to the Water Resources Commission. 

 

Minor changes are also proposed to streamline the penalty sections in this Act by placing all provisions 

in three sections rather than four. In addition to elimination of overlapping control programs and thereby 

improving administrative efficiency, the proposed changes will permit further streaming of other aspects 

of the Commission's work. For example, the approval of water and sewage works can be tied in with the 

applications for a surface or ground water right. Data collection on return flows in relation to water 

demand and water quality will be simplified and improved. This should prove very beneficial to the 

investigation and planning function of the Commission. 

 

The objectives of the new pollution control program are to conserve water and to protect, maintain, and 

improve its quality for the protection of public health, and within economic limits, for the following 

additional purposes: (a) preservation and protection of water supplies, (b) encouragement of economic 

development, (c) preservation of aesthetic values, and (d) preservation of fish and wildlife. We believe 

these objectives can best be achieved through investigation and research, an informed public, and a fair 

but firm program of pollution control. 

 

Under the new program, the Department of Public Health through the Regional Medical Health Officers 

will have the authority to ensure that the final product of water treatment plant or sewage treatment plant 

meets acceptable public health standards and does not create conditions which are hazardous to public 

health. While the Commission control program is intended to ensure that such conditions do not arise, 

the Regional Medical Health Officers can step in if a local problem does arise. Similarly, the 

Department of Natural Resources will continue to have the responsibility for preservation of aesthetics, 

aquatic life and wildlife, particularly within Provincial park and forest areas. 

 

The Commission in its program will work with all interested groups, whether local, Provincial or 

national, whether government or private agencies, in order to achieve the objectives of the Provincial 

policy. Public awareness of the economic and social disadvantages of pollution is essential. Many civic, 

business, conservation and service organizations can assist in a public education program and the 

Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission proposes to supply basic information and technical advice 

to these groups on request. The need for data collection is very important. Both general and precise 

knowledge of existing and potential pollution programs are necessary for adequate control measures. 

The Commission intends to full utilize the facilities of other Saskatchewan Government agencies, such 

as the field 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1375 

staff of the Departments of Public Health and Natural Resources, in conjunction with its own to meet the 

problem. Through a system of approvals the Commission proposes to control municipal and industrial 

water and sewage works as is currently done by the Department of Public Health. Pollution control will 

be achieved by prohibiting the discharge of waste water, except as provided by Commission approval. 

Of course this does not apply to the small private systems on farms. Through its approval system the 

Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission will require adequate sewage and water treatment 

facilities. Since water quality control standards are set by each province these standards may vary from 

one province to another. 

 

Some authorities argue that differences in pollution control regulations may cause industry to locate in 

those regions enforcing only minimum standards. However, this does not appear sound for a number of 

reasons. 1. Almost without exception nowadays every industry expects reasonable controls. 2. Other 

economic factors are usually far more significant in a location decision than reasonable water quality 

control standards. 3. Pollution control leads to improved water quality and hence reduced costs for 

industrial water treatment. 4. The capital investment required for sewage treatment is lower if the 

facilities are installed initially. Nevertheless our Government, through the Prairie Economic Council and 

the Canadian Council of Resource Ministers intends to strive to co-ordinate the programs of the various 

provinces with our own with a view to minimizing any differences in pollution control measures. The 

Commission recognizes the desirability of co-operative effort to work out feasible economic and 

technical solutions to waste treatment problems with both industry and municipalities. 

 

Since pollution control is of interest and importance to all levels of government, each level should 

consider incentives for the financial support of pollution control facilities. The program of waste 

discharge control does not contemplate fixed water quality standards. Each situation of waste water 

disposal and water pollution will be examined on a case-by-case basis. However, general guidelines for 

water quality assessments are helpful and these will be defined under Water Quality Criteria. These 

criteria will be employed on a local basis since, for example, the ability of one stream to assimilate 

waste may vary widely from another. Although each case will be examined on a local basis, the 

following inter-dependent aspects will be considered in connection with any approval: (a) regional 

effect; (b) multi-purpose use; (c) use of alternatives to conventional treatment practices; and (d) 

flexibility of treatment procedures to adapt to varying receiving-water conditions. Minimum 

requirements call for the removal of solid materials by primary treatment or its equivalent. The 

minimum requirement will be applied to both existing and new developments. Where more than primary 

treatment is required due to an existing water quality problem it is recognized that costly corrective 

measures may be necessary. Therefore, the Commission will be prepared to negotiate a schedule for the 

installation of waste treatment facilities beyond primary treatment. Provision for future secondary 

treatment will 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1376 

be required in the construction plans for all new developments. The approval will allow staging of the 

installation of these works in areas where adequate water is available for waste assimilation. However, 

staging may not be allowed in areas where the receiving-water is already carrying a high pollution load 

or where other uses must be protected. It is the Government's intention, through the Saskatchewan Water 

Resources Commission to circulate its views on our pollution control policy to interested groups and 

individuals soon by means of public hearings. Proposed criteria for water and effluent quality, criteria 

and regulations for the construction and operation of water works and sewage works will also be 

presented for consideration. Public hearings are planned for this spring, and the public are invited to 

present their views on the matter prior to the implementation of the control regulations. It is our hope 

that the program can be implemented and operating by midsummer. The development and 

administration of a program that will effectively deal with water pollution is a challenging task. I believe 

that the changes proposed in this Bill will provide an adequate legislative framework for this important 

task. The control program will neither be cheap nor easy. In Saskatchewan we are fortunate that we can 

implement reasonable control measures before the problem becomes acute. If the program is successful, 

we can avoid the anomaly in a conservationist's recent description of the American of today — "A man 

worried about water, standing knee-deep in sewage and shooting rockets at the moon." 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say just a few words 

about the Bill. To begin with, I welcome the statement which the Minister of Public Works (Mr. 

Gardiner) has made with respect to what needs to be done in this field and the value of doing it. 

Certainly I agree with him that the Bill does provide for what it appears should be a tidier and more 

effective administrative arrangement with respect to the protection and improvement of the quality of 

Saskatchewan waters. I think it must be noted along with that, however, Mr. Speaker, that except for the 

tidying up of the administrative arrangement, the Bill really doesn't add anything. There are, I think, no 

opportunities for Government action in this Bill other than that which existed in the series of statutes 

before, The Water Resources Commission Act, The Department of Health Act, The Water Pollution Act, 

and indeed some sections with respect to Natural Resources. The Act is in itself a device for improving 

the administration. It does not in effect state or direct a program as such and I'm not suggesting it should 

have. Agreeing with the Minister of Public Works, I think we have to wait something further before we 

can really judge the effectiveness of the program. I'm thinking we're particularly going to have to wait to 

see what extent the Budget provides for the doing of these things. The Minister may pardon me for 

being a little bit sceptical because the Plains of Saskatchewan are strewn with the bones of Liberal 

legislation on which there was never any flesh put. And I hope that is not the case with this particular 

legislation. 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1377 

I want also, Mr. Speaker, to draw attention to the statement which was made in the Speech from the 

Throne about pollution. I suggest that the legislation and the Budget combined really don't bear out the 

promise in the Speech from the Throne. The Speech from the Throne said and I quote: 

 

My Ministers inform me that serious problems of water pollution will arise if preventive 

measures are not taken. You will therefore be asked to approve legislation to provide authority to 

Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission with respect to the quality of our water. 

 

I must say that I for one, listening to that and reading it and studying it since, had expected more by way 

of a comprehensive legislative program than an Act that was drawing together of that which already 

exists in several different states. Now, I suggest if ever there was something that proclaimed a mountain 

and produced a mouse, this happened with respect to this particular Bill. 

 

I agree that we can't really judge the program until we get into the Estimates and see to what extent the 

Government has indeed provided the money for staff and for research and for public education, all of 

which, I agree with the Minister, are very, very necessary. I hope too that they will be able to give us 

some better information than we have at the moment, with respect to the standards which are going to be 

applied. 

 

I think some other Members of the House may have noticed recently some press comments in the 

Saskatoon Star Phoenix, I think, last week, with respect to the situation in New Brunswick. They have 

discovered that they are up against the very serious (they didn't discover, they simply discovered the 

urgency of doing more about it now) problem of pollution in some of their rivers. It went on to comment 

that a good deal of this was due to the operation of a pulp mill on the river. This is one of the reasons 

why several of us on this side of the House have raised the question of the adequacy of provisions made 

here. I hope the Minister has some information in the Estimates and will be able to tell us more about 

that than we know at the moment. Mr. Speaker, in general, then again I welcome the outline of the 

purposes and the hopes which he has stated on behalf of the Government. I am somewhat disappointed 

in that the legislation isn't indeed more suggestive of the program which will be carried out. I am 

prepared, however, to withhold a more complete judgment until we see the Estimates, where the 

Government is actually going to put in the money necessary for people, research and the public 

education program. 

 

MR. GARDINER: — I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that it's necessary for me to add much to what has 

already been said in the debate except that we assure the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) that if we 

had as many bare bones in the years of Liberal Administration as they had in their 20 years, you'd have 

something to worry about. 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1378 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) referred to legislation being left on the statute books on your 

side of the House by Liberal Governments, but of course this was definitely not the case but this policy 

was followed by the CCFs. In fact much of the legislation was on the books in this province when he 

came into office. He never made use of it, he never put into effect in spite of the fact that it was there. 

There still exists on the statute books today legislation that was never used by his Government in spite of 

the fact that they voice on many occasions the idea that they were good things and should have been 

done for this province. So when he speaks about the Liberal Governments of the past leaving legislation 

in bare-bones fashion and not carrying it out to its fullest, I think his Government holds the greatest 

record of any government in Canada for achieving a record in this manner. However, I do want to assure 

him that this pollution program will be carried ahead with the utmost speed and I can assure him that not 

only myself as Minister in the Government, but the officials of the Saskatchewan Water Resources 

Commission from the chairman down to the employees of the Commission are very serious in their 

desire to see to it that the problems of pollution that affect other areas that he's mentioned this morning 

do not affect our province in the future. So I can assure him that any of the fears that he might have with 

regard to the operation of this Act in the next few months, he can pretty well forget about them. I think 

the record of the Water Resources Commission in its first two years in active operation has indicated 

that this is no stand-pat organization. It is going to be an active organization and it is going to do things 

and it is going to accomplish things for the people of this province. So I can assure him that under this 

Act, there will be action taken, it will be taken as I pointed out by midsummer. He will not have too 

long, I don't think, to wait to see the beginnings of the actions that he has spoken of. Of course as he has 

related, we will probably have to wait some time to see the effectiveness of the action of the Water 

Resources Commission. This is something that will have to be watched carefully, not only by the 

Resources Commission, but I would hope by all people in this province. I would ask today the assistance 

of all organizations interested in this field, municipal government, business and industry in order to 

make this program a success. 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, before the Member takes his seat, may I ask the Hon. 

Member when was The Water Resources Commission Act passed? 

 

MR. GARDINER: — In the session of 1964. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. C.G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and to the 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1379 

Members of this House a group of fine students sitting in the top row of the east gallery. There are 60 in 

number from the Melfort School Unit and they are here with their teachers, Mr. Hendrickson, Mr. 

Pylatiuk and his wife, and Mrs. Harold. They have been driven down here today by bus drivers, Lyle 

Cox and Don Brown. Mr. Speaker, these are rural students from the Melfort Unit. While the school is in 

Melfort itself, these pupils are brought in every day from the surrounding districts. This reminds me, Mr. 

Speaker, that many of these pupils are probably from the same district I taught in 25 or more years ago, 

in fact, I believe I taught some of their parents 25 years ago. This trip to Regina which they made today 

accents a difference between 25 years ago and today. Twenty-five years ago the parents of these 

children were very, very happy if they had a four-mile trip to the adjacent school district to play ball. 

This was probably the extent of their trips in those days. Today they make a 200-mile trip and think 

nothing of it. This visit to the Legislature will be the highlight of the visit to Regina for these pupils. I 

want to welcome them to the Chamber and hope that their total day will not only be thrilling, but will be 

a memorable one. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome to this House a very 

fine group of grade eight students. They are in the Speaker's gallery. They are accompanied by their 

teacher, Mr. Hudema, and also a very efficient bus driver, Mr. Filarczuk. I do hope that they are having 

a very enjoyable and educational day in the city and I do hope they will have a very pleasant return 

home to their fair town of Ituna. There are 41 students in grade eight. I am told they are all in one 

classroom so I really think the teacher is earning more than his pay, but they are such a fine group, I 

think any teacher would love to have them. I am very pleased to see them here today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to welcome a group of students 

from another school, from my constituency, St. Augustine School, who are here with their principal, Mr. 

Selinger. They are the grades seven and eight students — I don't know how many are here as I haven't 

had the opportunity of checking the number, but it's a school about three blocks from where I live. I'm 

sure there are many of the young students that I see here that I know personally and I see them on the 

street every day. We welcome them here most sincerely, and I'd also like to welcome many of the others 

that are here for the first time. I hope that they will enjoy their visit with us, that they will learn of the 

workings of democracy and some day we will be looking forward to them being future leaders and no 

doubt Members of this Legislative Assembly too. We welcome them most sincerely on behalf of you all 

here and the outsiders to the city of Regina. 

 



 

March 17, 1967 

 

 

1380 

MR. G.T. SNYDER (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, I understand that we have with us this 

afternoon a group of students from Aldergate College in Moose Jaw. I haven't had the opportunity to 

check on the specific details, but I'm sure that all Members will join with me in expressing the wish to 

them that they will have an enjoyable stay here and that they will enjoy the proceedings and have a 

pleasant trip home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina West): — Mr. Speaker, and Members, I'd like to call your attention to 

a group of students in the east gallery in the front rows. They are a group of 49 students from the two 

grade five classes at the Regent Park School in the northern part of the city of Regina. They are 

accompanied by their two teachers, Mrs. Hill and Mrs. Seper. They have had a tour of the Legislative 

Buildings and they now see the Legislature at work in some of its more informal aspects, the study of 

the spending for the forthcoming year. I'm sure that all Members join with me in wishing them a 

pleasant visit in the Legislature and express the hope that their visit with us might be helpful in their 

school work. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o'clock p.m. 

 

 


