



















































Hansard: March 29, 1967


 

 

1500 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session — Fifteenth Legislature 

37th Day 

 

Wednesday, March 29, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS RE: RETURNS 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 23 

 

MR. J.H. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are proceeded 

with I would like to refer the Government to the Votes and Proceedings of February 21 on page 5 which 

indicates that an Order of the Assembly was issued that day for Return No. 23 asking for copies of the 

expense account submitted by the Honourable Member for Athabasca as a Legislative Secretary. That's 

over five weeks since that was submitted. In view of the demonstration of the alacrity of the 

Government in getting information over the last couple of days, I'm rather amazed that we haven't got 

this information. When are we going to get it? 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN NO. 49 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw City): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would also like 

to ask about that elusive Order No. 49 which was first given notice for on February 20. A very simple 

question involved the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan's acceptance of the arbitration re Bill No. 2. This 

has still not been answered. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN No's. 3, 18, 23, 79, 82 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day I could add about 

40 to that list to which we haven't as yet got any answers. There are a few which I think are of particular 

interest which don't take long to get. It's difficult to see why they have not been tabled. Order No. 3, 

passed on February 7 deals with the number of persons who have been rejected because there wasn't 

room for them to get technical education. This is something we want before the Education Estimates. 

Order No. 18 on February 21 deals with the rather peculiar arrangement, I think, between the 

Government and one Mr. Odishaw. Certainly this is something we ought to have before Estimates on 

Executive Council. Order No. 23 passed on February 21 has to do with the expense account of the 

Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy). Certainly this is something that ought to be in the hands of 

Members before the Natural Resources Estimates are dealt with . Order No. 79 passed on March 16 asks 

the question whether the Government has corresponded with the farm implement machinery companies 

with respect to the announced increase in price. This shouldn't take very long to find out. Order No. 82, 

was passed only on March 21 but it is very easy to get. It simply calls for the script of the SPC so-called 

report to the people. It's just a matter of getting it and putting it on the table. I can't see any justification 

whatsoever that this should be delayed for a couple of weeks. I ask the Attorney General, the Provincial 

Secretary, if he will ask the Ministers responsible if they could speed 

 



 

March 29, 1967 

 

 

1501 

these up. 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say that the Government will 

make every effort in the next two or three days before the House adjourns to have all returns back, 

tabled. The Attorney General tells me that maybe the odd one because of work involved may not be 

tabled, but we would hope that the great majority would be tabled later today, tomorrow or the next. 

 

QUESTION RE: POWER FAILURE 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I'd like to direct a 

question to the Minister in charge of the Power Corporation (Mr. Steuart). I understand that in my 

constituency in Glen Cairn, Glen Cairn Southwest, the power is off. As the people have contacted me 

showing their concern whether the Minister can tell us what is the cause of it and asking how soon the 

power might be restored in that area. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — No, I cannot. I can find out, though. I 

wasn't even aware it was off. Would you give me a note. I'll find out what area . . . 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — In Glen Cairn and Glen Cairn Southwest in the city of Regina. 

 

MR. STEUART: — This morning it was off. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Right. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN No. 91 

 

MR. C.G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, I'd ask the Minister of Education (Hon. G.J. 

Trapp) whether or not his officials are having trouble digging up the answer to Return No. 91 showing 

payments to MacLaren Agency. Are your officials having trouble getting the answer to this, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Never have any trouble, George. 

 

MR. WILLIS: — The Minister of Education, please. 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): — As far as I know they are working at it to get it over 

here. 

 

QUESTION RE: RETURN No. 22 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — I'd like to ask the Provincial Secretary if he yet has Return No. 

22 which was asked four or five weeks ago. 

 



 

March 29, 1967 

 

 

1502 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. F.K. RADLOFF (Nipawin): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to introduce to this Legislature a fine 

group of students from the Nipawin School Unit. There are some 23 students here with their teachers, 

Mr. Angel from Aylsham, Mr. Hutcheson from Newfelt School and Mr. George Hess from the Codette 

School along with other adults. On behalf of all MLAs here and yourself, I'd like to wish them a 

welcome and wish them a very successful trip home and hope they have a very enjoyable day. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 p.m. o'clock. 

 

 


