



















































Hansard: February 09, 1967


 

 

137 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

 

Thursday, February 9, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino): — Before the Orders of the Day,Mr.. Speaker, I would like to have you 

join with me in welcoming a fine group of students in the Speaker‟s gallery from Yellow Creek. They have 

been making this trip down here, the grade 11 and 12s every year. I want to also say that Yellow Creek has 

always given a good account of itself in sports. On several occasions they have taken the soccer 

championship and the volleyball championship. At the present time, two girls that are not in the gallery — 

and I‟m sure would be glad to be here — are on their way to Quebec City to represent this province in table 

tennis. I‟m sure that the House will join with me in wishing these two girls great success. The amazing thing 

about this is that they competed in Saskatoon and it is Carol Kostyk and Gloria Borsh. Now out of ten 

games, Carol won ten, Gloria won nine games, only to be defeated by Carol. So both the first and second 

came to Yellow Creek and now they are on their way to Quebec City. These students are here today with 

their teachers, Mrs. Spelay and Mr. Gingero. The bus drivers are Andy Lypchuk and Gary Hostuik. They are 

touring the city today and I‟m sure that their trip here will be educational and I want to wish them a safe 

journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. SALLY MERCHANT (Saskatoon City): —Mr.. Speaker, could I draw your attention and of the 

Members of the House, to an even finer group of students who are in the west gallery. They are finer, not 

because they are better students, but because they are lucky enough to live in Saskatoon. They are from John 

Lake School, who with their teachers are down on one of the many visits that are paid by Saskatoon schools 

to the Legislature. We are very pleased to have them and I know you will be too. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): —Mr.. Speaker we have with us today, seated in the east gallery, 

students from two schools located in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, on your behalf, I would like to introduce 

them 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

138 

 

and to welcome them to this Assembly. They are a group of some 50 students from the Haultain School. 

They are grade seven and eight students. They are accompanied by the assistant principal, Mr. Shire, and one 

of the school teachers, Mr. Dyer. We also have seated in the east gallery, a group of grade eight students, 

some 28 of them and they are here with their assistant principal, Miss Buckwold. We hope their stay here 

with us today will be enjoyable and they will be able to learn how our Legislature functions. Not only are 

they a good group of students, Mr. Speaker, but I suggest that they are the most excellent group of students 

that we have with us today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Hooker 

(Notukeu-Willowbunch) for an Address In Reply and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Lloyd (Leader 

of the Opposition). 

 

MR. M.P. PEDERSON (Arm River): —Mr.. Speaker, before resuming the remarks that I discontinued at 

adjournment yesterday afternoon, I would like to comment for a few moments on a rather “far-out” program 

that I saw on television last night. I think I use the phrase “far-out” in the correct sense of the word, in the 

modern sense, because it was a “far-out” program in the same sense as are many of them that we see on CBC 

these days. I‟m referring to the Provincial Affairs telecast that we heard on the local station at six o‟clock last 

night. It was quite apparent to me that all the stops were pulled, all the techniques of modern advertising 

used, to sell one central thing. They had a little bit of sex, and I must admit it was lovely, and a handsome 

young Cabinet Minister from Wilkie, sharing the honors doing a very thorough job. I was rather intrigued to 

find that the lady Member from Saskatoon, perhaps unwittingly, gave us some advance information on the 

Budget and, I want to quote, that she announced that one-third of the money that comes out in the Budget is 

going to be diverted to the further use of education. In order to have done that, she must have had some 

inkling or some figure in mind, to have arrived at that statement. More than that, I was appalled at the type of 

impression that was attempted to be left with the viewing audience. That was, that the Liberal party, rather 

than the Government of the people of this province, was responsible for every good thing that was taking 

place in Saskatchewan today. I want to quote, and I would suggest you hold your applause until I‟m through 

with you. I want to quote what the lady Member from Saskatoon (Mrs. Merchant) had to say about senior 

citizen housing. She said: 

 

The Liberals are building housing for senior citizens across this province. Several thousand more 

senior  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

139 

citizens now can thank the Liberals for their accommodations —  

 

or words to that effect. I‟m absolutely sure that the committees in the various communities, the local 

councillors, the mayors, the interested citizens and all of those involved who have spent years in some 

places, getting community centres built to provide care for senior citizens, will be interested to know that the 

Liberal party think that they built them. 

 

MRS. SALLY MERCHANT (Saskatoon City): —Mr.. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I think if the 

Member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) had listened more carefully he would have understood me to say 

that this Government had in cooperation with religious, municipal, and I have forgotten the third 

classification I used, made it possible to help . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEDERSON: —Mr.. Speaker first of all, it wasn‟t a point of order and if the lady wishes to have it 

corrected, I would suggest that she bring a transcript of what she said. She said, “The Liberals were building 

senior citizen housing”. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEDERSON: — And then they went on to describe virtually every program in this province as being a 

Liberal program. I would suggest that if it‟s a Liberal Government, you say that. I have listened in this House 

over the last two or three days to speeches being made, and I have been listening with some disgust to the 

comparisons that are being made of what the Liberals do and what they NDP do. And I hear some people 

around this province saying, “how about us who pay the shot?” I think it‟s about time that Members in the 

House started to realize it‟s the taxpayers who do these things. We merely legislate and follow policies laid 

down by this party who happens to be the Government. It is not the Liberal party who is building senior 

citizen homes. I think that my people down at Davidson and Outlook will be pleased to know that you think 

you built them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEDERSON: — The entire program as I say was a “far-out” type of program, a recital of what the 

Liberal party is doing, not what the Government of this province is doing. I wanted to mention that, because 

I think it‟s time people started to realize that we are a government. It is not a political party running the 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

140 

 

province. 

 

Before carrying on with my remarks, I want to relate back to what I said yesterday, that there is in my 

opinion, a lack of awareness by this party in power of the position it should take in the Centennial Year, of 

its attitude towards its responsibilities as a Legislature and as a Province. As I said yesterday, there is very 

little evidence that it is aware of what is required of it in the year 1967. I dealt yesterday with two general 

areas, namely the area of food production and the tremendous need to increase it. I also dealt with the other 

resource, water, and the dangers of pollution, and the wise use of water. Today, in my concluding remarks, I 

want to deal for a few moments with our third major resource, that of the human resources of our nation. 

 

I believe that if there was one resource area that the Government did direct a reasonable amount of attention, 

it was to this third resource. There were holes in the program, but by and large, I think they tried to do many 

of the things that are most certainly necessary. There was a passing reference which has already been 

mentioned in this House, to the serious problem of rising living costs. I most certainly don‟t wish to prejudge 

the findings of the committee that has been established into looking into this matter, in cooperation with our 

sister provinces. But I believe that certain basic essentials should receive the attention of this Government, 

even before the findings of the Commission are brought in, because they do affect the cost of living just as 

much as do the high cost of groceries. The first major area of restraint, as everyone is aware, that is imposed 

on our citizens, is the ever-increasing amount of taxes. I have looked for, but I have failed to see, any major 

move that would immediately or in the near future reduce in substantial amounts the tax burden carried by 

the citizens of this province. There was no indication of it. I will quote figures. No doubt he‟ll do that to 

demonstrate that he has reduced taxes; but I suggest that in spite of the minor tax cuts, the tax adjustments 

and tax shifts that he has made that every taxpayer in Saskatchewan today is paying as much, if not more 

taxes directly and indirectly than he has ever paid before in history. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. PEDERSON: — I took a look at the White Paper on the Saskatchewan financial and economic 

position published by this Government at the end of last year. In it was indicated that the highest net income 

for the Saskatchewan Government Telephones in the previous nine years of its operation had been obtained 

last year. Yet the Government saw fit to introduce a fairly substantial general increase in rates across the 

board in this province. 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

141 

I also saw that the net income of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation showed a similar high position, yet no 

decreases were evident in the rates being charged both for gas and power. No sign of a decrease. They say 

these are small items, small items in the individual consumer‟s budget. Nevertheless they are contributing 

factors to the high cost of living. Surely it would have been reasonable, in the face of this expanding 

economy and this continual increase in the cost of living, to have brought about a reduction rather than an 

increase in one case, a holding of the level in another, in these two areas during this period of inflation. 

 

While the Liberals were in opposition, I recall very well, as I‟m sure many Members do, that they were 

always claiming that if they were the Government, they would introduce competition to the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation in order to reduce gas and power rates. I heard the present Premier on several occasions 

suggest that this was one way to bring about reduction in rates. He was asked what he would do. He took a 

look at Manitoba and he quoted figures; he took a look at Alberta and he quoted figures and he said, 

“Competition would bring them down and we‟ll do something about that”. I also remember another promise 

that they made in those days, that they were going to refund the cost of bringing power to the farmers of this 

province. They‟ve conveniently forgotten that one too. Perhaps they do have in mind some steps that they are 

gong to take in this direction to relieve some of the pressure that‟s on the population of this province. Even 

the most casual look at the cost of gas and electricity in our neighboring provinces will show that 

Saskatchewan is paying the highest rate on the prairies. 

 

Last year I brought to the attention of the responsible Minister the proposal that a new look should be taken 

at the cost of financing expansion for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. As I remember correctly, I 

presented a fairly broadly documented proposal dealing with this area. I remember that I ended up in a bit of 

a hassle with the Minister at that time, but at no point was he able to refute the fact that if the financing of 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation was approached on a broader, more long-term basis that it would be 

possible to divert some of the profits, that are now being made, and which are going into the capital fund and 

into the retirement of debt fund, to reducing rates, and this is particularly necessary at the present time. 

Surely it‟s time to take a look at some of these areas where the Provincial Government has some 

responsibility in the rising cost of living. 

 

I want to remind Hon. Members opposite in passing of two other major contributors to the high cost of 

living, both Liberal measures. I am referring to the tight money situation and its attendant high interest rates, 

as well as the 11 per cent sales tax. Granted, these are measures that were imposed by 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

142 

 

the Federal Government. However, I would hope that at every opportunity our Provincial Premier would use 

his very persuasive powers to bring about some change in the attitude of his national colleagues in so far as 

these two measures are concerned. Perhaps now with the return of Water Gordon to the Cabinet, his task will 

be considerably easier than it used to be. He might be able to persuade them a lot easier. 

 

I listened to the Premier yesterday defending the homeowner grant. And he has reason to defend, because 

over the past year he has been promising over and over again, or hinting at any rate, dangling the proverbial 

carrot, that he‟s gong to raise it. He‟s not only giving it to us this year, he is going to increase it. Now he tells 

us that it doesn‟t look as if he is going to be able to do that. “This is a sad state of affairs,” he says, “We are 

in trouble.” Well now, the thing that I would like to know is: wasn‟t the Premier aware that Saskatchewan 

would in 1966 emerge as a have province? Or didn‟t he believe his own propaganda, that things were never 

better and that Saskatchewan people were never wealthier? You can‟t have it both ways. Either he was 

ignorant of our financial picture in Saskatchewan, or else he was guilty of gross and deliberate misleading of 

the people with his promise to increase the homeowner grant. It had to be one or the other. If he knew that 

the financial situation wasn‟t as good as it was, then he made a drastic error in judgment in not realizing that 

we would no longer be eligible for equalization grants when the Federal-Provincial Conference was 

convened. 

 

The job of Treasurer, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is, and I concede this, is a difficult and an exacting one, 

requiring full time attention. You cannot, as I suggested about the Hon. Member from Regina (Mr. Baker) 

who is also the Mayor of Regina, be a dual-purpose person. You don‟t do much of a job by running in two 

directions at the same time. If the Premier is going to travel around the world and sell Saskatchewan, fine. 

Let him do that or else stay at home and attend to the fiscal problems of this province, so we don‟t end up in 

the silly situation we have where promises are being made, and then turn around and say, “For heaven‟s 

sake, I never realized it, but we‟re going to be cut off here all of a sudden.” I think it‟s a good thing that he 

announced recently that he would be stepping down, because I think another year of surprises, such as the 

one he sprung on us, is more than we can possibly manage. I haven‟t much time left at my disposal,Mr.. 

Speaker, and I wanted to speak just for one moment on the question of education. 

 

I don‟t want to belabor too much some of the things that have been said by other Members in this House, but 

I do want to repeat the suggestion I made in this House yesterday in so far as technical schools and their 

applications to farmers are concerned. I noticed in the press this morning, that the Minister 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

143 

of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) in his brief to the Federal Members of Parliament Committee that are sitting 

in Regina pointed out that he was concerned, or that he also recognized, that there was a lack of labor force 

for farmers. The press release seemed to indicate that he had said this in his brief to the committee. I‟ve just 

had a few moment, since it was tabled in the House about 15 minutes ago, to run through it, and nowhere did 

he say this. I can only conclude that as a result of my remarks yesterday afternoon, he belatedly remembered, 

“Heavens alive, we have robbed the farmers of all labor. We had better say something about it.” Perhaps this 

will indicate that he is going to do something about it. We must provide a trained labor force and it will have 

to come under our technical schools‟ assistance program in some form or other. 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, in spite of there being several other things that I would like to have 

discussed, but in view of the radio time, I will have to conclude. I can only say, as I said at the opening of my 

address, I believe that the Government has in my opinion failed to recognize its responsibilities in this 

Centennial Year. There are many measures it is introducing which will be supported by myself. 

Nevertheless, it is not the type of program that is commensurate with the year of 1967, our Centennial Year. 

I cannot support the Motion, but I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw City): —Mr.. Speaker, to begin, I want to say something on the Premier‟s 

initial remarks on Tuesday. He chose as you remember to make a few remarks about Moose Jaw. He 

chortled that the former CCF Member, Harry Swarbrick, was going to run as a Liberal candidate in Moose 

Jaw. Well, I‟m not going to shoot any personal shafts at Mr. Swarbrick. The most striking thing about the 

Premier‟s statement was that he decreed Mr. Swarbrick as the candidate. If there is to be a nominating 

convention, it is to be a bare formality. The orders have come from the Most High that a decision on a 

candidate has already been made. Those Liberals who still believe that these matters should be 

democratically decided in convention or who are the contenders themselves for nomination are gong to be 

quite rudely surprised. The Premier boasted about what the Liberals have done for Moose Jaw. He claimed 

the Liberals have brought a winery and a nail plant to the city. Well, we are all glad to see these two 

enterprises, but when the Premier has the unvarnished nerve to talk about Moose Jaw‟s economic troubles 

rising because of the CCF Government, something needs to be said. Now, Moose Jaw‟s main difficulties 

arose because of dieselization on the railroads and successive Liberal governments at Ottawa did next to 

nothing, Mr. Speaker, over 15 years, to overcome these adverse effects of automation for railway employees. 

The Liberal way was to let things work their way out and thousands of Moose Jaw 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

144 

 

railway employees were victims of that lack of policy and leadership. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — The Premier even had the unblushing audacity o blame the CCF for the closing down of 

the Robin Hood Mills at Moose Jaw last year. By this closure, many jobs will be lost at Moose Jaw, probably 

more in the future. It‟s doubtful if either the winery or the nail and wire plant will make up for the number of 

employees that were lost just from this one plant. Mr. Speaker, with Liberal Governments at Regina and at 

Ottawa, the Robin Hood Mill closing could have and should have been prevented. The intervention of the 

Wheat Board alone could have produced the contracts for Robin Hood to continue operations. The lack of 

action from these two Governments is all too evident. The mill remains closed. The Premier now tries to 

cover his on tracks by a verbal barrage. 

 

The CCF administration was instrumental in bringing both industry in employment-creating institutions to 

Moose Jaw. The large staff of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute and the accompanying large number of 

students all help the city. So does the Training School with its more than 500-employee payroll. Canaday‟s 

Apparel with up to 175 employees, is another industry brought in when the CCF was in power. Mayor 

Lowry, soon hopefully to replace the present Member for Morse, took an active part in the arrangements. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Up to 1,000 jobs were probably created directly by those actions, many more were 

created indirectly. Between 1960 and 1961, there were nine new concerns located in Moose Jaw, three others 

had expansions. The Siren cries of the Liberals are likely to be ignored in Moose Jaw for those and other 

reasons and one concerns the proposed Moose Jaw Provincial Building. Ample land was acquired by the 

previous CCF Government, and $400,000 was set aside to begin this building. What did the Liberal 

Government do as one of its first actions? Cancelled all arrangements, squelched all the plans. Three years 

have passed, still no building. The Liberal promise of a Provincial Building will soon be dangled in front of 

Moose Jaw citizens just like other promises they made in the past. The significant thing is this, Moose Jaw 

can‟t trust the Liberals. They said No to the Liberals for 23 years! They‟ll say it again until next election! 

And they‟ll do this in spite of the most bare-faced gerrymandering jobs ever engineered by any Liberal 

Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker after the program outlook displayed on February 2nd and hearing the remarks of Government 

supporters, I 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

145 

couldn‟t help but think of a fast-talking salesman trying to dispose of a doubtful second-hand automobile. 

Yes, a second machine with a flashy paint job, broken-down motor, no wheel alignment, sawdust in the 

gears, leaking oil, and a noxious and noisy exhaust system. And not to forget a blaring horn that won‟t come 

unstuck! Years and years on the hustings have long ago made this Liberal machine ready for the scrap heap. 

It‟s resold every year by fast-talking and a new paint job. Since 1964, many Saskatchewan citizens have seen 

it in action. They‟ve concluded that it should be taken off the roads as unsafe, unreliable, at any speed and 

with the owner‟s licence revoked. 

 

It‟s almost shameless to see and hear from the Liberal party on many questions. The very programs they 

fought and attacked, the economic developments they hampered they now claim for their own. 

 

The Liberal party who carped and complained at every step would now like to erase that record. Who can‟t 

recall, for example, the continual criticism of the new Premier a few years ago with respect to the 

Interprovincial Pipe and Steel Corporation. Undoubtedly at the time this did great damage to that firm. As 

everybody knows it succeeded in spite of the explosive attacks of the Premier. This company recently 

reported a profit of almost $3,500,000, 19.8 per cent of sales in 1966. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party and their loyal agents and the areas of communication have done their best to 

take all credit in the immense social and economic strides that our province has taken in the last two 

decades. 

 

One recalls George Orwell‟s book “1984", and his description of how the rulers of the day attempted to 

expunge all earlier historical references they didn‟t approve of. The Saskatchewan Liberals haven‟t waited 

for twenty years. A new book, “1964" needs to be written about the way that they have abused and 

suppressed the record of events. 

 

Ever since the Premier in his “promising days” of the 1964 election campaign said 80,000 new jobs would 

be provided under the Liberals, we have seen the gross misuse of the wildest assortment of statistics in an 

effort to prove that this pledge was mostly or wholly redeemed. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had prosperous times in 

North American during the past two or three years. We‟ve all certainly benefitted from this trend. It has 

greatly aided the quickening development, especially noticeable in Saskatchewan, over the last ten years. But 

the Premier and the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) and others need to be restrained when they talk about 

the number of new jobs. They should compare notes when they make claims. They should recognize the 

Liberal Government of this province has been anything but useless in approaches to many key problems of 

employment and the wage earner. 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

146 

 

Now the last Dominion Bureau of Statistics, “Estimates of Employees by Province and Industry”, issued in 

January 1967, gives us the latest provincial job figures. The real facts are very interesting. In spite of the 

immense advantages of potash development and the direct and indirect employment created by 

record-breaking crops, we have not done nearly so well as the Premier‟s propaganda machine would have us 

believe. Now the DBS figures for September of 1966 show that Saskatchewan had a 3.4 per cent increase in 

employment over the same month in 1965. This was less than the Canadian average of 4.4 per cent. 

Saskatchewan tied with Newfoundland for the sixth place in terms of percentage increases in employment. 

British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, and little Prince Edward Island all had greater growth in 

employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker a Government enjoying all the advantages of a continental boom, along with continuing 

development of resources and record-breaking grain crops, that has this meager employment rate increase 

has nothing to crow about. 

 

The Premier misled the public again when he spoke to the Saskatchewan Women‟s Liberal Association, in 

November of last year. This is reported in the November 26, 1966 issue of the Leader Post. He said, 

 

As we prepare for this election campaign there is full employment in the Province and there are 

about 15,000 jobs that cannot be filled. 

 

Now the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) applauds. 

 

The Premier even in the midst of his election fervor (or is it fever?) should have disciplined his tongue. At 

the least, he should have explained that there were thousands of Saskatchewan people looking for jobs. As a 

matter of fact, in December of 1966, there were in Saskatchewan, 10,059 unplaced applicants for jobs and 

only 1,470 job replacements. And remember, Mr. Speaker, these are only those who presented themselves at 

the Federal Government office. They don‟t represent by any means all of the people who were unemployed 

and looking for work. 

 

The statement of the head of the Government that there is full employment in the province reveals a 

complete lack of responsibility. What the Premier should have told his audience is that the problem of 

upgrading and training workers is the primary one. He should have been frank to admit that his Government 

has failed to provide the means and facilities that would effectively cope with this grave situation. 

 

This Government has dragged its feet badly in the field of upgrading, technical training and trade education. 

The CCF Members of this House have consistently appealed for proper action. It is true that there have been 

some forward moves. 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

147 

But on the whole the record has been very poor. 

 

My constituency was honored with the construction of the first provincial technical institute buildings. From 

the beginning under the CCF, its facilities were very well used by Saskatchewan people. The institute 

principal, Mr. R.J. Reynolds, just recently retired, pioneered in developing that system. Just recently before 

stepping down from his post, he was quoted in the Moose Jaw Times Herald as follows: 

 

He told the reporter interviewing him that “We are not able to take in all perspective students that 

apply, and industrial concerns are not getting the number of graduates they want from us.” Most 

shocking of all, Mr. Reynolds said that in the past year almost half of the recruiting teams from 

industries failed to find the graduates they wanted. Out of 57 recruiting teams he said twenty-six had 

failed to find graduates. 

 

Considering the actions of this Government, and their cancellation of technical school projects of a CCF 

Government and others too, the admission by the Premier that there are plenty of jobs that cannot be filled, 

because people are not trained for them, is absolutely inexcusable. Liberal inactivity has been directly 

responsible. There is simply no other conclusion. We‟ve lost much of what could have been gained if a full 

building program had been followed during the last three years. 

 

With the advent of higher Federal allowances for unemployed trainees more people can take courses. I‟m 

glad that the Government has agreed to take some advantage of these increases. But where are the new 

quarters we need to accommodate the thousands of young people and adults who desperately need to get 

training and education under these programs? That this Government hasn‟t provided adequate facilities 

means, first, that many young people will be denied them . . 

 

MR. CODERRE (Minister of Labour): — Not one. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — . . and second, the economy of he province itself has been badly injured. Mr. Speaker, I 

wonder if the Saskatchewan Manpower report, which my Leader asked for in this Assembly, and which this 

Government seems very reluctant to produce, may not prove to be the final refutation of the Premier‟s 

bombastic claims about 80,000 new jobs by 1968. Now I haven‟t seen the report, but I have heard rumors 

about its contents. My understanding is that the report smashes to smithereens Liberal claims on new jobs. I 

gather it indicates, first, that new job opportunities are today emerging in Saskatchewan at a slower rate than 

during the 1961-64 period, second, that more job opportunities emerged in the three years from 1961-64 than 

it is estimated will emerge in the whole four years from 1964-1968, 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

148 

 

and finally, that the number of Saskatchewan farmers will drop by 10,000 in the four years 1964-68. 

 

When this document is finally dragged into the limelight, Mr. Speaker, I predict it will be a damning 

indictment of the Liberal Government‟s economic policies. No wonder it seems to be doing its best to hide 

the report from the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government likes to talk about what it has done for young people. The people in my 

constituency are denied a new Y.M.C.A. building because of the refusal of the Local Government Board to 

permit a loan partly guaranteed by the City. Lip service to youth isn‟t enough. I appeal to the Premier to 

review the stand of his Government. I suggest that particularly because this is Centennial Year, he starts by 

making a substantial grant to the Moose Jaw Y.M.C.A. This isn‟t a precedent. The former CCF Government 

did this in the case of both the Regina and Saskatoon Y.M.C.A. buildings. 

 

I want to make some reference to the Saskatchewan River dam now termed the Gardiner Dam. I shan‟t go 

deeply into the question of the name, except to say that surely the Liberal Government at Ottawa, acting after 

consultation with the present Liberal Government at Regina, should have considered the name of bothMr.. 

T.C. Douglas and the Rt. Hon. John Diefenbaker. Those two men were after all second to none in their fight 

for the dam. They were signatories to the agreement to build it, after frustrating decades of Liberal inaction. 

It‟s not too late to take some gesture in this regard. There is the new Lake Saskatchewan, there‟s the 

Qu‟Appelle dam, that could be named to give some recognition to these two great individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the possibilities that are opening up because of the operation of the Gardiner Dam are of great 

importance to Moose Jaw. It‟s the gateway city to this area. We expect to see growth and development 

because of increased tourism, mixed farming industry, recreation. 

 

This Government has made a wretched beginning in backing up the Saskatchewan Water Resources 

Commission and the water pollution policies. I want to refer to a statement made by the manager of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Mr. D.B. Furlong, at the annual meeting of the Saskatchewan River 

Development Association in Moose Jaw last year. According to the Western Producer of November 3rd last, 

Mr. Furlong styled “a professed servant of big business” urged that anti-pollution campaigns not “get out of 

hand” in any promotion of water conservation. 

 

Mr. Speaker we must insist that this Government take a solid position to prevent pollution of our rivers. The 

Saskatchewan River dam must become a reservoir for pure mountain water not a catch-basin for human and 

industrial wastes. There‟s no compromise with pollution. We know all about the sad history  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

149 

of the United States. Let‟s reject the idea that water pollution control has to give way to the “goose that laid 

the golden eggs”, which I shall term the Furlong phrase. 

 

I want to talk for a few minutes about the Liberals and labor. Now what‟s been noticeable about the Liberals‟ 

statements in this and other debates? Blame labor for inflation, vilify its leaders while remaining absolutely 

silent about monopolistic, centralizing trends in industry and their actions against the public interest. The 

Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) the other day had nothing to say about the most recent 

increase in farm machinery prices. One firm says that this will be $150 for tractors, $325 for combines in 

certain lines. The Member (Mr. Hooker) said that many strike settlements were quite unwarranted; but he 

had nothing to say about the 44 per cent increase in Canadian corporation profits from 1960-1964. He said 

nothing about the fact that six of the largest Canadian firms control 50 to 100 per cent of all raw material and 

industrial production. He had nothing to say about the millions of dollars lost to Canadian widows and 

pensioners because of the actions of defaulting financial firms. No, the whole Liberal outlook seems to be 

based on a fixation against labor. 

 

The Mover of the Address in Reply said nothing about his own Government‟s failure to act positively in the 

interest of consumers. He blames labor for being the cause of high prices. He echoes a leader who has gone 

the length and breath of Canada nailing labor to the proverbial cross of gold. 

 

Mr. Gordon McEachern of Ottawa, an economist with the Agricultural Research Council of Canada, said in 

Ottawa last October that large retail food stores in Canada are taking twice the profit they are in the United 

States. He compared Washington with Ottawa prices. They are all much higher in Ottawa, including items 

like sirloin steak and flour. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, my friends in the Liberal party well know that in general, United States farmers 

get more for their produce than Canadian farmers. They know that wage rates of Canadian retail employees 

are much lower than in the U.S.A. It‟s the big food chains that benefit while Canadian farmers and 

consumers both suffer from exorbitant charges. 

 

Why don‟t they mention these facts? The conclusion I draw is they‟re not anxious to moderate the 

misunderstandings that exist on farm labor issues. They want to inflame and enlarge them for the least 

commendable political motives. Liberals in the House say they want to play fair and square with labor. Why, 

then Bill 2 — the compulsory arbitration law rushed through last fall? 

 

Let‟s assume that compulsory arbitration was the answer. 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

150 

 

Can this be an excuse for stacking legislation against the organized working people? Look at the one-sided 

sections. A Government in the position where it can select two of three members of an arbitration board 

supposed to provide an impartial judgment on the matters in dispute between the Government and its 

employees. Why did the Government reject the naming of a board chairman by the Chief Justice of the 

Province? Why indeed, subsequently, did it have its own board nominee refuse flatly to accept anyone of 

five or six prominent judges suggested by the union to be the chairman of the board that was set up between 

the S.P.C. and the O.C.A.W.? Why set itself up as judge and jury in usurping the rights of the Labour 

Relations Board to cancel a union‟s bargaining right? Why unless the Government wanted to continue to 

wield the big stick to crush all that got in its way. 

 

The grave and iniquitous feature of Bill 2, apart from the central argument of arbitration in labor disputes is 

that this law makes a mockery of the impartial tribunal principle. It makes the Government an agent of 

injustice and restraint. 

 

The Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) raised the old chestnut about strikes caused by union 

bosses. Now where have a great many of the most intense disputes, Mr. Speaker, taken place in the last 

fourteen months? In Quebec, of course. National unions have figured in most of these. I watched television 

the other night, watched the reverend sisters who are teachers, chanting strike melodies side by side with 

other teachers. But perhaps Liberals think, they are under the sway of Labor bosses too. 

 

I should say something about the so-called labor court principle ,Mr. Speaker, that is sometimes advocated. 

The reference here is to the Swedish, Norwegian, or British practices. It should be understood that almost 

total reliance in these systems is placed on collective bargaining. Indeed, the state intrudes much less than is 

the case in the United States and Canada. Arbitration where it is used is entirely on the voluntary agreement 

of labor and management; and compulsory arbitration is the rare exception. The difference in these countries 

is that labor is treated far more as an equal partner than is the case in North America. Shortcomings in 

management-labor relations today are caused to a large extent by the failure of the Federal Government of 

this country to aid in updating the tried and true methods of collective bargaining and setting the stage for a 

far more meaningful area of management-labor consultation. 

 

For most of the past 30 years we‟ve had a Liberal Government in Ottawa. Upon them must rest the chief 

blame for not acting earlier to achieve the higher stage of development in industrial relations. If the advice of 

the Saskatchewan 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

151 

Liberals were followed in labor relations it would cause the greatest damage and violence to this country‟s 

voluntary institutions since the dark days of the Combination laws in the 19th century. 

 

The Federal Government has only recently set up a fact-finding body on labor relations. I regret it does not 

have representation from either management or labor bodies. It is a half-hearted effort which can‟t bring the 

best results. But it is at least a belated recognition of the need to get facts, information, and recommendations 

for a modern labor policy. The self-styled, middle-of-the-road, rightward acting Saskatchewan Liberals have 

not even gone that far. Indeed, they have eliminated two important organizations for management-labor 

consultation in this province: the Saskatchewan Productivity Council and the Industry Advisory Council to 

SEDCO. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Chief Justice Hall pointed out two years ago that 100 days of sickness are lost for every one 

day of strikes in Canada. It is also known that during each year some 30 or 40 times more lost time results 

from unemployment than results from strikes. Accidents themselves cause far more lost time than all the 

labor disputes in the country. Now, this is not to say that there are no strikes which acutely affect the 

community. They do. This isn‟t to say that we shouldn‟t try for a more civilized, a more intelligent approach 

to bargaining, wherever it exists. We should. But it does suggest that we should not be stampeded into wild 

and intemperate courses, that are advocated by politicians who look not so much for remedies as for their 

own extremely narrow political advantage, and by the division of the community by examples that I suggest 

are not true in substance and fact. 

 

I must tell my friends in the Government that compulsion as a principle is foredoomed to failure. I want to 

remind my friend that there was another spokesman very well known in this country and who got a great deal 

of publicity at one time, who is hardly known today, hardly remembered. I refer, and I refer respectfully 

because he is now dead, to the late Premier Mitch Hepburn. You all recall what he had to say about labor 

about keeping unions in their place, what he did to prevent the unions of the time from organizing so that 

they would have some equality in their relations with their employers. I say that if there is no other reason 

than the present Saskatchewan Liberals‟ attitude to labor relations, I would have to voice my lack of 

confident in the Government that sits to your right, Mr. Speaker. Now there are of course, very many other 

reasons why I could not go 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

152 

 

along with the message that was delivered in this House last week., including the numerous omissions, the 

many short-comings of the Speech from the Throne. These in any case would prompt my decision when the 

vote comes in this House to vote for the amendment and against the motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. T.M. WEATHERALD (Cannington): —Mr.. Speaker, one of the things that I learned when I first 

came to this Assembly was that once you are schedule for radio time you must perform practically barring 

anything short of death, and today I find myself with only about half a voice. If the Members of this 

Assembly will bear with me, I‟ll proceed. 

 

I‟d like to talk today, Mr. Speaker, about the problem which I believe is quite serious in Saskatchewan. It is 

not a new problem but it is one which many small communities face and which many are finding more and 

more difficult to solve, although they are receiving increased help in more recent times. I am speaking of the 

problem of centralization because it is a problem which is touching over half of the people of Saskatchewan 

because over half of our population still live in the rural areas. But, Mr. Speaker, there is a problem which 

confronts all of the people of Saskatchewan outside the two major cities of Regina and Saskatoon. This is the 

essential question as to how we can share in Saskatchewan‟s economic growth and development. 

 

It is true that this is more acute for some communities than for others but nevertheless the problem does exist 

to a greater or a lesser degree. 

 

I don‟t believe, Mr. Speaker, that there is anyone who wants to see a small community disappear. However, 

due to economic changes that are daily taking place in our society some small communities are eventually 

going to disappear. 

 

However, it is the Government‟s responsibility to see that policies of the Government are directed to ensure 

that the maximum number of smaller communities do continue to thrive as going concerns. 

 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, very strongly, that any government that does not recognize the desirability of 

decentralizing services of this province into as many thriving communities as possible, any government 

which does not recognize that need does so certainly at its own peril, and is a government which will not be 

supported long by rural people. The concept of the few large towns and cities which was so avidly sponsored 

by the previous administration is one which people of this province will no longer accept. This concept was 

far too long promoted and many people came to accept it as being inevitable. I do not believe that this is in 

accordance with the facts. And in fact, this Government in the last two and a half years has done a good deal 

to help reverse the trend to centralization and ensure those 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

153 

towns that have the possibility of a future to assist them and help provide the services which the people in 

Saskatchewan need. 

 

I want to talk about, first, the program of small hospitals. This was a program which was started 

approximately two years ago by this Government. At the time when it was first initiated the small hospitals 

in Saskatchewan, some fifty of them, were slowly falling into disrepair, and there was no plan of action to 

replace them In fact their only future was that of disappearance. There was no policy except for their 

disappearance. And, Mr. Speaker, the Government of today now has a plan of action to provide for 8, 10 and 

12 bed units that will replace these and now are being built throughout this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WEATHERALD: — This policy is meeting well with the people of these small communities and is 

one which has helped decentralized service and provide the type of service that the small hospitals can give. 

The more complicated problems are still being referred to the larger centres and of course, this has been in 

accord with good medical practice and I don‟t believe anyone would suggest that this was not desirable. 

There is one concrete example of how Government action has helped to decentralize service and provide it 

on a more local basis. 

 

The second one is Air Strip Assistance, a program just recently started. This program will give up to a 

maximum of $2500. to the community to help assist in developing and improving its local air strip. This 

again is a policy which is desirable because it is helping to provide a service to people on a local basis. 

 

The third policy which the Opposition strongly opposed and which has gained wide acceptance is the 

opening of liquor outlets in many smaller town. These smaller towns have voted overwhelmingly in favor of 

this new type of outlet and for the basic reason that it helps keep people in their area and keep their 

community alive as a thriving centre. 

 

The Department of Youth has instituted action to making grants available to the lighted school house 

program; and for the first time we are now making use of the facilities that millions of dollars have been 

spent upon and we are making use of them the full year round. Again, this is assistance to a smaller 

community that was never available up until the last year or so. 

 

Urban Assistance, in 1963-64 ,Mr. Speaker, the last year under the previous government, totalled 

$1,227,000. In 1966-67 urban assistance will involve approximately $5,300,000 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

154 

 

or an increase of about 4 million dollars. This is an increase of approximately 6 mills. If it is spread evenly 

across the province as assessment, it is a saving to the municipal taxpayer of approximately 20-30 per cent. 

This program has meant that many communities have been able to install paved main streets; some of these 

main streets are costing in the high thousands of dollars. These communities would be unable to undertake 

the installation of these paved street without the government paying half of the cost. The installation of water 

and sewer systems is also being assisted and many other forms of urban assistance have helped beautify 

many town and cities throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

There are many other programs which have meant a better way of life for rural residents. The increased 

highway program and the increased aid to rural municipalities but I want to leave these, Mr. Speaker, to 

other speakers to dwell upon. The point that I am making, Mr. Speaker, is that the Government through 

many new programs has indicated that it believes the decentralization and improvement of public services in 

so many communities in this province are not only desirable but are absolutely necessary if Saskatchewan 

people are going to have a better economic and social life. I can only add that in 1964 there was very great 

concern in many small towns and villages throughout this province that centralization had become a way of 

thinking, not only of the Government but that it had been promised and propagandized for so long that 

everyone was willing to accept it. I think that this has changed and for the better for most of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to say, Mr. Speaker however, that today in Saskatchewan, we are badly in need of a regional 

development program. Such a program would involve the location of new industries, large and small 

throughout the province rather than becoming totally located in one or two large centres. Such problems as 

availability of labor and desirable transportation facilities can be overcome if we work sufficiently hard at 

them. I know that the Provincial Government has asked various industries to locate in smaller centres and 

there are two examples in the city of Moose Jaw. I am happy that the Provincial Government has seen fit to 

do this because this has meant that many other communities can develop and receive industries that they 

would be unable to attract themselves. Regional development is desirable to ensure opportunity to a 

maximum number of citizens. One of the great problems that today faces the United States and increasingly 

is becoming a Canadian problem is how to govern the great cities and make life in them somewhat more 

livable. In that very interesting book called, “The Making of a President”, 1964 ,Mr. White, the author says 

that the civil rights revolt between the negro and the while in such cities as New York and Chicago were not 

so much revolts of the white versus the negro and over civil rights, as a revolt against the way of life and the 

living conditions of the great cities of the United States. 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

155 

Canada, in some areas, is now approaching this problem and inevitably will suffer from it because we have 

not attempted to find the solution. I do not wish to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that any of Saskatchewan cities are 

even close to approaching a problem in size, because they are not. However, I do suggest that now, as 

industry steadily increases, surely decentralization is desirable from a point of view of improving the life of a 

maximum number of Saskatchewan citizens. Most often the obstacle cited by industry is efficiency. 

However, I am convinced that the loss of efficiency over a long term would be either non-existent or 

negligible and the gains to society would certainly far outstrip the losses. Therefore, I sincerely hope that the 

Government will, at a very early date, in our province‟s development attempt to develop the resources on a 

regional basis so that Saskatchewan people can all share in the programs. I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to be 

part of a government that has recognized that decentralization of economic and social life is a desirable goal. 

Any government which proposes to do otherwise does not deserve the majority support of Saskatchewan 

people. The problem of centralization and what we can do about it is an acute problem of our time, and 

governments must actively work to deal with it, and I am pleased that this Government is. Mr. Speaker, it is 

with great pleasure that I will vote for the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Labour): —Mr.. Speaker, in rising to take part in the debate, I would 

like to congratulate all those who have thus far participated. I believe that special mention should be made 

with regard to the Premier‟s address and to the very welcome statement of policy that he made yesterday. I 

think that particular congratulations should be given as well to the mover and seconder, The Member from 

Willowbunch-Notukeu (Mr. Hooker) and the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardiner) for the excellent job 

they have done in clearly outlining the excellent programs and policies of the Saskatchewan Liberal 

Government. I congratulate the new Minister of Welfare, the Hon. Mr. MacDonald, on his new position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have much to be proud of in Saskatchewan and the Liberal government for the great 

expansion and progress which can be reflected on all segments of the economy. I think the Throne Speech 

does indicate a real sincere concern for the well-being of all the people of our province without 

discrimination against any group. 

 

However, this expansion and progress mentioned as reflecting on all segments of economy are also reflected 

on the co-operative enterprises. Today, I would like to deal specifically with the Department of Co-operation 

of which I am the Minister. At some 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

156 

 

future date Mr. Speaker, I hope to participate in other debates dealing with matters of labor. There are some 

disadvantages though, in having two Government portfolios. At times, when there are certain challenges and 

statements made across the floor, it is rather difficult to answer them without getting both departments 

involved. But however, I throw a challenge at the Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) to produce one 

student to the Province of Saskatchewan who has ever been turned down since this Administration is in 

office for lack of space in our vocational or technical schools. I would like the Member from Moose Jaw to 

stick to the facts, and I would even say to stick to the truth; there is not one single student that has ever been 

turned down. He stood there for five or ten minutes and made a big issue of Bill No. 2 and Bill No. 79, and 

still he was just as dumb as anyone could find in this Legislature when these two Bills were in the House. 

When he had the opportunity to bring in changes and make suggestions to them, he was silent. Now, for 

propaganda purposes, he is trying to raise the issue again, most vociferous at times, yet quiet when he should 

speak or say something about it. 

 

I wish to say something, Mr. Speaker, about the importance of co-operatives and the credit unions to the 

economy of our province, especially to agriculture. I want to tell you something of the work of the 

Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development. In nearly every part of the world where food is 

produced on a large scale, producers have tried to increase their production, improve their efficiency and get 

more for the product they sell through self-help in the form of mutual aid. Co-operation amongst agricultural 

producers is important in Saskatchewan. From the pioneer days of the province, agricultural co-operatives 

have been important in an attempt to increase farm income and helping the agricultural industry to make 

progress. I remember, as a young man, hearing my father talk about his work and that of his neighbours in 

helping to start the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Co-operative marketing and the organization of farm supply 

co-operatives were to be expected because of the dependence of our province on agriculture and the 

importance of our province as a major producer and exporter of food products. Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is 

still our major industry and will remain so for a long while to come if co-operatives in the form of self-help 

for the purpose of mutual aid can increase the prosperity of agriculture then this is of continuing importance 

to the people of Saskatchewan as a whole whose prosperity is so bound up with agricultural production. 

 

We must realize, Mr. Speaker, that co-operatives have been in operation in this province for over 60 years. 

First, our farmers organized marketing co-operatives. Then they started buying farm supplies to keep their 

costs down; then they organized the credit union which became so important in our rural districts. They also 

went into a number of other services, including hail insurance. They also worked together in local 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

157 

organizations and co-operatives to assist in production, such as co-operative community pastures. Let me 

remind you, Mr. Speaker, of a few figures to show how important co-operatives are to the economy of the 

province. Co-operatives handle over 68 per cent of all grain and seed marketed in the province. They handle 

58 per cent of all cattle and calves; 50 per cent of dairy products are handled through these organizations and 

50 per cent of our fish production is marketed through the co-operatives, chiefly in northern Saskatchewan. 

We could say that nearly every farmer in this province is a member of self-mutual aid or a co-operative of 

one form or another. 

 

Now, the growth and progress that I have mentioned a moment ago, so far as the province is concerned, a 

growth I am proud to talk abut, can be illustrated in one specific case. Sherwood Credit Union in the city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker, which has, I believe, a good cross section of membership from labor, professional and 

farm people, has made a net growth in the month of January alone of $1,785,000. 

 

I submit to you, Mr. Speaker that the booming economy of this province is truly reflected in all segments of 

our economy. I think that the Administration, the Liberal Administration, has created the climate to promote 

and develop this feeling. One out of every four people living in Saskatchewan is a member of a credit union. 

These credit unions and their centrals have served mostly rural communities but are also growing rapidly in 

our cities. The Federal Government is proposing deposit insurance legislation to protect depositors in banks 

and federally incorporated loan, finance and trust companies. The Minister of Finance has said that the credit 

unions are to be excluded from the deposit insurance program, because: (1) they do business with their 

members only and do not accept deposits from the public, and (2) they have their own stabilization fund. 

 

May I remind Members of this House that the first central stabilization fund or mutual aid fund, as it is 

known, of this kind that Mr. Sharp is talking about, was started by Saskatchewan credit unions. It has been a 

success and a similar plan has been adopted by nearly every other province in Canada and by a number of 

States of the Union. This kind of self-help has helped to guarantee our credit union members against losses 

in this province, and the safety of the credit union funds is recognized by the Federal Government. The fact 

that this stabilization fund which is a kind of deposit insurance was started in this province as a tribute to our 

credit union leaders and helps to explain why a quarter of the population of this province or over 250,000 

people have savings in local credit unions. 

 

One of the earliest forms of self-help in this province was in the hail insurance field. Rural municipalities 

and their ratepayers worked together to organize the Municipal Hail Insurance Association. This Association 

and the Co-operative 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

158 

 

Hail Insurance Company carry out the majority of hail insurance policies in this province. Another proof of 

the importance of self-help to agriculture. 

 

Now, we also have over three hundred agricultural co-operatives in this province. They are mostly of the 

local groups, including machinery co-operatives, pastures, forage crop production, animal breeding, 

co-operatives for feeding and finishing cattle and many other types of production organizations of which the 

Minister of Agriculture is quite aware. Some of these production co-operatives, like co-operative pastures, 

have been with us for a very long while. I‟m convinced that more co-operative work among farmers to 

increase or diversity their agricultural production can do much to help the independent family farm operator 

maintain this position. I‟ll have more to say about this when new legislation to help the farmers increase their 

production through the mutual self-help aid, is before this House. 

 

The Royal Commissions are of special interest to Members of this House, are the Royal Commission on 

Farm Machinery and the Royal Commission on the Cost of Living. I am happy to state that the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) has tabled his brief today, and I think that it is a very wonderful brief that he 

made to that Commission. I hope that the farm groups, co-operative groups generally, will not fail to make 

their views known to these commissioners on how the users of farm machinery can lower their costs. 

 

The Government of this province has from the earliest date recognized the need to provide legislation and 

staff to administer such legislation for those who wish to use self-help methods and for the purpose of 

mutual aid. This policy recognizes the voluntary nature of the co-operative enterprise as part of our free 

enterprise system. Under this system, our people are free to choose the kind of enterprise or service they 

require, and our Government provides the necessary legislation and legislative service to assist the different 

groups in our society or in our economy. Now, it is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that we have a Department 

of Co-operation and Co-operative development for the benefit of those who may wish to use co-operative or 

credit union methods. On the other hand, it is for the same reason that we have a Department of Industry and 

Commerce to assist those concerned with industrial, and commercial development which is so vital to our 

economy, and it is also for this reason that we have a Department of the Provincial Secretary that provides 

the administration of joint stock company legislation and for the licensing and inspection of companies, and 

for the benefit of those who wish to use this type of business and organization. 

 

Now, the main work of the Department of Co-operation is to administer the co-operative and credit union 

legislation, give 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

159 

information to those who may wish to use this type of legislation, and see to it that the legislation is 

complied with and that the interests of the members of the co-operatives or credit unions are protected. In 

line with giving the people the kind of legislation they require from time to time, cooperative legislation and 

the administration of it is old policy in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

May I remind the Members of this House that our main cooperative acts have been passed by Liberal 

Governments. First was one of the Agricultural Cooperative Associations Act of 1913. The Cooperative and 

Marketing Branch was organized in 1914 to administer this legislation and assist farmers who wished to use 

it. And this is still the general Cooperative Association Act in use today. Then there was the Cooperative and 

Marketing Associations Act of 1926 under which our dairy cooperatives operate. And in 1937, we had the 

Credit Unions Act. Then at this session we will be considering a new act that is to assist new agricultural 

producers in their production programs. There is hardly time to mention organizations of the cooperatives 

under private acts such as the first Cooperative Elevator Company, the Cooperative Stockyards in Prince 

Albert and Moose Jaw and many others and so on. I mention these things to show that the Liberal Party and 

the Liberal Government has always recognized and continues to recognize the importance of voluntary 

enterprises, whether they are cooperative enterprises or others in this province. It has continued and will 

continue to provide new legislation as need for the people who wish to organize and operate cooperatives for 

the purpose of mutual aid. 

 

I now want to remind you of some of the services provided by the Department of Cooperation in helping the 

people to help themselves. For convenience, services have been divided into four branches, into branches 

such as the Credit Union Branch, the Cooperative Association Branch and the Extension and Research 

Branch, and a general Administrative Branch. Now, I want to say something about the work of each. 

 

Inspection of 300 credit unions with a quarter million members is carried out by the Department through the 

Credit Union Branch. Each credit union is owned by the people in the community where it is situated. The 

Board of Directors of each credit union are shareholders of that local credit union. They are residents of that 

community. Their credit union is totally owned and operated by the people themselves and directs its own 

policies within the guide lines of the legislation. In other words, each credit union, is owned, operated and 

guided by the guide lines of the legislation in each individual community. We in other provides, we are 

required by law to inspect the operations of each credit union every year and in doing this work, we work 

very closely with the auditors of the larger credit unions and the local auditing or internal audit committees  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

160 

 

of each organization. The collapse of certain lending institutions in Eastern Canada has helped to make the 

public realize that governments have a major responsibility to safeguard the people‟s savings. We are now 

doing this with our credit unions which serve mostly farmers but which would have a growing number of 

workers and professional and business people amongst their membership. So far not a single member of our 

credit unions in Saskatchewan has ever lost a cent in deposits with a credit union. Even the write-off of loans 

which cannot be collected has been only about eight cents for every hundred dollars loaned. Our credit union 

members, over a quarter million of them, have the highest average investment in credit unions in North 

America. I am proud of this record on the part of the people of the province by being conscious of savings 

and I am sure that you are as well. 

 

Our credit union inspectors, along with a Director and assistant Director of the Credit Union Branch are 

working very hard to assist the local officers to help maintain this record. The inspection of 300 credit 

unions with over $300,000,000 — it is anticipated that before very long it will be $350,000,000 of the 

people‟s savings — is a major responsibility of the Government, one that we are very, very concerned with. 

The Credit Union Branch also inspects the Cooperative Trust Company, the largest Saskatchewan-based 

company of its kind, owned by the various credit unions and co-operatives of the province. Besides paying a 

tribute to our credit union staff for their work, I would be remiss if I wouldn‟t give a word of thanks to 

members of the Credit Union League for their cooperation. The League does very good work in making 

recommendations and suggesting improvements in legislation. 

 

I now want to say something about our Extension Branch. Some may wonder why we use the word extension 

in connection with what is basically a self-help program started and carried on by the people. The reason is 

that certain types of organizations, mostly small and highly specialized, are of a kind which require more 

information from our field staff than the general run of cooperatives. In the southern part of the province 

more information may be required by machinery cooperatives than is readily available amongst a small 

membership. Sometimes community pastures associations or livestock feeding associations may require 

some special assistance in setting up their books and records. In the southern part of the province, the field 

men of our Extension Branch work closely with the representatives of the Wheat Pool, the Department of 

Agriculture and they work with the 300 production cooperatives that I mentioned a moment ago. I wish to 

thank the major cooperative organizations for the assistance they give us in this respect. As I have said 

before, cooperatives of this kind have a great possibility in assisting the family farms. They can apply all the 

way from a father and son cooperative set-up to a pulp wood cutters‟ cooperative in the northern part of the 

province. As I mentioned earlier, 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

161 

a new act to assist groups of this kind will be dealt with. 

 

We have at the moment 60 cooperatives in the north amongst trappers and fisherman. Our Extension Branch 

fieldman in the north work with these groups in assisting the people Nearly all Indians and Métis learn how 

to run their own businesses. This is an important way to help to integrate these people with a white man‟s 

business and industrial economy. 

 

Some mention was made of lack of effort of the Government in education. I can stand here very proud of the 

work we are doing with our Indians and Métis. Speaking of education this Government is concerning itself 

to a great degree in the matter of developing the youth of our province. I need not repeat the many programs, 

the vastly expanded assistance in the new programs in the areas of education. I believe everyone n this 

province realizes the necessity and the need of expansion in these programs without discrimination against 

anyone; and this is being done of course. Of course the gloomy Members, the Member from Moose Jaw for 

example, the fabricators of trouble, the underminers of the well-being of some people are forever attempting 

to depart from facts, but apart from this, Mr. Speaker, my Department is concerning itself with the help in 

education for the Indians and Métis to help them to integrate and form part of our society. This work will 

continue to expand because of our great concern for the under-privileged of this province. Education, Mr. 

Speaker, is not just classroom instruction. It is a slow process and much remains to be done but we are 

making headway with the assistance of the Extension Branch fieldmen in the north. Let me give you a few 

examples. Two years ago, Mr. Speaker, Indian and Métis around Ile-a-la-Crosse organized a small trading 

post. They had no experience and no money except some guaranteed loans. Directors and management had 

to be trained. Last fall, Mr. Speaker, I had the honor to open a brand new store built by that cooperative of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. The local board, consisting of Indians and Métis planned the building, arranged for the 

financing of their own on a business that is a credit to the community. And this would not have been at all 

possible a few years ago. A few years back, a sawmill cooperative at Cumberland House was leased a tract 

of timber. Last fall, this Cumberland House Saw mill cooperative received a prize of $500 from the Timber 

Board for the best timber cut of any operator in the province. Remember the members of this cooperative are 

Indians and Métis. The McIvor Commission on Fish Marketing has some good things to say about the way 

our fisheries cooperatives in northern Saskatchewan have increased the returns to the fisherman and how 

they have improved marketing methods. The fishermen are mostly Indians and Métis and the plants that they 

have purchased from the Government a few years ago have now been paid for by these fishermen. In view of 

this fact that it was then a guaranteed loan that they received to purchase these operations they also had a 

Government— 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

162 

 

appointed Cooperatives Fisheries Board. Provisions were made at the time that there would be a gradual 

reduction in the Board and they would be replaced by fishermen themselves. This again is a type of 

education of groups in our society. 

 

Rehabilitation of our Indian and Métis people is a long-term program. It requires cooperation of every and 

many agencies and many people who are interested in the welfare of our under-privileged. Our Extension 

Branch is happy in its relationship with the Federal Indian Affairs Branch and the Provincial Indian and 

Métis Branch. We appreciate very much the cooperation received from DNR in helping our northern district 

representatives as they try to encourage the Indian and Métis people to make a success of their own 

cooperatives. The problems confronting our Indian and Métis people are many and varied and must be 

attacked on may fronts. The point I wish to make is that cooperatives are proving to be an important method 

of helping these people to integrate with the rest of our society. I also wish to emphasize that the good 

progress made by our northern cooperatives is one more reflection of the booming economy of the north and 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CODERRE: — Let‟s look at some of them. I mentioned a moment ago the Fisherman‟s Co-operatives 

and they have greatly increased the fishermen‟s income from fishing and assisted the fishermen to obtain the 

necessary equipment for the effective fishing operation. Just last year in March, a Cooperative Association 

was incorporated. Starting on a small scale, this was at Dillon, all incorporators signed a memorandum of 

association with an X. They could not even sign their own name. On the other hand we have for example at 

Patunak a cooperative that was incorporated a few years ago. They have had several years of success. Plans 

are well advanced for building a new store and the manager is a pure blood Chipewan Indian. Pelican 

Narrows Cooperative Store Incorporated is proceeding satisfactorily and the manager is a Métis. This 

indicates that given an opportunity, these people can do a very good job for themselves. We‟ve had other 

activities in the reserves in the south, for example the James Smith Cooperative Association Limited. Upon a 

request from the regional supervisor of Indian Affairs, our department has assisted them and the store in 

operating well, and we are confident that they will provide much needed service to the people on this 

reserve, not only in providing consumer goods but in providing an opportunity for the people to learn and 

develop as a result of the experience of working with their own business activities. Considerable work has 

been done with a group of people from the reserve who subsequently organized a Six Bar Ranch Cooperative 

Limited. This cooperative is set up to provide a basis for a group to develop a cattle raising enterprise. There 

are great problems, however, and valuable education  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

163 

is being provided for these people while they are working on the project. The Band of the Thunderchild 

Reserve have leased a store on the edge of the reserve from a local trader and the Department of Cooperation 

staff are assisting this group of people to operate this store at the moment. As soon as some of the minor 

difficulties are ironed out it is expected the store will be incorporated as a cooperative. 

 

Our Cooperative Association Branch provides services as needed to marketing farm supply and retail 

cooperatives, insurance cooperatives and hundreds of the community services. This is done through the field 

staff. This Branch examines for example the Credit Society which is a central credit union of the various 

small credit unions and large credit unions of the province. It also examines the Co-operative Hail Insurance 

Company. Recently there was a housing conference in Regina. This conference was held because there is 

concern over rising construction costs and the difficulty of providing enough housing. Now we have two 

examples of what can be done to lower housing costs through the self-help for the purpose of mutual aid. 

There is a new and successful cooperative housing project at Lanigan and I would urge Members of this 

House to have a good look at it because it‟s really a wonderful project. This will grow and have a place in 

other industrial communities where both skilled technicians and workers must have housing. Last fall there 

was organized in Regina the first student housing cooperative in this province, with the assistance of the 

Cooperative Development Association and general cooperatives such as the Wheat Pool and the Federated. It 

is one method of helping our university students to secure housing at a lower cost. There has been a great 

program of student housing in Eastern Canada and has been financed with assistance from Central Mortgage 

and Housing Corporation. There are the same opportunities here to meet housing needs of a rapidly growing 

university student population. Please remember, Mr. Speaker, that the cooperative housing of this kind does 

not need nor does it expect government subsidy. 

 

The fieldmen of the Cooperative Association Branch along with the Directors and Assistant Directors are 

ready to help any group interested in lowering the cost of housing through the cooperative principles they 

wish or any mutual methods they wish to use. The housing sections of the Cooperative Associations Act are 

being clarified to aid in the development of the Cooperative Association. I believe I gave notice the other day 

of such a Bill. 

 

Our Research Branch also assists with the administration of cooperative, credit union and marketing 

legislation. I want to mention an example of the kind of work that this Branch is dong. The report of the 

McIvor Commission on Fisheries has been studied to see what its recommendations may mean to our 

fisheries in the north and how this cooperative could tie in with a fish  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

164 

 

marketing board, the National Board, if this is organized as recommended by the Commission. This study is 

in consultation with Cooperative Fisheries and the Department of Natural Resources. Our Research Branch 

also assists students who are sent from developing countries by the External Aid Office to study the 

operations of the Department. This reminds us we have a duty to help the people of developing countries as 

they strive to use the cooperative methods along with any other methods to overcome one of the greatest 

problems that face us in the world today and that is the problem of hunger. 

 

We concern ourselves with our Indians and Métis. We concern ourselves with our under-privileged through 

forms of education. I think that in our education program, we can stand unashamed before anyone and brush 

off the accusations because in fact we are doing more than any Administration has ever done for education. It 

is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): —Mr.. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate, I do not intend to 

take a long time this afternoon, but I would like to put a few comments on the records of this House. I would 

first like to comment on the opening statements of the hon. gentleman who has just taken his seat (Mr. 

Coderre). He said he challenged anyone to prove that one student hadn‟t been able to get into the technical 

institutions for lack of space. I think the Hon. Minister should read the returns tabled in this House here last 

year. That didn‟t say one, it said hundreds! 

 

MR. CODERRE: — Not for lack of space. 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — And the return is available. Now, I would again like to read what the Member from 

Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) put on the record earlier this afternoon. This is from a paper dated January 28, 

1967; it‟s from the Moose Jaw Times Herald. Now I‟ll just read the first bit of the interview which was held 

with Mr. Reynolds. It says: 

 

The man who has been the guiding light behind Saskatchewan‟s Technical Institute operating for the 

past eight and a half years says: 

 

“Technical institutes are not yet meeting the demand for trained people. We are not able to take in all 

the prospective students who apply to the Institute.” G.R. Reynolds, retiring principal of 

Saskatchewan‟s First Technical Institute said Friday in an interview. Secondly, “industrial concerns 

are not getting the number of graduates they want from us.” In 1965-66 out of 57 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

165 

recruiting teams seeking graduates from the STI here, 26 failed to find graduates. „We didn‟t have 

enough to go around.‟ This reflects the need for increased technical facilities in this province, but 

where the increased facilities should be, I am not prepared to say,‟ Mr. Reynolds said. 

 

Now,Mr.. Reynolds is a man who has been in charge of the Technical Institute, Mr. Speaker, and the return 

tabled in this House last winter doesn‟t agree with the statement we heard from the former speaker and I just 

wonder if this is in the same category as the missing cars. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — This still stands as a challenge to you, my friend, to produce one that has not been 

accepted in school. I gave you the challenge to produce one! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! One at a time! 

 

MR. DEWHURST: —Mr.. Speaker, the Hon. Member knows that it is not parliamentary to throw 

challenges across the floor. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — I‟ll throw it outside if you want to. 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — I think long before he has produced the missing cars we‟ll have produced the 

document tabled last winter. Now this speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, is a speech which I would say 

is a “frozen crop” speech. There‟s lots of straw, lots of dust, lots of chaff but no grain in it. The mover and 

the seconder of the Speech from the Throne tried to thrash this crop with a flail, they flailed around loud and 

long but they failed to come up with any grain because there was no grain in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, our Leader, Mr. Woodrow Lloyd, put on the record some of the problems of 

this province, some of the issues that are facing our people, issues which the Government so far has not been 

prepared to face up to and I think it‟s time that it took a look at the real issue. The Premier has been too busy 

running around this country and other countries to be able to stay at home and spend the necessary time that 

was needed to look after the problems of the people of this province. 

 

I note from the Public Accounts which were tabled for the fiscal year ending March 31st last, over $12,000 

of an expense account of the Premier‟s. That averaged over $33 per day of an expense including Sundays 

and this doesn‟t include the car he drives as a Government car and other things which he has used 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

166 

 

within the province. So, it would be very interesting to find out; where did he go, what did he do? 

 

I‟ve been told, Mr. Speaker, that it is a custom when dignitaries visit Mexico and they go to one of the bull 

fights that after the bull fighter has killed the bull, they‟ll cut off the ears and give the dignitary the ears of 

the bull to take back. Well, I don‟t know where our Premier went but evidently he‟s brought back the whole 

bull and not just the ears. 

 

We have hard him say a lot about what he is doing for underprivileged people, our Indian and Métis people 

and other underprivileged people. But his other statements sometimes give the words he makes in public a 

lie. I would like to read a quote from the Toronto Globe and Mail of May 12th, 1966 appearing on page 2. 

This is a dateline from Regina by Canadian Press: 

 

The Saskatchewan Premier, Ross Thatcher, said Tuesday Indians and Métis in the province are 

„breeding faster than rabbits‟ and his Government can‟t place enough in jobs to keep up with the 

birth rate. 

 

The Premier said that of the 50,000 Indians and Métis in Saskatchewan a great proportion are living 

on federal social aid. We realize something has to be done he told the Service Club meeting. 

 

“We set up a branch to find jobs for them. We found jobs for 800 last year, but I would hate to tell 

you how many are still working.” The problem, Mr. Thatcher said, is that even with the best 

intentions in the world it is very difficult to help people who don‟t want to help themselves. 

 

I think that shows his true feeling toward the Indian and Métis people. And his only one interest in those 

people is when it comes election time. We have heard a lot from the Premier and the other spokesmen of 

what was done in the previous 20 years in this Legislature prior to this Government taking office. But there 

is one thing that we did do, I‟ll tell them. We saw that the Statue of nelson wasn‟t stolen from this chamber 

and I would like to know who took it or what happened to it? 

 

MR. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — So would we! 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — And I just wonder if they got in after some of the Liberals kicked down the door. 

Was it kicking down the door that let somebody in to take the statue? Or maybe even the Statue of Nelson 

couldn‟t stand what he had to look at so he got out. 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

167 

MR. STEUART: — He was over there, but looking right at you! 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard a lot from this Government about the policies it is 

bringing in, how it has helped the unfortunate people. But I would like to say that the Government policies 

discriminate against rural people. One of the first things that this Government did was to increase the 

hospital and medicare premium by $20 which put a burden on them as well as on other residents of the 

province. 

 

Prior to July 1, 1965, if our rural people lived a distance from larger hospitals and had to go to hospital for an 

operation and they needed a second doctor to operate in that operation, the local doctor would contract 

another doctor to come in to assist with the operation. The doctor charged a mileage for coming in to assist 

in the operation. But prior to July 1, 1965, the mileage was paid by the medicare plan. Since July 1, 1965, the 

mileage is the responsibility of the patient or the patient‟s parents, whichever the case may be, if the patient 

should be a child. This in turn adds in many cases from 15 to $25 extra in the year for the cost of doctors 

which prior to July 1, 1965 was included in the medicare plan. 

 

Now this Government has been going around saying how they have been saving money for the people of this 

province. I would like to submit that they have been very extravagant in many a ways with the people‟s 

money of this province. I have here, Mr. Speaker, five copies of the „Saskatchewan Today‟. These are 

pamphlets which are printed on a very expensive type of paper. They are a good printing job, on good quality 

paper, but all these five issues are all dated the same day, and all sent to the same individual — and in 

addition to these five, he kept one himself and he gave the other five to me so that I had them to bring in to 

show you. These five are all addressed to one man and he still had one left at home. Is that the way that they 

save money? The printing of these papers costs money, and then they say they‟re printing the news of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, that is just pure propaganda. 

 

Now, I would like to for a moment for the benefit of our Minister of Cooperatives (Mr. Coderre), who has 

left the Chamber, return to the remarks I made at the start, when he challenged me to prove that any students 

had been refused admittance to technical institutions. Well, here on the motion ofMr.. Smishek, an order of 

the Assembly was issued April 6, 1966, for Return Number 153 showing the number of persons in the latest 

12 month period for which figures are available, who have applied for technical institute courses and have 

been rejected because of (a) academic standing, (b) space, and (c) other reasons. The answer on account of 

academic standing — 123; (b) on account of space — 880; and (c) any other reasons — 5. No wonder that 

the Minister 

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

168 

 

of Cooperatives beat it from the room when he knew that this return was coming in. This is a return, this is 

not a document, Mr. Speaker, put out by any Member of the Opposition. This is an official sessional paper, 

the sessional paper in s Number 228, tabled in this Legislature last year. Now, I told him I thought I could 

produce the proof of the students being denied before he found the car. I hope he comes back and tells us 

where the car is. 

 

Now, I‟d like to ask this Government what are they dong for the farmers? I know they are dong a lot to the 

farmers, but I‟d like to know what they‟re dong for the farmers. I know they have done away with the AMA. 

They said it was transferred to the university and we would be getting bigger and better service from the 

university, and the AMA testing would be carried on there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have yet to see one report that came from the university that covers the work that the AMA 

was doing. I have not received one report and I haven‟t found one farmer who has. I know that there were a 

lot of farmers who appreciate and valued that service. There are machines coming into the province these 

days, machines which are costing a farmer a lot of money. They‟ve no way to get information, or if they have 

complaints they have no one to help them to prove whether it‟s their fault through lack of knowledge of 

operating the machine or whether the machine is constructed faulty, and whether the company should stand 

behind him. 

 

So I hope that the Government and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) will press the university and 

the AMA branch to get some bulletins out to the farmers so that we can have a look at what is gong on. 

 

Grazing fees in this province have gone up double and tripled in different areas, and the taxes of this 

province, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) mentioned, have gone up and at the same time in 

many cases the grants have gone down. Well I have here four financial statements of one municipality in my 

constituency for the years 1962-63-64-65. These are the audited financial statements. And what do you find 

when you peruse them, Mr. Speaker? In the financial statement of 1962, the amount of money that that 

municipality received from the Province of Saskatchewan for grid roads and equalization grants totalled 

$25,138. In 1963, the same municipality for the same purposes received $22,833. In 1964, the same 

municipality — this was the last budget that the CCF Government introduced in this Legislature, that money 

was provided by a CCF Government and administered by the present government — $44,980. But in 1965 

the last financial statement which is available from the municipality as yet, for the same purpose from this 

Government, from its first budget which it was responsible for — including $446 which was an extra grant 

for gravel pit search — the grand  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

169 

total receipt was $3,766. Under the CCF the last three years the budget brought down ranged from $22,000 

up as high as $46,000; under the Liberals $3,766. 

 

Now, I would like to look at the same municipality. What has happened to the taxation rate? I‟ll take the last 

full year under the CCF Government and the first full year for that municipality under the present 

Government. 

 

The general municipal levy in 1963 amounted to $70,900. That was what they were levying for municipal 

purposes. In 1965, the general levy was $96,500 up by over $26,000. You can check the mill rate. You can 

check the assessment or anything else and you‟ll see that taxes have gone up. An increase of $26,000 in two 

years; before it was $70,900, that‟s over 35 per cent increase in the taxes in that municipality. And then the 

Government‟s . .  

 

HON. D. MCFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture): — What‟s the number of the municipality? 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — The number of the municipality is 367, one in which most of our land is situated. 

The Hon. Minister can check it. These are the official audited statements. 

 

HON. J.C. McISAAC (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — I‟ll remember that. 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — I hope you will, and I hope you‟ll make some retribution for the way you forced the 

taxes up on them also. When the Government tries to tell us that the taxes have gone down under this 

Government that statement is not true. 

 

The cost-price squeeze is definitely on the farmer these days, and I was glad to see that the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) presented a brief to the Committee yesterday in spite of the Premier answering 

me the other day a definite „No,‟ when I asked if a brief was going to be presented. The Minister has 

presented a brief and I asked him if he would be good enough to supply us with a copy of the brief. I thank 

him for supplying us with a copy of the brief which he submitted yesterday to the Committee, because I think 

that each and every one of us should be interested in helping to relieve the cost-price squeeze on the farmer. 

 

By listening to the mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne, it would appear that the whole 

blame lies with labor, that labor is the whole blame of the farmers plight. I cannot subscribe to that, because 

if low wages meant that the farmers were going or have a good income then the farmers should have been 

well-off back in the thirties. All of us older people remember when the farmers could get a  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

170 

 

hired man for $5 a month and the government would pay you $5 a month to keep him. People would come to 

work for you to get their board and room. Wages were down to a mere pittance. What the farmers believe is 

that the laboring people should have a fair wage and we believe as farmers that we should have a fair wage. 

If we don‟t get a fair wage for the commodities we have to sell, then we cannot buy the products that labor 

produces in other places. On the other hand if labor does not get a fair return for their labor they cannot buy 

the products which we produce on our farms. I think in addition to trying to keep a balance between the 

prices of labor and the prices to the farmer, we have also got to strive to keep a balance in the profits of our 

companies, the big, huge companies. We are not saying that implement companies or other companies 

should produce at a loss. We are not saying that at all. But we say that there definitely should be a limit on 

the amount of profit they can make after they have paid all their expenses. 

 

I have here the annual reports of both the Massey-Ferguson for 1966 and The International Harvester 

Company and I would advise any of you to peruse it. Now if we will take a look at those companies, what do 

we find? We find that a major production cost for farmers is that of purchase and operation of machinery for 

the farmer, and higher prices for 1967 have been announced. Farmers faced with this and also reading the 

1965 annual report, or the 1966 annual report of the Massey-Ferguson Company, may well be perplexed. 

The report show that during the years 1961 to 1965 Massey-Ferguson increased sales by 56 per cent while 

profits rose by 165 per cent. The final profit figure for 1965-66 was up 13 per cent. In spite of this record 

Massey-Ferguson increased its machinery prices again in recent months. Now I think these are some of the 

problems which are perplexing the farmer, the reason why municipal taxes have to go up. We are not, as 

farmers, blaming the municipalities for having to put up the taxes. They must pay more for the equipment 

they have to use in order to give municipal services. Therefore, the increase of those companies‟ prices, 

unjust increases, reflect right back to the producers. 

 

Now this Government is trying to take credit for all new industry in the province. Recently I was listening to 

the radio and I heard our grand Minister of Industry (Mr. Grant) announcing a company with three 

employees. No doubt it is an asset to the community and I am not belittling it, every little thing helps, but 

they are even trying to take credit for industry that came here several years ago even before they came back 

into office. Industries which were established and producing prior to 1964, they try to take credit for. Well if 

they are going to take credit for all these industries, Mr. Speaker, then they must also assume responsibility 

for the closing of the Moose Jaw Flour Mill and the loss of employment for 90 people there. And they must 

also take responsibility for 360 companies leaving this province as reported by the Saskatchewan Gazette of 

October 7th. It lists in this Gazette 360 companies which have been struck off the register. So they can‟t have 

it both way, if they are going to take the credit on one side they must take responsibility on the other and I 

am sure the net balance will show a loss, if you take away what‟s gone from what has come in.  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

171 

Now before closing I would like to turn to a few of the problems in my own constituency, the problem of 

highways. Last year in this House I asked some questions on the highways in my constituency. I asked 

questions about Highway 35 from Archerwill south and also on other highways in there. If you will peruse 

the journals and I have the copy of last year‟s journal right here, you will recall that I asked some questions 

on Highway 35: who had the contract, what the cost was and what was spent, was the highway inspected and 

who inspected it, did it pass inspection, etc. — on the question. The answer I received was that this contract 

had been let, the highway had been inspected and that it had not passed inspection. I further asked them 

when was it going to be brought up to standard and I was assured that it would be brought up to standard 

during the 1966 construction year. The contractor, to my knowledge, did not do one bit of work on that road 

in 1966. Highway 35 between Archerwill and Rose Valley, which the school bus had to use last spring twice 

a day in the morning and in the evening, was getting stuck right in the middle of the grade. Cars were getting 

stuck, trucks were getting stuck, traffic couldn‟t move. There is no other road to go around there. It is the 

only road through that district. You can‟t take a municipal road around it because there isn‟t one. Some work 

was done this summer there, but every time there comes a rain on that stretch of road the dirt that was put in 

these holes just kicks out and the bottom of your car is banging on the grade. I can predict right now that 

next spring when the breakup comes people again will be getting stuck on that stretch of highway. This 

spring that part of 35 was just a series of red flags and in places, Mr. Speaker, there were so many holes that 

they didn‟t have a flag to stick onto a stick. They would stick a red tin can on the stick in order to mark the 

hole. It was one series of holes and I wish the new Minister (Mr. Boldt) now would take a look at that stretch 

of road and see if something can‟t be done because the traffic will be tied up absolutely this spring on that 

road because there is no other way through. I think also that he should take a look at the contract that was let 

for that road two years ago and see that the contractor fulfils his contract. 

 

Now Highway 14 at Wynyard has also been another source of complaint this past while. The Department 

went in there last year to start to rebuild Highway 14 from Dafoe east through Wynyard over to Elfros. Just 

on the west side of Wynyard there are three graveyards and the highway at the present time goes between 

these three graveyards. They were told that they would have to move approximately 100 graves in these 

graveyards in order to make room for a wider right-of-way. Naturally the people there were very much upset 

and disturbed about having to remove these graves and objected very strenuously. Some very bitter and hot 

meetings and debates took place in Wynyard last fall. One on occasion they were told that if they didn‟t 

move them 78 of the graves would be buried under the grade. Some of the people said, “Well you‟ll bury us 

with them because we will sit on top of the grave”. 

 

Now I have here the Wynyard Advance showing the proposed route through Wynyard of the new highway 

when they get it constructed. A lot of people there are saying that they should make a detour of Wynyard and 

go on the south side of Wynyard,  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

172 

 

but Highway officials have been opposing it. They say that 75 per cent of the highway traffic goes into 

Wynyard and therefore to make any detour wouldn‟t be logical. The only detour that is, Mr. Speaker they 

only need to detour by 200 yards because there is only about the width of one block on the south side of the 

highway at Wynyard which is now developed. They could go 200 yards or more, whatever they wish for a 

good detour, and it would be open field. They could protect themselves from people coming in too close on 

the highway; they could reserve additional property if they wished to for access roads if necessary. But as 

reported in this paper, the local school unit board representative pointed out that if they go through on their 

present location and build access roads which they have shown on this map, then they are going to take up 

part of the school ground where their school is in Wynyard, one of their main schools, and it would leave 

them 600 students at this school on a 2 acre playground. Two acres of playground for 600 students. Mr. 

Speaker, I don‟t think this is being fair and reasonable. We just heard today a speaker say that we must 

protect our smaller communities. This is wrecking our smaller communities. 

 

Also we had one of the Highway engineers tell them, a Mr. John Dunlop, the designer, that a bypass would 

add distance for those travelling to Wynyard. Even an additional one-tenth of a mile would mean an 

additional $3,500 in freight cost to a local producer he said. Well, Mr. Speaker, I cannot accept that 

statement whatsoever. If one-tenth of a mile is gong to add $3,500 of cost to a local producer that makes 

$35,000 per mile. What additional cost is it going to make to our farmers in areas of this province where they 

are moving the railroad and they are going to have to haul 25 or 30 miles further? If one-tenth of a mile costs 

$3,500, what will that cost? In all logic it would be logical to divert that highway. A residential section of 

that town is starting on the south side of the highway. Those children have to cross the highway to get to 

school and if we put in access roads in each side of the highway we see — as the map here shows — that 

those children not only have to cross the main highway, but they shall also have to cross both of those access 

roads. By taking a detour of less than one-quarter of a mile the present highway could do as an access road 

and we could feed the detour in three locations and they wouldn‟t have to touch the graveyards; it wouldn‟t 

interfere with anything. But this other way is going to have businesses and homes and everything else 

moved. At Kandahar which is 8 miles west of Wynyard, what do we find? We find that there is plenty of 

room on the present location by just making agreements with the railroad. There is lots of property between 

the railroad track and the present highway; where there is lots of room they are going to detour at Kandahar. 

And where they are detouring they are coming back in short enough to take a portion of the school ground 

off at Kandahar when there is just field on the other side. Now if this is decent planning in the interest of 

local communities they had better go and convince those local people because the are not convinced that this 

is planning whatsoever. 

 

The holes on the highways, Mr. Speaker, were terrific in all that area. I could talk about Highways 38, 49 or 

No. 5 going through from Wynyard to Foam Lake and all through that area. It is true the past year that they 

have doubled  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

173 

the expenditure on highways but the public are convinced that they are only getting half the amount of value 

that we got for work done. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — And I think that the new Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) should take a good look 

at what has happened in the past because things are getting ridiculous and close to the scandalous. So for 

those reasons, Mr. Speaker, you will see that I cannot support this Speech from the Throne but I will support 

the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. B.D. LINK (Saskatoon City): —Mr.. Speaker, I would first of all like to congratulate the Minister of 

Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) on his appointment to the Cabinet. It is my opinion that he will carry out 

his duties in a fair and competent manner. However, having said that, Mr. Speaker, as one of the MLAs for 

Saskatoon, I should perhaps also add that any change in the Social Welfare Department is bound to be an 

improvement over what we had in the past few years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LINK:— I am sure that my constituents would agree with me when I say that the Member for Rosthern 

(Mr. Boldt) has assumed a portfolio that should suit him very well. Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of dirt to be 

moved in the Highway Department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have tried to find something in the Throne Speech that the people of Saskatoon might be 

looking for and, which I suggest they have a right to expect. It simply isn‟t there. What do I find? Well an 

item under Agriculture states and I quote: 

 

Construction will continue on the Veterinary College at Saskatoon in order to protect the investment 

of our people in the livestock industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what an earth-shattering statement. Just imagine how delighted my constituents will be to hear 

that construction of a building that was planned a long time ago will continue. May I suggest, sir, that even a 

Liberal Government would find it difficult to explain, should they halt construction on this building at this 

time. As you know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon has for many years, among other things, been noted for its 

University and other educational institutions. I studied the Throne Speech hoping that it would contain some 

good news with regard to education. What did I find? Well, Mr. Speaker, this is what it said about education 

and I quote: 

 

My Ministers will seek your approval of further large expenditures in order to continue meeting the 

needs of education. 

 

Now really, do the Liberals expect anybody to believe that  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

174 

 

there is a province in all of Canada that is not, or has not been saying the same thing the last number of 

years? So what else is new? I realize of course, Mr. Speaker, the Government would like the people to 

believe that they are in favor of education. This of course is not the case, as was demonstrated last year when 

they established the tax incentive formula. This so-called incentive program probably did more harm than 

any other scheme that the government might have devised. I could say a lot about vocational and technical 

training in Saskatoon, but this has already been dealt with by previous speakers. 

 

As you know Saskatoon is a city that has grown fairly fast since the war. I am sure all the Members in this 

House will agree that it is a beautiful and a friendly city. As you know we serve a large area and of course we 

find many elderly farmers having retired come to make their homes in Saskatoon. We have a lot of working 

people in Saskatoon as well. If there is one thing that a city like ours must have at this time, it is a good 

supply of housing. What did the Throne Speech have to say about housing? Nothing. Absolutely nothing. 

Mr. Speaker, housing is a topic that I could speak about for some time. It is a topic that is very close to me, 

having been associated with the housing industry for some 15 years . It has been my privilege to serve the 

housing industry in various capacities over the years, including a term as Provincial President of the 

Saskatchewan Real Estate Association. Mr. Speaker, if there is one thing, Saskatoon, and other parts of this 

province need it is housing accommodation. I actually had two cases last summer where two families 

returned to the cities from which they had been transferred because they could not find suitable rental 

accommodation in Saskatoon. What does this mean? Well, Mr. Speaker, the employee lost an opportunity 

for promotion. The employer‟s plans were upset because of staff problems. This, of course, is only a small 

matter compared to other problems in the field of housing. The kind of homes that are being built today, Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest are not helping those people that are in a low income bracket. In order to qualify for a loan 

the income must be substantial. What about the family with a low income? What happens to them? Well to 

begin with they very rarely can find anything to rent. So what happens? They are in some cases compelled to 

buy an older home, in some instances a substandard home. In a case of this kind they have no alternative but 

to put down what little money they have, promise a high monthly payment at an exorbitant rate of interest. 

Mr. Speaker, these people n many instances have no alternative. They are transferred by the companies that 

they work for and they simply have to move. I suggest people that are compelled to move and compelled to 

buy a home under these conditions that I have mentioned are not buying homes; they are merely buying 

mortgages. They are buying debts, Mr. Speaker, that in many instances they cannot pay for no matter how 

long they live. I have actually seen agreements for sale that would take some 80 years to retire. Not only are 

houses high priced, the down payments are too high for the people in the low income bracket. Having been 

compelled to buy a home under these circumstances, it soon leads to a general breakdown in the morale of 

the whole family. 

 

The husband worried, about his payments and the hopeless  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

175 

situation of trying to pay for a house he can never hope to own in many cases simply gives up. I could quote 

some examples of what happens in cases of this kind. Mr. Speaker, what is this Government doing about the 

housing problem? Absolutely nothing. The irony of the whole thing in many cases is that it is easier to buy a 

new $15,000 home than to acquire a modest home for $7,000 or $8,000. Many people today especially older 

people where the children are grown up and the parents are by themselves would like to move into a small 

one or two bedroom home instead of a suite. Where do you find a small new two bedroom home? You don‟t 

because it is almost impossible to get a loan on this type of a house. 

 

Mr. Speaker, someone will say that they re building a lot of apartment blocks. This is true up to a point. But 

very few, if any, will accept children in these blocks. Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents are worried 

about the housing situation in Saskatoon. This Throne Speech will do nothing to dispel their anxiety. 

Another group of people that are having an extremely hard time with regard to housing are the university 

students. It‟s bad enough for the single students; it‟s unfortunately worse for the married couples. Again, not 

only are rents high, the accommodation in many cases is in my opinion substandard. And what is this 

government that is so concerned and interested in the youth of this province doing about this situation? 

Absolutely nothing. It would appear that I am not the only one that is worried about the housing situation in 

Saskatoon. I have before me a copy of the Saskatoon Star Phoenix dated Wednesday, February 8th. On page 

three I find an article in which the local manager of CMHC has this to say and I quote in part: 

 

Mr. Sneyd said a survey conducted in the past month by CMHC of available rental accommodation 

showed a vacancy rate of only .6 per cent. The survey covered 2,100 units and found 12 vacancies. 

The number of units studied was about 48 per cent of the total. The pressure and demand for housing 

in Saskatoon is increasing, he warned. There is no doubt in my mind that in any one year there is a 

minimum requirement for 1,800 new dwelling units in our city. Mr. Sneyd said housing starts in 

1966 for individual homes kept up but there was 58 per cent drop in apartment construction. This 

was a major problem. He said the availability of newly completed homes and apartments in 

Saskatoon in 1967 will be less than the demand and this would produce a seller‟s market with 

increased prices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have tried to point out to the Government this is a serious situation. Again I suppose it‟s a 

matter of priorities. I was interested to read an article one day — I believe it was in the Leader Post — in 

which it was pointed out that more money is spent on dog food in Canada than on public housing. I am fond 

of dogs, Mr.. Speaker, but it does seem that our priorities are somewhat out of line. 

 

Mr. Speaker one other thing that my constituents are very interested in is the high cost of living. In my work 

as a salesman I meet people from all walks of life and of all  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

176 

 

political and religious persuasions. The one thing I find that they all have in common is that they have to eat 

and require all the other necessities of life. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the high cost of living even affects Liberals. 

The one thing all of these people want above all else is for the Government to do something about this 

continuing increase in the cost of living. What after much prodding by the Members on this side of the 

House and the general public, has the Government done? They finally set up a Commission. It is my guess, 

Mr. Speaker, that precious little will come out of these hearings, and if there is I doubt very much if our free 

enterprise Government will have the courage to do anything about it. 

 

One last thing, Mr.. Speaker before I sit down. Great as the problems are that I have mentioned, they fade 

into insignificant in comparison to the problems of some people. I am referring now to the unhappy people 

of Vietnam. In the present time the American government is spending about $1,000,000 an hour in the 

fighting in that country. This I suppose is their business. This is a lot of money when one considers the fact 

that most Vietnamese earn less than $50.00 a year. Mr.. Speaker, what I cannot understand, is why our 

Government does nothing to bring to the attention of the Federal Government in Ottawa the fact that we in 

Saskatchewan deplore what is going on in Vietnam, and ask our Federal Government to use all the influence 

at its disposal to try and see that negotiations are started to settle this war. I am sure that the Government 

would gain the respect of all the people of Saskatchewan if they took this stand. 

 

Now, as you have gathered, Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment and oppose the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. G.J. TRAPP (Minister of Education): —Mr.. Speaker, first I want to congratulate the Hon. 

Members who moved and seconded the Speech from the Throne. Both the Member from 

Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) and the Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) did a commendable 

job and were a real credit to their constituencies. I am personally proud to be associated with such capable 

gentlemen. 

 

I must also say that I was more than proud of the performance of our Premier, the Hon.  Mr.. Ross Thatcher, 

for the outstanding job he did yesterday. It has been a long time since a Premier of this province has set forth 

in such clear and concise manner the program for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. TRAPP: — I have had a number of phone calls from my constituents saying what a wonderful speech 

the Premier made. All those who heard the address were assured that Saskatchewan now has dynamic 

leadership. 

 

Tuesday we had listened to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and I want to commend him for it. 

However, as I listened to him I couldn‟t help but feel that he was laboring under a great handicap. I felt that 

he would have  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

177 

like very much to endorse the Speech from the Throne but being the Leader of the Opposition he could not 

do this. So what did he do? Well, in the beginning he spoke about the “Liberal Backbone”, and all the while 

I thought he was trying to conjure up his own funny bone but it wouldn‟t work. Then he proceeded to be 

critical of the mover and the seconder because they did not use enough figures and statistics but headlines. I 

know of no one who can misuse figures and statistics to his own advantage more than the Hon. Member, the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). I think that most people would agree that one of the main purposes of 

figures and statistics is to clarify a particular situation and this is not the purpose of the Leader of the 

Opposition. His purpose, it would seem, is to mystify and delude. He used every type he could think of. One 

time he used percentage increase; the next time percentage decrease; then total number; then total values; 

and so on an on, but he stayed away from figures altogether in certain areas because he could find no 

manipulating device by which he could explain away the solid progress made by Liberals in their two years 

and nine months in office. Well, I hope tomorrow to deal at a little more length on some of the figures the 

Hon. Member (Mr. Lloyd) conveniently left out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do believe that decent people of this province have a right to expect of us, their 

representatives, an honest attempt to be honest and fair with them. 

 

Well, after the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) had tortured a number of figures, he turned to speeches 

made by the Premier outside the province and he spent nearly 15 minutes of his time and of ours on these 

speeches. Never was the Premier paid a higher compliment by the Leader of the Opposition. Honestly, I 

think the Premier should consider seriously of giving some donation to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) for the wonderful publicity he received yesterday. How poverty-stricken the Leader of the Opposition 

must have been to spend so much time and effort on speeches given by the Premier outside of the province. 

This is why I am certain he would have liked to be in favor of the Speech from the Throne, but he daren‟t. 

Too bad he missed the Premier‟s speech yesterday. I‟m sure he would have fallen for it. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) inferred that approximately 800 students were denied training in 

the technical institutes. This is a misleading statement. One must remember that not all applicants qualify 

and that not all applicants enroll when accepted at the institutes. Some students make applications to a 

number of institutes and then pick one or the other. Some take employment long before they‟re called. 

 

I notice by the questions which the Opposition are asking that they are most anxious to learn the amount of 

money spent on preparing the vocational facilities at Weyburn. They will get  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

178 

 

these answers. Now, Mr. Speaker I would have thought that the Hon. Members opposite would be concerned 

with the number of students being trained, the quality of the courses being offered, and the variety of courses 

being offered. But no! I think they would like to make out that the Government had been parsimonious in the 

money it had spent at the school. Well, the hon. gentlemen are right. For a very little of the taxpayers‟ money 

we have set up a vocational school at Weyburn. Surely the Government is to be commended for what it did. 

Here were building standing idle, and for very little the Government turned these facilities to useful 

purposes. If the NDP don‟t appreciate what was done at Weyburn, the taxpayers of the province will. They 

will remember at the next election time which party refused to waste their money. 

 

The young people who are taking training at Weyburn will remember that the present Government did 

something for them so that they can take their rightful place in society by providing them with upgrading 

classes and vocational courses, and at the same time most of them are getting allowances so that they can 

take these courses. Let me list some of the courses that are offered there now: academic upgrading, both for 

senior and junior welding courses, painting and decorating, upholstery, carpet laying, tile setting, drywall 

installation, small appliances, repair, farm motors, farm carpentry and farm welding. 

 

Over 200 students are now at Weyburn. We have the facilities there to train many hundreds during a full 

year. I have said publicly and I will say again that the only limit on the number of people we will train at 

Weyburn will be the number of people who present themselves for training. We will provide the facilities for 

them and the courses required by the applicants. I hope that the day will come when we will not require to 

bring so many adults into upgrading classes. We realize that it is only a patching job that needs to be done 

because of the failures of the previous Government to give those young people something before they were 

kicked out into the world to look for a job without any training. 

 

The Hon. Member from Arm River (Mr. Pederson) — I‟m sorry he‟s not in his seat this afternoon — had 

something to say in his speech yesterday, and I thought his approach — yesterday I emphasize — was rather 

reasonable, but he did forget that the Tory Government in Ontario last year increased taxes by $200,000,000 

and the Tory Government in Manitoba just a few days ago increased the taxes by $40,000,000. He also 

forgot that one of the great sellers . . 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — Just like Liberals. 

 

MR. TRAPP: — . . just one of the great sellers, you know of Canadian wheat, Mr.. Alvin Hamilton I think, 

found out about the  

 

 



February 9, 1967 

 

 

179 

sale many days after the sales were made but still took some credit for it, when the credit should have gone 

to the Wheat Board. 

 

The Hon. Member (Mr. Pederson) however, did suggest in his rather reasonable approach yesterday among 

other things training for agriculture workers. I would like to assure him and others that it is our intention to 

do this. I might add that we are doing some work on the establishment of such a school in Weyburn. It looks 

like Weyburn might be a very likely spot for such a school of agriculture. I would at this time, Mr. Speaker, 

like to adjourn the debate and continue tomorrow. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:10 o‟clock p.m. 


