



















































Hansard: February 14, 1967


308 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Fourth Session - Fifteenth Legislature 

9th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 14, 1967 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Order of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. A.N. NICHOLSON (Saskatoon City): — I‟d like to draw your attention, Members, that in the east 

gallery the students and teachers of the King Edward School are honoring us with their attendance. This is 

one of the older schools in Saskatoon and we are delighted that the pupils and teachers are visiting us. We 

hope that their visit to the capital city will be pleasant and profitable for them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina West): — I refer to the remarks from the Hon. Member for Prince Albert 

(Mr. Steuart) a couple of days ago and would just remind him that the young ladies of Regina yield nothing 

to the young ladies of Prince Albert in their charm and pulchritude. I think, Mr. Speaker, that that will be 

immediately obvious when we look up in the Speaker‟s gallery and in the east gallery and see some 120 

charming young ladies from Sacred Heart Academy here in Regina. They are from grades 10, 11, and 12, 

and they are here under the guidance of Sister Winifred, Mr. Goski and Miss Dobben. They have had a tour 

of the Legislative Building and I‟m sure that all of us through you, Mr. Speaker, express the hope that their 

stay with us will be pleasant and educational. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION RE: PUBLIC HEARINGS OF MINIMUM WAGE BOARD 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw City): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask 

the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) whether the public hearings of the Minimum Wage Board, announced 

last fall would take place and which have not yet taken place, are planned to be held shortly in view of the 

continued rise of living costs, especially for the people in low incomes and the consequent need to bring the 

minimum wage in Saskatchewan, at least to the $1.25 federal level. 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Labour): — I would like to tell the Hon. Member that since this 

government has taken over, there have been two increases in the minimum wages and a question of whether 

the Minimum Wage Board is sitting is now under advisement. 

 

QUESTION RE: CLOSING OF PANGMAN HOSPITAL 

 

MR. G.T. SYNDER (Moose Jaw City): — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I‟d like to 

direct a question to the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

309 

in connection with the closing of the Pangman hospital. I think the Minister is aware of the closure and I 

understand that it was instigated by the Department of Health because of the shortage of staff. I‟d like to ask 

the Minister what consideration has been given and what is being done by the Department in connection with 

providing hospital services to the people in the Pangman area of Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, this hospital found it necessary to close 

because of the lack of nursing staff and notice was given that it would be necessary to have nursing staff. 

The Department is rendering every assistance possible to secure staff for the hospital. 

 

QUESTION RE: RECIPIENTS OF OLD AGE SECURITY RECEIVE $30 PER 

MONTH FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 

 

MR. NICHOLSON (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Welfare (Mr. MacDonald). I wonder if the Cabinet has decided whether or not the recipients of old age 

security payments, who are receiving the supplementary payments from the government will be receiving the 

full $30 a month from the Federal Government? 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, that will be announced in due course. 

 

QUESTION RE: CHINA PURCHASING SASKATCHEWAN PRODUCED POTASH: 

 

MR. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — I would like to ask the government if it could tell the House if 

China has purchased or tried to purchase any Saskatchewan produced potash? 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — No, I‟m unable to answer that question at this time, but I‟ll 

be glad to look into the matter and see if we can find out. 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — I would appreciate it, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier would have that 

matter looked into because the question was raised in the House of Commons. It seems like fertilizer for the 

production of food is very important to those parts of the world where it is needed. 

 

QUESTION RE: FILLING OUT FORMS FOR ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS OF PENSIONS: 

 

MR. NICHOLSON (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a supplementary question to 

the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald). Are the recipients of supplementary pensions required to fill out 

new forms as they receive the additional payments from the Federal Government? 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — This will be announced very shortly. 

 

MR. W.B. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a supplementary question to 

the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald)? Since government policy 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

310 

 

is going to be announced soon, could we at least have the forms which now some people are being asked to 

sign? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — What forms? 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Doesn‟t the Minister know? In other words, people out in the country have access to 

forms but the Legislature doesn‟t have access to these forms. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — If the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) will make a request for a specific form, 

I will be glad to table it in the House. 

 

MR. LLOYD: — The specific request is for forms that persons in receipt of welfare are now being asked to 

sign in respect to supplementary assistance. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I will give the Leader of the Opposition a copy. 

 

MR. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — If the Minister can afford it. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES: ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. J.B Hooker (Notukeu-

Willowbunch) for an Address In Reply and the proposed amendment thereto by Hon. W.E. Lloyd (Leader of 

the Opposition). 

 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, first I want to commend our Premier 

generally on the contents of the Throne Speech and also on the leadership which he has demonstrated during 

the past twelve months. All too frequently governments of this country and other countries are denied the 

services of such capable men. Premier Thatcher has demonstrated his dynamic abilities in the fields of not 

only salesmanship, but also business-like administration. His efforts have produced and re producing results 

in these areas and showing good results in industrial growth and employment levels. 

 

Secondly, I would like to say a word about the finest constituency in Saskatchewan, namely Regina South. I 

am extremely fortunate in having such a constituency to represent. I am pleased to say that employment is at 

a high level. I have little or not highway problem, no lease land problems, no crop destruction by wild life. 

While I do not have some of the problems of a rural constituency, I do have constituents who are enjoying 

the fruits of a booming economy, constituents who appreciate the rapid building expansion taking place at 

the university, constituents who appreciate the homeowner grants, and constituents who welcome the 

Premier‟s announcement of plans to proceed with a base hospital in my constituency. It is a real pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, to represent these people and I thank them for their cooperation during my term of office. 

 

If it is true to say that variety is the spice of life, I suspect that I have had more than my share of spice in the 

past year or so. My experience in the Departments of Highways, Telephones, and Industry and Commerce 

have been most interesting and I trust this same experience will prove helpful in my present 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

311 

position as Minister of Health. I find myself in a new role in a very important and large department, a 

department that at times seems to become involved in controversial matters, but this only makes it all the 

more stimulating and challenging. The people of Saskatchewan are fortunate to have many capable and 

dedicated employees and I thank them for the help they have been to me in the past three months. I want to 

pay credit to my predecessors who have established the department on such a sound basis and particularly 

the Hon. Dave Steuart for ironing out some controversial matters over the past three years. During his term 

he initiated several progressive programs, which are now well underway. He also sparked thinking in other 

areas that will soon show new developments or extended services. 

 

I feel there has been a marked improvement in liaison with hospitals and professional groups involved in the 

province‟s health. This has been brought about through regular meetings with health regions, professional 

groups, hospital councils, as well as chairman and administrators of the 145 hospitals throughout the 

province. It would certainly be my plan to continue this close liaison and extend it wherever possible as I 

deem it highly essential for the proper and efficient operation of the department. I realized when I took in the 

Department of Health that it was a department with many problems, but I also recognized it as an 

opportunity to do everything I could to make the base hospital proposed for Regina a reality. 

 

The Premier in his remarks last week certainly dispelled any question about the intent of this government in 

regards to a third hospital in Regina. I commend him for this announcement; it will mean so much not only 

to the people of Regina, but to people of southern Saskatchewan requiring the services and facilities 

provided by a hospital centre such as we have in Regina. It is quite evidence to me that much planning must 

go into the base hospital for Regina in order that the best possible facility will result and that the best 

possible one will be made of the new facilities as well as of the existing facilities. The area planning council 

will play a very important role in coordinating the services to be provided by the three hospitals. One might 

more properly refer to four hospitals since the combined Geriatric Centre and Rehabilitation Centre represent 

some 300 beds which must be coordinated with the other facilities in Regina. There will be many demands 

on the taxpayers‟ dollars as well as private sources to upgrade existing hospital facilities in the city. This 

makes it doubly necessary to see that the entire facilities available to are coordinated fully. Besides having 

inspected some interesting hospital complexes in the United Sates, I have personally checked the facilities 

provided by the Grey Nuns‟, the Regina General, and the Geriatric Centre and Rehabilitation Centre. 

Drawing from this experience, I will make it a point to work very closely with the Area Planning Council to 

see that the best possible hospital facilities are made available to the very competent and dedicated medical 

personnel available in Regina. Our government recognizes that good facilities are essential to hold and 

attract qualified and specialized medical people, and it will be our objective to make such facilities available 

rather than perpetuate the neglect fostered in the previous government. As things stand now, great credit 

must be given to the physicians and staff who have persevered despite outmoded facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that many people in Saskatchewan were shocked at the pictures and text in the Leader 

Post which only last week showed the deplorable conditions of the Munroe wing of the Regina General 

Hospital. Our government is extremely 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

312 

 

disturbed at the neglect and unconcern that brought about this situation. Long before the Leader Post story 

appeared, we made provision for a grant in excess of $100,000 to renovate that wing and extend facilities, 

and I can assure Members that far more extensive psychiatric facilities will be built into the third hospital 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — The same damning evidence of the D.V.A wing of the same hospital. Outdated bed 

accommodation for 146 patients was conveniently overlooked by our predecessors. The Liberal government 

has stopped this “overlooking” policy and is doing something about it. We provided $460,000 for 80 new 

beds and a modern emergency department in the new MacPherson wing of the General. Another $157,000 

was provided fore renovations to the D.V.A. wing. Add that to an estimated cost of $104,000 for renovations 

to the Munroe Wing and there is a total of $711,000 in three years of Liberal government. How does that 

compare to the CCF government which did not add a single bed from 1949 until it went out of power in 

1964? Mr. Speaker, it just doesn‟t compare. The Liberal government has been a government of action on 

provincial hospital problems and will aggressively continue its forward program in this regard. May I 

emphasize that a third hospital will not be a hospital serving only Regina, but will be a hospital situated in 

Regina which will sere both the people of Regina and of southern Saskatchewan. 

 

I would emphasize that I will speak in terms of hospital services and point out that sound health planning 

does not see brick and steel construction or the number of beds provided as ends in themselves. True health 

planning consists of satisfying needs economically and without duplication. Our government is putting forth 

a health services plan for the southern part of Saskatchewan and a new hospital is only a physical 

manifestation of that overall planning. This hospital will be built after careful consideration of the present 

and future needs of the people it will serve and after a comprehensive study of our present resources. This 

sort of planning has been greatly facilitated by cooperation of Saskatchewan hospitals. 

 

This year saw the formation of the Southeast Regional Hospital Council. Now there is a opportunity for 

every hospital in this province to participate in planning and thus coordinate its activities according to the 

needs of the area. There are 130 hospitals which are members of councils now, compared to less than 80 a 

year ago. Health services planning for the part of Saskatchewan served by Regina has been greatly facilitated 

by the Hartman Report. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that some credit should go to the CCF for having commissioned 

the report when they were in power. However, after 20 years of neglecting Regina‟s health facilities, it was 

about time that some serious planning was done. The people of Saskatchewan can be thankful that under a 

Liberal government there will be some action taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has already been made clear by the Premier that Regina citizens must assume some financial 

responsibility for their own hospital needs. But our government also realizes that Regina facilities are used 

by the southern half of this province. The Hartman Report pointed out that in 1964 36 per cent were from 

outside the city. In all, people from 125 municipalities were using these facilities. However, if we consider 

hospital utilization in terms of patient days, the utilization rate of 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

313 

people outside of Regina was even higher, because while it was possible for people to use local hospitals for 

minor illnesses, they needed the facilities of a larger hospital for more serious illnesses. For these reasons, 

our government feels that investing of provincial funds in Regina hospital facilities is an extremely 

legitimate undertaking. Now, Mr. Speaker, let me say something about the services we want to see provided. 

 

Some of the members of the opposition have suddenly discovered that there is a waiting list of 2,000 for 

Regina hospitals although they were strangely oblivious to this fact when they were in power. To look after 

the needs of these people we do not just need more beds, we need more and better use of other hospital 

facilities. We have heard of cases of patients occupying a bed for several days while they wait for an 

operating room. We must take a look at full scheduling on a seven or at least a six-day week to ensure 

maximum use of our facilities. Staff holidays should be staggered so that we do not have slack periods 

during the summer when optimum use is not made of our hospitals. Again may I stress that the new hospital 

will have a close liaison with the university. It has been shown in the past that the best medical standards are 

maintained at those hospitals which are balanced in these areas: patient care, teaching, and research. 

Operating on this premise, we will work diligently toward making the hospital complex for Regina a 

teaching and research centre closely associated with the medical school of the University of Saskatchewan. 

We should make Regina attractive not only to medical personnel, but to all those other technically trained 

people so essential for the care of the sick. In effect we are setting up an overall health services program for 

the southern part of the province. The basis of the program is coordinating services and coordinated 

facilities. 

 

Our government has already taken steps to merge the Regina Geriatric Centre and the Regina Physical 

Rehabilitation Centre into a single centre which will be part of the Regina-based health services complex. 

These two centres will be operated by the Department of Health from April 1st under the name of Wascana 

Hospital. We hope soon to announce an administrator for rehabilitation and chronic care aspects of a hospital 

program which is important if we are to operate a program which provides care according to needs. Such a 

program is called the “Levels of Care” concept. This concept proposed eight progressive levels of care which 

include such stages as intensive care, moderate care, home care, and out-patient care. In short, we would 

have a comprehensive program of progressive patient care. The advantage of this is that it assures that 

physical and staff resources are not wasted. I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that staff resources are 

even more critical than physical resources. There are indications now that our supply of physicians will not 

keep pace with the normal population expansion. Therefore, it is most important that our physical resources 

afford optimum use of these people. We realize that by supplying medical personnel with the best in physical 

resources, we have a better chance in drawing them to or keeping them in Saskatchewan. I have made these 

foregoing remarks so that the public can be kept fully aware, as is their right, of the hospital we are planning. 

 

I would note for the record that the Hon. Member from Regina West, (Mr. Blakeney) stated in the Regina 

Leader Post on February 8th that he is pleased with the hospital announcement. He said also that he would 

be more pleased when he sees definite indications that the project is being proceeded with. Now, Mr. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

314 

 

Speaker, I am not one to deny the Hon. Member his pleasure, nor would I deny him having his pleasure 

intensified. Therefore I was most happy for him when I was able to announce last week that we were 

proclaiming the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act, something the Hon. Member had never go around 

to when he was Minister. 

 

I am also most happy for him today because I wish to announce the chairman for the base hospital. This is a 

great responsibility to place on any man‟s shoulders and I have extreme pleasure and satisfaction in 

announcing that Mr. John Rowand has agreed to accept this position. Mr. Rowand is a prominent young 

businessman who has much to offer this province, and has demonstrated his capability in many sectors and 

areas of community life. Before this session ends, Mr. Speaker, the government plans to announce the entire 

board for the hospital. It is to be hoped that then Mr. Blakeney‟s pleasure will be complete. 

 

I can‟t miss this opportunity to make some observations on the words of the Hon. Member from Regina East 

(Mr. Smishek). I‟m glad to see both Members are in their places this afternoon. The Hon. Member I refer to 

along with his colleagues, the Mayor, have so vocally blamed this government for all the hospital ills 

presently existing in Regina. They remind me somewhat of chameleons in that while only a few days ago 

they were clamoring in criticism, they suddenly changed color and jumped on the band wagon in an attempt 

to get some political mileage for the Premier‟s announcement of last week on the hospital. On a couple of 

occasions, the Hon. Member in question has insinuated that I have been sitting on my hands when I should 

have been doing something else. But let me point out to him that I wouldn‟t suggest he try sitting on his 

tongue since it would be quite an acrobatic act, but I would suggest he hold his tongue when he is not sure of 

his facts. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. GRANT: — He indicated that there is cause for skepticism because no date had been set for 

construction, no agreement announced with the Federal Government, no land purchased, no hospital board 

appointed, no architect hired, therefore, how could a cost figure be established? Let me point out that his 

colleague, Mayor Baker, and others seem to be having difficulties these days coming up with an accurate 

figure for an auditorium even with an architect. It does not require an architect to arrive at an estimated cost. 

I think my previous words indicate our seriousness in proceeding with this hospital, in that we have 

proclaimed the Act, we have named the chairman, we have designated the property and he‟s going to find 

out over the next few months that the Premier was not using any weasel words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all those present will be familiar with the Saskatchewan plan for the mentally ill. 

It is a plan of great vision and I will always recall with pride the fact that I was a member of a government 

which had the courage to implement it. It is also a matter of pride to me that the citizens of Saskatchewan 

have endorsed this plan. Last summer we heard a great deal about the ad hoc committee on the resettlement 

of mental patients. Many of us wondered how favourable their report would be on the concepts of the 

Saskatchewan plan. It was an historic moment when the committee endorsed the concept of out-patient 

treatment and I can truthfully say that their backing gave the government the stimulus to continue 

implementing its recommendations. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

315 

Today I have the privilege to speak on a plan which will be for the retarded what the Saskatchewan plan has 

been for the mentally ill. Mr. Speaker, this is considered an age of enlightenment, almost everyone accepts 

the fact that mental illness is a disease that can be cured. Unfortunately too many of us consider that, while 

there can be hope for the mentally ill, there can be no hope for the mentally retarded. Mr. Speaker, this is not 

true. I am sure that many of us present watched the recent program on CBC television entitled “One in Every 

hundred.” I am sure too that it opened up our minds to the problem of mental retardation. But I am sure that 

most of us said, “What does this mean to me?” let me say what this means. The title, “One in Every 

Hundred” referred to the fact that one in every hundred children is born mentally retarded. In fact, the figure 

is much closer to three in every hundred. This means that by the time the population of this province reaches 

a million we can estimate 30,000 adults and children will be impaired by some degree of mental retardation. 

Our government realizes, Mr. Speaker, that these people have as much rights to realize their full potential as 

any other citizen in this province. And we believe that rather than build huge institutions, the best way to 

improve their condition is by employing the out-patient approach as used in the Saskatchewan plan. 

 

Many of us here, Mr. Speaker, may be shocked at the task of providing for 30,000 people. However, only 

one in a thousand of our population suffer such severe retardation that he must spend most of his life fully 

dependent. Approximately three person in every thousand suffer moderate retardation. With special training, 

they can acquire basic personal independence. The majority of the mentally retarded — 26 out of every 

thousand — can look forward to social and economic independence, if we provide the necessary vocational 

and educational opportunities. In the past, Mr. Speaker, and I lay no blame, it was that group of the mentally 

retarded that had the most potential that were discriminated against the most. In the future, Mr. Speaker, our 

government will ensure they have expanded opportunities. I feel that it is only right that we recognize the 

fact that private organizations such as the Saskatchewan Council for Crippled Children and adults and the 

Saskatchewan Association for Retarded Children have done commendable work in dealing with this 

problem. This year the Saskatchewan Association for Retarded Children is assuming the responsibilities of a 

service agency and is setting up a sheltered workshop in Prince Albert. Our government will provide a grant 

to aid them in getting staff. We feel that this is a step in the right direction because it aids those who are 

mildly or moderately retarded. The Department of Public Health in assessing the distribution and severity of 

mental retardation feels that the group most sadly neglected at present is the group composed of the mildly 

and moderately retarded. Mr. Speaker, we feel that community services rather than institutions are the best 

means to provide for their needs. We propose to divide the province into six mental retardation regions. 

 

The centres for these regions will be in the Saskatchewan Training School at Moose Jaw, the Saskatchewan 

Training School at Prince Albert, and clinics in North Battleford, Yorkton, Weyburn, and Swift Current. 

Through these regions we will provide comprehensive diagnostic, out-patient treatment and counselling 

services. We will place special emphasis on the support and guidance of families. The program will be 

integrated with temporary or permanent in-patient care for those who require it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to use the Moose Jaw Training School as an example of the way in which our 

government is 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

316 

 

expanding the mental retardation program. To begin with we are substantially increasing the number of 

positions as well as modifying the role of existing staff. This will enable us to expand our intra-mural 

program in vocational rehabilitation. The Federal Manpower Department has given us grants in the past and 

has indicated that future grants will be forthcoming for an expanded program. This spring 60 women and 

girls of only moderate retardation will take part in an intensive program including counselling, training in 

social graces and vocational training. The program is aimed toward integrating the girls into the community. 

 

Related to this is an extra-mural program. This will include resettlement of patients, follow-up and 

supportive services, and counselling for their families and employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past, through neglect and ignorance, the mentally retarded have been allowed to become 

a social and financial burden. We must ensure in the future that they have every opportunity to develop 

themselves. Under our plan the initial responsibility for bringing this fulfilment is with the Department of 

Public Health. Eventually we hope for a closer liaison with the Department of Welfare, the Department of 

Education, and the Federal Manpower Department. I am convinced that the public will show the same 

acceptance of the program as was shown for the Saskatchewan plan and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

Members of this Legislature will show the way with their leadership. 

 

I would like to conclude, Mr. Speaker, with the observation that in the public health field in Saskatchewan 

there is an air of optimism which even socialist gloom cannot dispel. A Liberal government has expanded 

previous health programs and is introducing new ones. This session we will introduce a number of bills that 

will among other things increase the membership on the University Hospital Board, extend nursing home 

and medical representation to the Regional Hospital Councils, and set penalties for leaving unattended 

refrigerators in places accessible to children. 

 

We have got things going on a base hospital. Within weeks we‟ll distribute almost $400,000 to deserving 

hospitals throughout the province with money raised by the Hospital Revenue Act. Within the month a mass 

polio vaccine program will be carried out among pre-school children. In the past year, for the first time free 

measles vaccination has been offered to all pre-school children in Saskatchewan. Also in the past year an 

unprecedented number of scholarship and bursaries were awarded to Saskatchewan health workers. This 

spring the special Committee on Alcoholism will release its report and we can look forward to this 

government taking action that will further meet our province‟s problems in alcohol addiction. 

 

One can only conclude, Mr. Speaker, that these have been exciting days in the public health field and that the 

future is even more promising. 

 

I imagine it is quite evident, Mr. Speaker, that I will not support the amendment but I will support the 

motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MRS. SALLY MERCHANT (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker I enter the debate at this point to 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

317 

indicate my wholehearted support of the program that the government has put forward for consideration at 

this session and for the resolution that is before the House. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, I think I will find it hard to 

believe that Members opposite who have paid lip service to all that is contained in the outline of our 

legislation can now really vote against it as they indicate that they will. They who have so often talked of 

their dedication to education, to agriculture, to our youth, to our senior citizens, to our Indian population, 

now indicate that they will oppose a program of action on behalf of everyone of these. The who talk so much 

about their concern for the welfare of the people of Saskatchewan, now propose to vote against measure after 

measure that is designed with just that in mind, the welfare of the people of Saskatchewan. They are 

measures that are proof that this government is taking positive action that will benefit the people of this 

province. 

 

There are particular aspects of our legislative program, Mr. Speaker, to which I would like to address myself 

today, but before I do I would like to vice again my own pride at being part of a government that is taking 

action on so many fronts. Mr. Speaker, when I first rose in this House two years ago to speak I recall 

expressing pride in the leadership of my party, that was at that time so new to government. The pride I felt 

then was in the leadership that had brought my party and my philosophy into government, and looking back 

upon it, it was a pride full of hope. But it was paled by comparison by the pride I can now feel in that same 

leadership when I can reflect on two years of accomplishment, an accomplishment, Mr. Speaker, that I 

would not have dared to hope for two years ago. My own city of Saskatoon is evidence of the change that has 

taken place in Saskatchewan in those two years. The economic advances, the growth, the enthusiasm, the 

buoyant outlook that are abroad, all are typical of changes that have been effected under this government and 

in due turn affect the welfare of our people. 

 

I would be dishonest, I think, if I did not now pay tribute to the leadership that the Premier has given, 

leadership that has gone so vigorously and so directly to the heart of the problems that have for so long 

vexed this province. I take some pride, Mr. Speaker, too in the fact that the leader of my party, the Premier of 

this province, gives priority to the very things to which I, myself, give priority, to our youth, to their 

education and their welfare; to the development of our resources so that Saskatchewan will affords its people 

equal and better opportunity than exists elsewhere in Canada; to transportation facilities across this vast 

province to serve our people and the commerce that will serve our people; to our senior citizens who laid the 

foundations of this province, who developed institutions and patterns of life from which we now profit and 

which we now seek to hand on improved and extended to the generation that follow; to our native population 

whose problems compounded each year that they went unsolved. These are the priorities that the Premier has 

established and that this government has followed, and these are the priorities in which I and every one who 

has a sincere interest in the development of this province, heartily concur. There is no more, Mr. Speaker, I 

think to demand of government and its leadership than it have truly responsible concern for all of the people 

who chose it to govern. And, Mr. Speaker, I think a truly responsible opposition could in fact find no fault in 

the attitudes of this government, or in its accomplishments, or its aspirations for the people of this province. 

Within the total program that is before this House 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

318 

 

for our consideration in this session, I would like to deal particularly today with what can be broadly classed 

as consumer protection. 

 

In this area, I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am one who believes very firmly that protection of the 

rights of one segment of society always carries danger of infringement upon rights of another segment. And 

for this reason, I regard this kind of legislation, as requiring the very highest degree of responsibility on the 

part of any government that would enact it, a responsibility that has regard for our duty to the entire 

population of the province, and all of the segments of the economy. 

 

In the last 20 years, there has been increasing need for measures on behalf of the general buying public. 

Whether they are buying bacon, and soap flakes in a supermarket or vacuum cleaners, or house-siding from 

an itinerant salesman, or used cars, or buying burial plots against the day of their inevitable use, whether they 

are buying investment shares or scholarship plans, there is need for some protection. And I would be the last 

one in the world, Mr. Speaker, to advocate or even to support any kind of legislation that was so restricted as 

to remove from people the right to spend their own money as they see fit, or even remove from them the 

right to make a mistake, if they see fit. I feel that over-protection turns very easily into over-control. On the 

other hand, I would not be satisfied with a government that allowed sharp or misleading business practice to 

jeopardize the rights of the general public. As a government we have moved to protect those rights. In the 

last two years The Direct Sellers Act, The Cemeteries Act, The Motor Dealers Act, changes in the 

Investment Contracts Act all have been designed to this end. And not only with legislation passed but an 

investigation branch was established for the investigation of complaints and the enforcement of the laws. 

 

Legislation that will come before this House will extend this protection. The Mortgage Brokers Act will 

require the licensing and the control of people who lend money or security involving land or real property. It 

will protect the public from misrepresentation and in some cases from outright fraud, from deceptive 

advertisement, or inducement to borrow money in this way. And it will ensure that only those who are honest 

and competent are allowed to engage in the business. It is only just that the public should have these 

protections and until now they have not been sufficiently. The unconscionable transaction legislation goes 

even further in that it provides for relief in cases where people have already borrowed money, or bought 

goods on credit to find later that the so-called fine print in the contract has placed them at the mercy of the 

creditor. The Act will provide a means whereby the courts may examine a contract suspected of being unfair 

in this way, and relieve the debtor of excessive payment or even order the return to him of money already 

paid that is judged to have been unfairly charged. 

 

Financial failures in other provinces, and indeed problems in our own province in years gone by, have 

indicated a need, a very great need for protection where investments are concerned. Protection to ensure that 

people whose security rests on income from investment can be certain of its safety. Upon taking office this 

government moved immediately to improve the legislation that protects investment in companies licensed in 

Saskatchewan. And that move has proven most effective, Mr. Speaker. We have had in this province in the 

last two years none of the problems that 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

319 

have occurred elsewhere. And we propose, this year, with The Securities Act to go even further. The Act will 

oblige the provisions of not only more information but of information on a continuing basis to investors and 

to shareholders. It will further provide for a two-day cooling-off period similar to that in The Direct Sellers 

Act that will apply in the case of primary distribution, which will be a measure of protection against the so-

called fast-talking promoter. 

 

The White Paper, the Citizen‟s Protection Code, that was tabled last week in this House, expresses concern 

at the inadequacy of our present Act, and indicates the government‟s determination to prevent undesirable 

business elements from moving into this province. These are the ways, Mr. Speaker, in which I am proud to 

say our government is moving to protect the rights of our people, not with impassioned speeches on civil 

liberties and individual rights, but with direct legislative action to support our belief that we have a 

responsibility to protect the rights of citizens and that is what we‟re doing. 

 

There are other measures that we have taken that are related to what we generally classify as the consumer in 

the narrower sense of the person who controls the expenditure of the household budget. And two of these 

measures I would like to refer to briefly. Time does not permit the attention that their importance should 

really command. One is the Commission under the chairmanship of Judge Mary Batten, that is presently 

receiving submissions on the rising cost of living and the means to control it, particularly as it applies to the 

prairie provinces and to food costs specifically. Certainly it is a problem of such increasing proportions that 

it required the best means at our disposal to attempt a solution. Cooperation on a regional basis with Alberta 

and Manitoba appeared a superior approach to any investigation that might have been centred only in one 

province. What the recommendations of the Commission will be, no one can say. Whatever they are I would 

be prepared to press very vigorously for their implementation, if, in the Commission‟s burden on those 

whose incomes are not high, or those who live on fixed incomes. I would hope that the Commission might 

establish an area of study in which government can become involved; some areas in which consumer 

education can be effective; some areas where direct legislative action is called for. It is premature I know and 

perhaps out of order to discuss it at all in the House, but the urgency of the problem prompts me to voice my 

approval of the action that we have taken thus far, and my hope that direct measures may be applied to 

control the rising cost of living. 

 

The second area relating to consumer problems to which I would like to refer is one way in which we are 

able to move with the assurance that it is a necessary and effective means to protection. And that is The Cost 

of Credit Disclosure Act, that will place Saskatchewan among the pioneer provinces in this kind of 

legislation. The amount of credit that is extended either in instalment buying or on revolving credit or budget 

accounts is staggering. It‟s almost impossible to discover just what proportion of goods and services are 

bought in this way each year. And it is right that people should have these goods and services available to 

them in these ways. But what is not right is that people find it almost impossible to discover what the cost of 

credit it. Costs are too often calculated only in terms of monthly payments, and the total cost, that is the 

value of the goods plus the interest on the loan to buy the goods, is 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

320 

 

never or rarely available. 

 

We propose to oblige disclosure of these costs, not in confusing percentages of interest, but in actual dollars 

and cents, and the actual percentage of the cost that is paid not for he goods but for the convenience of credit 

buying. It is not a measure, Mr. Speaker, designed to restrict credit buying, but it is a much needed measure 

to ensure an open understanding in any credit transaction of exactly what the purchaser is spending his 

money on. The purchaser, with all the facts clearly understood, makes in that way a better decision as to how 

he will spend his money. And it is to me the kind of legislation that carries no restrictions but obliges credit 

transactions to be conducted and advertise in ways that will protect the consumer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot resume my place without commending the government for action that is proposed in 

two other acts which will come before this House, that will extend the rights of citizens. One is the proposal 

for a program of legal aid that puts Saskatchewan in the company of very few other provinces, who have 

moved to implement it. It is a start in a direction that I would hope to see before long include legal aid in 

civil matters as well as criminal. I think of the need for legal counsel for deserted wives in particular, for 

small landlords whose income is derived solely from rental income, and who are very often sorely tried by 

delinquent tenants. The scope of the program will, I am sure, be extended as time goes on and I urge the 

government to move as quickly and as far as necessity will demand. That we have made a start in this 

direction, Mr. Speaker, is an indication that it will be expanded. And in another area, Mr. Speaker, this 

government is the first on the North American continent to introduce compensation for victims of crimes. 

There are increasing numbers of cases where innocent victims have suffered physically and financially where 

families have been deprived through loss of a father or a husband, by death sometimes or even temporarily 

through injury. We propose a pattern of compensation to these victims of violence, to their families, which is 

only just, Mr. Speaker, and in my view long overdue. And I take great pride in the fat Saskatchewan takes 

the lead and shows the way to every jurisdiction on this continent in this regard. As I said at the beginning, 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to sit as a Member of a government that is taking action in so many way that 

will benefit the people of Saskatchewan in whatever economic circumstance they find themselves, or in 

whatever corner of the province they live. I am very sincerely, Mr. Speaker, in support of all that this 

government is doing and will happily endorse the motion. 

 

MR. E.I WOOD (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, one significant omission in the Speech from the Throne 

which was noted yesterday by the Hon. Member from Weyburn, (Mr. Pepper), and upon which I also wish to 

comment, is the lack of any mention of surface rights legislation. 

 

Discussions over compensation to the farmer for the granting of surface rights to operators in the search and 

development of oil have been going on a good many years in Saskatchewan. 

 

These stared first in the Lloydminster area when oil was discovered there and farmers were not satisfied with 

what was being paid by the oil companies for the destruction of their topsoil and the inconvenience caused. 

After discussions with 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

321 

the government and the oil companies a rather complicated formula was devised for arriving at what at that 

time was considered to be a comparatively satisfactory amount of compensation. 

 

In January 1952, oil was discovered at Fosterton in the Swift Current area and discussions started all over 

again. I think there would not have been so much trouble if the oil companies had paid compensation in line 

with the Lloydminster formula, but they insisted on paying considerably lower amounts. Another association 

was formed of which Tom Garland (later President of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities) was chairman, and I was Secretary-Treasurer. This association together with the 

Lloydminster and the South-East Surface Rights Associations, and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities worked to achieve a better deal for the farmers. 

 

We realized, Mr. Speaker, that the oil people had rights to search for the oil and to develop the oil, which 

must be recognized. We did not consider that the farmers had any special rights to the oil which lay under 

their land if they did not hold the mineral title; but we did believe that the farmer did own the surface of the 

land and his rights must also be recognized, and that he should be amply and generously compensated for the 

inconvenience to which he was subjected by the operations of the oil industry. 

 

Several arbitration cases were head and several meetings were held with the CCF government and the oil 

companies. The upshot was that the government brought out new regulations in the fall of 1953, that 

considerably raised the compensation payable under a more simple formula based on the municipal 

assessment of the land taken. 

 

In our part of the province at least, the subject of surface rights was comparatively quiet for some years after 

the introduction of the new regulations in 1953. In fact, the first serious rumblings of discontent that I heard 

were down at Midale during the 1964 provincial election. I said at that time that so far as I was concerned, I 

felt that a good look should be taken at the matter just as soon as the election was over. 

 

Well, you know what happened, and it was over a year later that the question came to the fore again. I feel 

that the farmers have a good case for the revision of surface rights regulations. In the intervening years since 

1953, though the price of grain has not risen appreciably, the price of land has gone up drastically, especially 

in the past few years. So had the price of farm machinery which the farmers were forced to bum around and 

over the oil installations. The whole tempo of farming had increased. In 1953 oil development was in its 

infancy, especially in the southern part of the province, and those farming in the midst of oil development 

which were not realized when we were working on the formula in 1953. Some of these were noted by the 

Hon. Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) when he spoke yesterday. 

 

In the summer of 1965, the South-East Surface Rights Association was able to get the present government to 

take notice of their problem and the Friesen Commission was set up. Last year, Mr. Speaker, here in this 

House, and on other occasions I have commended the government on taking this step. Judge Friesen gave the 

matter objective study, heard scores of witnesses and 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

322 

 

thousands of pages of briefs from all who wished to appear before him and he came up with a momentous 

report on the subject. 

 

Now the government opposite is dragging their feet, for no apparent reason. The report was brought in last 

November with a proposed Act already drawn up by the Judge. But I see nothing in the Throne Speech about 

it at all. 

 

I believe that they should cease this dilly dallying and bring down legislation that would mean something 

worthwhile to the farmers of this province, who are forced to put up with the development of the oil industry 

in the midst of their own operations. It is not just time to review the surface rights situation; it is time to do 

something about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another thing I have noted in this debate that should have been left out but wasn‟t. The 

Liberals yelped and hollered for years about the population statistics while they were in opposition, but by 

the way these statistics are behaving since the Liberals became the government they should have the good 

sense to leave them alone. But the Members from Moosomin and Melville have brought them up in this 

debate. It is well known that between the years 1931 and 1944, under Liberal and Conservative governments, 

but mostly under Liberal administration, we lost not only our natural increase which would have amounted 

to some 251,000 people, but our population actually dropped by some 85,000 as well, even above the loss of 

our natural increase. Under the CCF administration, our population stopped falling and increased by some 

107,000. In the years 1951 to 1964 our population increased at the rate of over 8500 per year. The last year 

we were in office it increased by 10,000 persons. The Premier says that our population is increasing under 

the Liberals. Well, maybe so, but by about half the rate it increased under the CCF. In fact in the last period 

for which we have Dominion Bureau of Statistic figures, from June 1, 1965 to June 1, 1966 our population 

increased, not by 10,000 and not even by 8,000, Mr. Speaker, but only by 3,000. And there is good reason to 

fear from the family allowance monthly reports of transfers from one province to another, that during the 

time from June 1 to December 31 of last year, our population has not increased at all, but has rather 

decreased. I think it is time the Liberals started to quit talking about population figures. 

 

It is difficult to tell just what lies behind the slowing down of our population increase, but I believe that it 

backs up the findings of the Hillis and Partners Report which was tabled in this House last Friday and was 

spoken of earlier in this debate. This report shows that job opportunities are not emerging at as fast a rate in 

Saskatchewan under the Liberals as they were during the last three years under the CCF government. 

 

In this debate, and many times outside the house, it has been indicated that Saskatchewan is now a have 

province since the Liberals took office because of a cutback of some $10,000,000 this year in grants from the 

Federal Government. This is just not so. The reason the federal tax-sharing grants are being cut back is not 

because Saskatchewan has become more 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

323 

prosperous under the Liberals, but because the Liberal government at Ottawa has changed the rules under 

which the grants are given. 

 

Originally they promised that the receipts from income, corporation and estates taxes would be equalized 

among all the provinces up to the level of the one province receiving the most from these three taxes. In 

1963 the grants were cut to a level equal to that of what was received by the top two provinces. But now they 

have been cut back to the level of the average of all the province. This is the main reason for the cutback in 

Federal grants to this province for next year. In fact if the formula had not been changed, Saskatchewan 

would have been eligible to receive not less but some $4,000,00 more next year than it did during the present 

fiscal year. 

 

I would also like to say something about grants to municipalities. I don‟t wish to pick on him but the Hon. 

Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) made another statement in this debate to which I take some 

exception, and I quote: 

 

I believe the benefits of this Program can best be illustrated by referring to the rural municipalities in 

my own constituency of Moosomin. In 1965 these 11 rural municipalities received provincial grants 

of only $9,572. One year later in 1966 the same rural municipalities received $119,992 in grants 

from this Provincial Government, an increase, Mr. Speaker, of approximately 12 ½ times as much in 

one year. 

 

I have a copy here of the “Cabri Herald” of November 15, 1966, and in it there is a quotation very much 

along the same lines. This one is attributed to the Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources, the MLA from Maple 

Creek (Mr. Cameron) speaking at a Liberal Annual Meeting of the Maple Creek constituency in Fox Valley, 

and I quote: 

 

Referring to municipal assessments he said the government now pays 50 per cent of the cost of 

regravelling and maintenance of grid roads. This, he said, together with the new Equalization 

Formula and assistance for snow removal increased the amount of money to the rural municipalities 

in the constituency to five fold what was given in 1965. In total, the 10 municipalities in the 

constituency this year will receive $103,000 as compared to $18,000 in 1965 under the old formula. 

He quoted the assistance to the following municipalities in 1966 as compared to 1965: Miry Creek 

from $528 to $4,500, Clinworth from nil to $4,600, Happyland from $800 to $6,800, Deer Forks 

from $2,700 to $8,000. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that Saskatchewan has been having a succession of prosperous years which 

got rolling under the CCF and even the Liberals have been unable to stop it. To these has been added last 

year the best crop in the history of Saskatchewan. Funds have been rolling into the government coffers and 

last session, out of its affluence, the government was able to raise the amount of the assistance given to rural 

municipalities. This is something for which the are to be commended and I am sure that the rural 

municipalities did appreciate it. Assistance to municipalities on roads was raised according to last year‟s 

estimates by some 36 per cent over the previous year but, Mr. Speaker, this is not 500 per cent as 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

324 

 

claimed by the Hon. Member from Maple Creek nor 1250 per year as is claimed by the Hon. Member from 

Moosomin. What these Members have done in making their extravagant statements is to completely ignore 

the millions of dollars that have been spent by the Provincial Government for the lat 10 years in assistance 

on the Grid Road Program and which has meant so much to the people of this province. The government in 

office is not to be criticized for having given added assistance to the rural municipalities but let us not be 

foolish and try for political reasons to make it appear to be 10 or 20 times as much as it really is. 

 

These are really seriously important days for Canada, Mr. Speaker, both in our relationships abroad and out 

relationships between her National Government and the provinces, and between the provinces themselves, 

here at home. If we are able to have a worthwhile and meaningful Centennial year, there must be many 

problems for which answers must be found. There are many problems confronting the people, the local 

governments and the Provincial Government of Saskatchewan. These cannot be solved through political 

manouevrings and through trying to mislead the public. This is the truth that the government often seems 

unable to understand. Mr. Speaker, for this reason as well as for several others, I will not support the motion. 

I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G.T. SYNDER (Moose Jaw City): — Once again I welcome the opportunity to contribute a few 

words to this debate. The tolerance and the latitude allowed in this debate provides the temptation to discuss 

a wide range of topics and matters of consequence to the Saskatchewan people. On this occasion, however, I 

hope to devote the bulk of time at my disposal to matters of particular significance to the city of Moose Jaw 

which I am pleased and honored to represent in this House. Some of the areas of concern are local in nature 

while many more however, have a general application and they are festering sores which affect a large 

segment of Saskatchewan‟s population. The Throne Speech appears to provide little hope for a solution to 

many of those problems. Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, allow me to offer my congratulations to the Cabinet 

Ministers who are assuming new portfolios since the House last met. I want particularly to congratulate the 

Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) on his newly acquired portfolio. I hope that he will manifest 

the wisdom to contribute to the betterment of that department. How the change in ministerial responsibilities 

will affect the Department of Highways, I couldn‟t venture a guess, Mr. Speaker, but gratefully that is the 

government‟s problem and not ours. During the last announced Cabinet shuffle, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

indicated that he would be willing at some time in the immediate future to forsake the Treasury portfolio. 

May we offer our condolences at this time to his successor whoever it may be. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Under the stewardship of the Member for Morse (Mr. Thatcher), Mr. Speaker, we have 

witnessed the extravagance of a person dedicated to image building at the expense of many vital programs. A 

half or three quarters of a million dollars worth of marble floors in this building and the four lane freeway 

connecting the 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

325 

ranch at Caron with the friendly city of Moose Jaw are only two examples. There are a good many more that 

could be offered at this time. In recent months the Provincial Treasurer has drained money from the Student 

Aid Fund. He‟s taken $1,000,000 from the Public Administration Foundation and I expect also, Mr. Speaker, 

that the surplus medical care and hospitalization funds have vanished by now. The inheritance which he 

received from the former administration is all gone; there are no more piggy banks to rob so now the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) stands prepared to vacate the Treasury portfolio to pass it on to one of 

his colleagues. This brings to mind, Mr. Speaker, an old adage which seems to fit the case very nicely. It 

goes something like this: “The man who builds and lacks wherewith to pay, provides a home from which to 

run away.” 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech which was delivered by His Honor on February 2, left 

many of us wondering how it would be possible to devote seven days to the discussion of such a hollow 

document. I expect that much of the time that is yet to be used by the Members will be devoted to the 

discussion of matters which were excluded from the Throne Speech. In that way I hope we will have 

justified the expenditure of that amount of time. The amendment that has been proposed by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) does a concise job in indicating the failings and the shortcoming in His Honor‟s 

Address. It makes clear the displeasure of the official opposition at the indifference of the government 

concerning matters of vital importance to Saskatchewan people. The failure of the government to recognize 

the need for inclusion of prescription drugs under the Medical Care Insurance Act, I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

represents the most obvious omission of all. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we will not be able to lay claim to a 

complete health plan until this goal is reached. The service of the medical practitioner is available to all 

Saskatchewan people. However, care and diagnostic service means little if there remains the financial barrier 

with respect to the substantial cost of drugs, especially in the case of our low income people and especially 

our senior citizens. We are told, Mr. Speaker, that in many cases the physician is restricted in the proper care 

and treatment of his patient because he knows that much needed drugs are out of the reach of the patient 

because of high costs and low incomes. We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, offer no apology for 

introducing this amendment. It presents itself to us as the logical next step in providing services to the sick. 

A major hurdle was passed in 1962 over the protests and the obstructions of those who sit opposite. Today 

they claim to support comprehensive, universal, prepaid medical care. This amendment, I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, provides the opportunity for them to indicate to the people of Saskatchewan just how genuine they 

really are. We had hoped, Mr. Speaker, that at the very least we would have seen the inclusion of terminal 

cancer patients under a drug program during this session. This would have been the bare minimum which 

would have been expected in view of the fact that the Liberals promised drug benefits to Saskatchewan 

people during the 1964 election campaign. There is little doubt that a great many people supported the 

Liberal party expecting that this pledge was given in good faith. We call upon the government, Mr. Speaker, 

to honor, not our promises, but their own. I was pleased last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, to hear the Minister of 

Labor and the Minister of Cooperatives (Mr. Cohere) speak in such glowing terms in reference to the 

cooperative movement. As 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

326 

 

Members are aware, the aim and the objective of the cooperative movement is to provide goods and services 

at cost. The growth of the movement, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is evidence that this cardinal principle is being 

endorsed by increasing numbers of people, in spite of the road blocks, of the opposition, of the friends of the 

Members who sit opposite. They seem to believe that the amenities of life should not be enjoyed until they 

have had the opportunity of taking a profit out of the operation. 

 

The conditions under which some of these cooperative organizations came into existence are well known to 

many people. Many can recall the day when it was claimed that wheat could not be sold without a future 

market. The farmer couldn‟t get his first load of grain out, Mr. Speaker, until the bottom had dropped out of 

the market and these conditions prevailed until all of the wheat was out of the farmer‟s hands and into the 

custody of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. If the farmer found that after paying his debts he was broke, he 

could also borrow money from the free enterprisers who had bought his grain at bargain prices. They would 

loan him money at high interest rates, take a mortgage on his farm and if through some misfortune, the 

farmer found that he couldn‟t meet his obligations, then they of course could take his farm from him. There 

was no future market for farm machinery, Mr. Speaker. The farmer couldn‟t buy a December binder at half 

the price of a July binder. 

 

The solutions to these problems were met, Mr. Speaker, by the farmer when the action was taken by the 

farmers of Saskatchewan and a cooperative organization was formed in the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

When the Cooperative Oil Refinery in Regina was ready to go into operation in the early 1930s, they found 

that the free enterprisers would not sell them crude oil in the hope the refinery would be left with a million 

dollars worth of scrap iron on their hands. The refinery survived only by building their own wells and 

producing their own crude oil and they succeeded. Mr. Speaker, in spite of the efforts of the free enterprise 

buddies of those who sit opposite in this House. The cooperative movement, Mr. Speaker, has come a long 

way in recent years since the days when it was a virgin project pregnant with hope. There is still a good deal 

that needs to be done. 

 

In the Moose Jaw Times Herald of December 28, 1966, there is a news item accompanied by a news map 

showing the corporation profits by Canadian companies increased by $100,000,000 this past year. For 1966, 

it showed that corporate profits totalled $5,300,000,000 before taxes, but after all wage bills had been paid. 

Liberals opposite, Mr. Speaker, malign labor at every opportunity. They blame labor for every one of our 

economic ills. They have chosen labor as their own individual whipping boy. They completely ignore the 

fact, however, Mr. Speaker that corporation profits took $5,300,000,000 out of the economic blood stream 

during this past year. Canadian food processors and distributors, on a percentage basis, Mr. Speaker, took 

twice the net profit of their American counterparts last year. It‟s an established fact that Canadian citizens 

have the dubious distinction of paying more for drugs than citizens in any other country in the whole world. I 

suggest to you today, Mr. Speaker, that this represents a free enterprise luxury that Canadian people can no 

longer afford and they will not continue to pay for it indefinitely in an era of high consumer costs and 

unprecedented corporation profits. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

327 

It is by this process, Mr. Speaker, that this uncontrolled free enterprise system digs its own grave. These 

people, Mr. Speaker, the friends of those who sit opposite are no more human benefactors that those who 

manipulated the grain trade a few years ago. This is why, Mr. Speaker, it matters not ho hard the crew may 

work on the pumps or how hard the captain may shout the old uncontrolled free enterprise ship is sinking. It 

may be, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Cooperatives, if he was sincere when he spoke last Thursday, has 

perhaps had a glimpse of the handwriting on the wall. 

 

I would like to return at this moment, Mr. Speaker, to matters of specific interest and concern to the people 

of Moose Jaw whom I am pleased and honored to represent in this House. The Members are aware that the 

city of Moose Jaw has lived in the shadow of the capital city and has suffered a disadvantage because of this. 

The age of technological change and a change in industrial techniques have also taken their tool with a 

subsequent reduction in transportation industries and food processing in particular. One of the recent and 

outstanding incidents which affected Moose Jaw adversely involved the closing of the Robin Hood Flour 

Mills. It seems that after 50 years of successful operation the parent company in Minneapolis decided that 

Moose Jaw was no longer strategically located for their purpose. It is widely recognized, Mr. Speaker, that 

flour milling has become an extremely competitive business in recent years. Former customers have 

established their own operations and in many cases, former customers have become our competitors. But 

having said that, there are still a number of disturbing factors in relation to the closure of the Robin Hood 

Flour Mill. 

 

A few weeks prior to the announcement that the mill was to close, a large order of flour destined for Cuba 

was not even bid on by the company and the reason for not bidding was, and I quote them: “We‟re satisfied 

with the business we have.” It is now an established fact that the equivalent of $15,000,000 bushels of grain 

as to be milled for delivery to Cuba. When faced with the charge that American policy decisions in keeping 

with the American Trading with the Enemy Act had influenced the company not to bid on this order. This 

was denied by the parent company in Minneapolis. I leave it to you, Mr. Speaker, and to Members of this 

House to make your own decisions. Now, Mr. Speaker, the immediate effect was to have 90 families in 

Moose Jaw denied a livelihood. A request by my colleague, Mr. Davies, and myself to delay the closing for a 

full investigation was denied. Since that time the closing of the mill has resulted in a subsequent reduction in 

employment at the Prairie Bag Factory which provided materials for the mill and a subsequent reduction in 

railway crews who performed switching operations at the mill and handled a good deal of the finished 

product. 

 

The closing of the Robin Hood Flour Mils involved final negotiations with employees affected. Since that 

time the company has contended that employer contributions to the employees pension fund are not to be 

turned over to several employees but they are to be retained by management. They are held at the present 

time, I understand, in Montreal Trust, and the latest information that I have received in this connection is that 

the matter is still under discussion with the employees hopeful that they may be able to salvage something 

from a fund which they always regarded as their own and was deemed to be, by them, a deferred wage. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

328 

 

Now this whole matter is significant, Mr. Speaker, when viewed in the light of the continued declarations by 

our bouncy Premier that there is only one thing wrong with foreign investment in Canadian industry and that 

is we don‟t have enough of it. The Robin Hood incident, I think, Mr. Speaker, point up the fact that foreign 

control over Canadian industry places us in a subservient position where, if extended to the extreme, results 

in a situation where we are no longer masters of our own destiny; we are not in a position to make final 

decisions with respect to either foreign or domestic policy. Some enlightened people in the Liberal party in 

Ottawa have already reached this conclusion while others in Ottawa and here in Saskatchewan still prefer to 

view this whole matter with their head tucked away neatly in the sand. 

 

Last evening when the Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) had a few words to say with respect to his 

responsibility in connection with the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, Mr. Speaker, he remarked 

about the excellent year which SGIO had just enjoyed. It might be fitting to take note of the fact that October 

of 1966 was designed as Fire Prevention Month. At that time Members will recall newspaper, television and 

radio advertising pointed out to us that the incidence of fire was down in Saskatchewan, and people in 

Saskatchewan were encouraged to keep up the good work. The Minister (Mr. Boldt) mentioned yesterday 

evening and he has mentioned on other occasions that SGIO has just enjoyed the best year in its history. It‟s 

not my intention to quarrel with the statement of the Minister or with advertisements in the press or the 

radio. However, assuming that these statements are true, I think the people of my constituency and the 

people of Saskatchewan are deserving of an explanation concerning the general increase in rates throughout 

the province. The smug and arrogant remarks of the Minister last night to the effect that we were perhaps 

poor risks just doesn‟t wash, Mr. Speaker. In Moose Jaw the fire insurance rates jumped from $2.50 to $3.50 

a thousand or a 40 per cent increase. At the same time the deductible for hail and windstorm damage was 

doubled from $25 to $50. In other categories, coverage for window glass was withdrawn completely and I 

understand that personal liability has been decreased on many of these policies also. It is worthwhile to read 

the fine print, Mr. Speaker. I believe that it is evident to most people that the gap between rates charged in 

neighboring provinces and those enjoyed by the residents of the Province of Saskatchewan is gradually 

narrowing. If this trend continues, Mr. Speaker, the advantage here will disappear and SGIO will assume the 

position of just another insurance agency and its reason for existence will become negligible and remote. 

This appears, Mr. Speaker, to be a calculated attempt to re-establish private insurance companies and allow 

them to be competitive without lowering their rates. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the benefits which the 

people of Saskatchewan have experienced on their Government Insurance Plan will be sacrificed on the altar 

of free enterprise. 

 

Now just a few words, Mr. Speaker, with reference to some of the policy decisions that this present 

government and their effect upon the lives and the futures of the young people of Moose Jaw and similarly 

the youth of Saskatchewan. The Members will recall overtures extended to young people by campaigning 

Liberals during the 1964 general election campaign. At that time Liberals represented themselves as the sole 

benefactor and the savior of youth. There is little doubt that the campaign had some effect on those young 

people who lacked the years that 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

329 

would enable them to make an accurate judgment. The time interval since May of 1964, Mr. Speaker, has 

had the effect of exploding that myth with the departure of the dancing girls and the return of McLaren 

Advertising Agency to their Eastern Canadian home. At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, the young people of 

Saskatchewan have received shoddy treatment from this particular government. The very young experienced 

a taste of Liberal benevolence during the Christmas season which is just past. The traditional Christmas 

allowance, Mr. Speaker, to welfare families for extra Yuletide needs which has been traditional over the 

years was discontinued by this government. These big spenders opposite, Mr. Speaker, rationalize by 

claiming that the change over to the Saskatchewan Assistance Act made the Christmas bonus unnecessary. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the increased schedule for rent in Moose Jaw and other municipalities I expect is 

absolutely meaningless. The practice has been to allow recipients of social aid the amount necessary to 

provide accommodation for themselves and for their family. The slight increase puts no money whatsoever 

in the recipient‟s pocket. 

 

Let‟s take a look at the schedule for food, the increased schedule with the introduction of the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Act. The increase for adults amounts to $1.50 a month for food from $22.50 to $24. For children 

age one to six years, up from $12.50 to $13.50 or an increase of one dollar. Age six to seven years an 

increase from $18 to $19 or an increase of a dollar a month. Age 12 to 15, $23 to $23.50 or an increase of 50 

cents. I won‟t go all the way down the list, Mr. Speaker, but this would mean that for an average family of 

four with two adults and two children, the increase for food per month amounts to about $5.00. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, also that there was a slight additional allowance for telephone services but the 

Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) has taken care of that quite nicely by increasing rates for telephone 

subscribers in recent times. The increase allowed by the introduction of the Saskatchewan Assistance Act 

falls far short of increased costs and yet it provides the opportunity, the excuse, Mr. Speaker, to chisel and to 

cut corners on those people who are least able to defend themselves. Those people at the lower end of the 

economic ladder. To deny these people the traditional allowance, Mr. Speaker, was shabby and it was cheap 

and it is out of keeping with the spirit of the season which is devoted in the main to providing a happy 

atmosphere for the very young. 

 

The attitude of the government with respect to other amenities for young people, Mr. Speaker, is also a 

matter for concern in the city of Moose Jaw. Some 30 years ago, when I attended the YMCA as a young boy, 

the facilities there were already inadequate and antiquated for a population of our city in the 1930s. Today 

the need for new accommodation here is immediate and there is no hope for expansion or renovation on the 

present site. A short while ago, the decision was made to provide new accommodation, to provide a new 

YMCA building. The approximate division for the financing for the project was detailed in this way. The 

YMCA was to raise some $60,000 from the sale of the present site. The community was expected to raise 

$445,000. The city of Moose Jaw was to raise $340,000 and the Province of Saskatchewan in view of the 

fact it had contributed to Regina and Saskatoon was expected and hoped to provide 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

330 

 

$100,000. Once again, Mr. Speaker, the young people of Moose Jaw received a taste of the kind of 

benevolence and concern that this government is becoming known for. The Local Government Board denied 

the city of Moose Jaw the right to proceed with the necessary arrangements which would allow them to 

provide their $340,000 for this essential project. If the Local Government Board was not acting upon the 

direction of the Premier, I hope he would make his position clear in the immediate future, because this is a 

matter of immediate concern to the people of Moose Jaw and surrounding district. 

 

During the 1964 election campaign Liberal spokesmen pledged themselves, Mr. Speaker, to provide 

opportunities and unlimited horizons for young people. To most people, Mr. Speaker, opportunity is 

synonymous with education. It provides them with the springboard from which they progress and advance. 

What then of the educational opportunities provided for young people since the Liberal takeover in 1964? 

The government showed its colours pretty early in the game when it had a look at the allotment of Grade 12 

scholarship. The allotment by the former CCF government when it left office in 1964 totalled 637. Liberals 

took quick action, Mr. Speaker, and reduced this figure to 609. By 1965, Grade 12 enrolment had increased 

by 2300 and yet entrance scholarships fell to a low of 481. In 1966 we saw a further increase in enrolment at 

the Grade 12 level and yet the scholarship figure didn‟t even total up to the 1964 figure and it arrived finally 

at a figure of 594. The end result, Mr. Speaker, of this kind of economy measure, is not easy to estimate. 

However, it is certain that it means a denial of opportunities for worthy young people, young students. It 

means fewer opportunities for young people, Mr. Speaker, ant not more. 

 

Saskatchewan institutions of higher learning are not receiving the attention that circumstances demand. 

Students from Moose Jaw and throughout the province have been made aware of the courses available to 

them at the Saskatchewan Technical Institutes as the Member for Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) mentioned when 

he was speaking in the Address in Reply. They have been made aware of them and yet, Mr. Speaker, the end 

result has been that some 880 students were turned away. A total of 880 young people according to your own 

Sessional Paper No. 288, have been turned away from our Technical and Vocational Schools during 1966. In 

the field of vocational and technical construction, Mr. Speaker, the Herculean Liberal effort seems to have 

been to convert a portion of the Old Weyburn Mental Institution for this purpose. The Throne Speech speaks 

of a high demand for skilled workers and it seems to us on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. That we‟ve 

heard this tune played on at least two other occasions during the 1965 and the 1966 Throne Speeches. We 

hope that 1967 will be more productive. 

 

It would be untrue to say that advances have not been made in providing University facilities. However, it‟s 

not sufficient to say that more has been done this year than was done last year or that more was done last 

year than was done the year before. This is true in every province in Canada. To properly measure the 

progress that we are making, Mr. Speaker, it becomes necessary to examine what has been done in the light 

of what we must accomplish with the increased demand for higher learning. Dr. J.W.T. Spinks issued a 

warning of a further move towards controlled enrolment in the January the 7th issue of the Regina Leader 

Post. And this I think provides evidence of genuine concern by educators who recognize the need for 

increased 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

331 

activity by the Government if Saskatchewan is to fulfil the requirements expected of it. The attitude of the 

government to encourage the postponement of capital spending on the university level as an anti-inflationary 

measure, as was explained by Mr. Sharpe and our Premier, can only have the effect of making the problem 

more critical and making it more difficult for young students seeking entrance to both the Regina and the 

Saskatoon campus. 

 

I want to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, about another matter which is of particular concern to the 

constituents that I represent in this House. The people of Moose Jaw, with the possible exception of the 

residents of North Battleford and Weyburn, are probably the most interested and concerned with the respect 

to the progress and the problems of the mentally ill. The understanding and the concern of our people for this 

unfortunate group are directly related, I believe, to the existence of the Saskatchewan Training School in our 

community. Parents of retarded children bring the retarded child home often for weekends and for holidays 

and inject them into a community atmosphere. Mental retardation in the city of Moose Jaw no longer carries 

with it the stigma that was the case a matter of some years ago. Staff members who receive far too little 

recognition, staff members from the Saskatchewan Training School can be seen during off-duty hours with a 

child, a retarded child or two, with them. During the summer months it is a common sight to see training 

school staff with a half a dozen of these young retarded children at the wicket of a Fairy Queen or 

accompanying them on hikes in Moose Jaw parks. Volunteer workers play an active role in working with 

these patients, both in and out of the institution. I believe the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) 

will recall a musical skit which was presented by patients of the Saskatchewan Training School at the Youth 

Showcase. It was sponsored by the John Howard Society in Moose Jaw during this past summer. A 

combination of all these things, I believe, Mr. Speaker, have made the people of Moose Jaw tolerant and 

concerned and compassionate for these unfortunate people and it is widely recognized by our people that 

mental deficiencies occur at random. There are no exemptions by reasons of intelligence or wealth or stature 

in the community. Normality is regarded as a matter of good luck rather than good management. Against this 

background, Mr. Speaker it is little wonder than that Moose Jaw people were shocked and distressed at the 

treatment of some of the people that had formerly been confined to mental institutions. Is it any wonder that 

they were shocked and distressed at the closure of Embury House in 1964, one of the first official acts of this 

government? Families in Moose Jaw that I know well will testify to the spectacular success of Embury 

House in the treatment of emotionally disturbed children. Since I became a Member of this House in 1960, 

the institution was a perennial target for Liberal Members who sit opposite who claimed that the expenditure 

of approximately $100,000 a year was an extravagance and a waste. So they took quick action, Mr. Speaker, 

to close Embury House dispersing these children to the four corners of the country. This left a void and a 

vacuum, Mr. Speaker, and it represented an abrogation of a responsibility which is justly the responsibility of 

any good government. Apparently in recent months the government has come to recognize the mistake 

which was made when Embury House was closed, but rather than take the logical step and reopen the 

facilities and enlarge and expand and nourish it, the choice was made to leave the job to free enterprise. In 

recent months, Mr. Speaker, we have seen an influx of private institutions into the province. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

332 

 

While this field is properly the responsibility of government, these private institutions provide the only 

alternative at this time and I think in the main they are doing the best job possible under the circumstances. 

They lack, however, qualified staff; they lack the services of psychiatric people from the Department of 

Public Health and I doubt, Mr. Speaker, if the government can shed a bit of testimony on this whole matter 

to indicate that love and devotion alone are suitable substitutes for concentrated psychiatric care. With 

respect to the cost of providing service for the emotionally disturbed, it would appear that the government 

has blundered badly. At a cost of $26.30 per patient per day, they will be paying dearly for care which I‟m 

afraid will not compare with that which was offered at Embury House. The cost per patient annually is over 

$9,000 per patient. A dozen such patients would have justified keeping Embury House open. This is another 

example, Mr. Speaker, of financial folly and indicates that the government operated on the basis of a faulty, 

preconceived idea which has resulted in inferior service and increase cost to the public. 

 

The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker makes not one mention of the care of the mentally ill and I think this is 

somewhat strange and surprising in view of the fact that this is a matter which is very much in the spotlight 

in recent months. 

 

The rapid discharge of Weyburn patients raised a public outcry from all corners of the province and 

prompted the former Minister to set up the “Ad Hoc Committee into the Resettlement of Hospital Patients”. 

This committee investigated, made comments and recommended to the government. The committee noted 

that the Weyburn Institution, in reducing its population from 1,500 in 1963 to about 500 in the spring of 

1966 had — and I quote the report — “shown a sharper decline than that achieved by any other hospital in 

North America or the United Kingdom.” We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, agree with the 

observations of the Ad Hoc Committee when they said, “The Saskatchewan Plan provided for in legislation 

in 1961 would appear to be based on a sound principle, that of treating the mentally ill person in his own 

area of the province rather than removing him many miles to a large institution.” Now this, Mr. Speaker, we 

regard as sound judgment but we respond to and subscribe to the recommendations of the committee and the 

opinion of the committee that in order for the plan to function successfully that it requires: (a) in-patient 

facilities in a number of areas of the province; (b) adequate numbers of trained staff for both in-patients and 

out-patient treatment and follow-up; (c) a good working relationship between staff and community medical 

practitioners; (d) adequate community support and understanding. The committee noted also,, Mr. Speaker, 

that with respect to foster homes — and I quote the report again — “The lack of objective standards with 

respect to licensing, supervision and the keeping of patients‟ records was felt to be highly unsatisfactory.” 

The committee also observed, Mr. Speaker, that most of the proprietors interviewed had no prior training or 

related experience, and I think this emphasized quite clearly the need for the observance of the Ad Hoc 

Committee‟s report and that more use be made of psychiatric nurses in this regard. Other recommendations 

of significance involve the suggested uses of the Weyburn Mental Institution, the vacant portion of the 

Weyburn Mental Institution. These suggestions for the future use included: 

1. a geriatric centre. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

333 

 

2. a nursing home. 

3. a school for slow learners. 

4. a sheltered workshop. 

5. a centralized training program for psychiatric nurses. 

6. a centre for alcoholics. 

7. a method to relieve the overcrowding in the North Battleford institution. 

 

It was recommended also that intensified and continuing research be conducted into the resettlement of 

mental patients. I‟ve had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, only to touch very briefly on some of the major 

recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee. There is a good deal more which could and should be said on 

this very important topic. 

 

I believe it‟s worthwhile to observe what attention has been paid by the government to the recommendations 

of the Ad Hoc Committee. I should mention first of all in the opinion of many, many people that, if the 

Saskatchewan Plan is to be a success and to perform the function that was intended by those who conceived 

it, it is apparent that more staff rather than less staff ill be required. To be successful, the best interests of the 

patient must be primary for the government. The cost of such a program must be secondary, and it must not 

be regarded as the opportunity for the government to economize at the expense of the mentally ill. And it 

would appear, Mr. Speaker, that this government has used the Ad Hoc Committee as a device to get an irate 

public off its back. At this point in time there appears to be little evidence to indicate that any action has 

been taken which is consistent with the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee. My experience, my 

observation and the observations of others with respect to the activity of the government since the report was 

received show no significant change whatsoever. 

 

Patients in Moose Jaw half-way houses and in half-way houses throughout the province are receiving no 

more care, no more consideration, no more visits, no more occupational therapy than was the case before. 

Former Weyburn mental patients, Mr. Speaker, have made conditions intolerable in some institutions for 

normal people who are not mentally disturbed. It‟s made it necessary for some of the normal patients to pack 

their bags and move elsewhere. The need for additional nursing home accommodation, Mr. Speaker, has 

become acute as a result of the government‟s rapid discharge policy from Weyburn. The Speech from the 

Throne points to increase the accommodation for senior citizens. I hope that this will manifest itself and this 

will prove to be some relief for overcrowded conditions so that some of our senior citizens can take 

advantage of that kind of a program. Of his we heartily approve. The Park Lodge Nursing Home in Moose 

Jaw is one which was welcome t the city a number of months ago when it appeared to represent a very 

valuable addition to the community. In recent months, it has become the home for many former Weyburn 

mental patients. I am sorry to say that it no longer serves the community in the way it was expected to do. 

Among the patients are those who are referred to by the staff as the “strippers”, who remove their clothes 

regularly and parade in the nude. Others during winter months, Mr. Speaker, have been observed in their 

underclothes attempting to board passing buses operated by the Moose Jaw Transit system. The ambulance 

service in Moose Jaw which is subsidized by the city of Moose Jaw has found it necessary in recent days to 

refuse service to the institution as the feel they are ill-equipped to handle some of these patients, these former 

Weyburn mental patients at the Park Lodge Nursing 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

334 

 

Home without restraining equipment. On many occasions it has been necessary for them to thoroughly clean 

and disinfect the ambulance and equipment following the delivery of a patient from the Park Lodge Home to 

the General Hospital. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that these policies responsible for conditions such as these stem 

from a callous disregard for the welfare of these unfortunate human beings, and it represents a new low in a 

civilized society. This retreat back into the Dark Ages can never be justified, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of 

business efficiency. 

 

I wish the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) was here, but I would like to invite him to visit the nursing homes 

in Moose Jaw, in particular the Park Lodge Nursing Home which is regarded as the best structurally, the 

most modern and the most expensive in our city. I would like him to satisfy himself as to the standard of care 

that is being offered to patients there. I would like to have him decide for himself the extent to which former 

Weyburn mental patients are contributing to an intolerable condition for other normal patients in that nursing 

home. I would invite the Minister also to examine the records of Moose Jaw‟s two hospital and ascertain for 

himself how many long-stay patients are being detained in hospitals because no nursing home 

accommodation is available to the, when they might be discharged to the community to take advantage of 

home are services and the care of the Victorian Order of Nurses, thus freeing much needed hospital bed 

space for people in need of hospital care. The mention of more senior citizens homes, as I suggested earlier, 

Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech, provides some hope, I hope for an improvement in a very bad situation. 

The Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) and the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) I think might very well 

consider it to be a good joint exercise to work out a reasonable standard with respect to the quality and the 

standard in nursing homes throughout the province and decide on a minimum of training for proprietors for 

these people and make it their business to see that regular follow-up visits are made to insure that minimum 

standards of decency are observed. Of the seven recommended uses to which the vacant space in the 

Weyburn Institution might be put, which included a geriatric centre, a nursing home, a school for slow 

learners, a sheltered workshop, a centralized training program for psychiatric nurses, a centre for alcoholics, 

or even a method to relieve overcrowded conditions in North Battleford, not one of these recommendations, 

Mr. Speaker, was regarded as being worthy of consideration by the government. But instead it chose to 

renovate and convert it into a technical school and in so doing, Mr. Speaker, it ignored its responsibility in 

the field of education as well as in the area of health and welfare of government activities. 

 

In recent months, since the report of the Ad Hoc Committee was received, Mr. Speaker, many reports are 

still rampant with respect to patient neglect, with respect to inadequate heat, food and clothes. I wish the 

Minister would make it his business to see that these matters are checked out and some conclusion is drawn. 

One of the most outstanding and one of the most recent brought to my attention involves a former Weyburn 

patient who was admitted to the Union Hospital during the Christmas season. She was described as a person 

having the mental ability of a four or five year old. She was found, according to reports, trying on 

newspapers in a half-way house and was admitted to the hospital in an absolutely disgraceful state, Mr. 

Speaker covered from head to foot with her own body waste. A major clean-up was necessary before this 

woman could be admitted to the hospital and placed in a hospital bed. This is a grizzly 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

335 

story, Mr. Speaker, to place before this Legislature and I can assure you that I receive no pleasure in drawing 

it to the attention of this House. But I can assure the Members of this House as to the condition she was in 

when she was admitted to hospital. I am sure that the records of the hospital would be more readily available 

to the Minister than they are to myself, and I would encourage his interest in matters of this sort. This 

happened, Mr. Speaker, not in the Dark Ages. It happened in the last half of the 20th century. It happened in 

the province of Saskatchewan, where only a short while ago we were described as having the most advanced 

mental health program in the whole of North America and where research and care and treatment of the 

mentally ill were an outstanding part of that program. 

 

I intend, Mr. Speaker, to vote against this motion because in essence a vote against the motion on the Throne 

Speech is an indication of no confidence in this government and I need no better reason, Mr. Speaker. This 

government has failed to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people, it has failed to meet the minimum 

requirements in the fields of health, education, and welfare. In so doing it has failed the general public and it 

has failed the youth of our province in particular in many, many ways. I intend, Mr. Speaker. To vote against 

the motion and to support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. K. G. ROMULD (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, first I would like to associate myself with the Members 

who spoke yesterday on the passing of John Cuelenaere. I know that we will all miss him in this House. Not 

only have we lost a great parliamentarian but the province has lost a great citizen. 

 

Now like the speakers who spoke before me, I would like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the 

Speech from the Throne. I think they did a tremendous job and I know that they were well received 

throughout the province. When I was home over the weekend several people came up to me and said how 

much they appreciated hearing the information from the mover and the seconder. I would also like to 

congratulate the Hon. Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) on being appointed to the Cabinet. I now 

that he will bring a great deal of distinction to the Department of Welfare. I think I would be remiss if I did 

not commend the Premier for his explanation of the Speech from the Throne and I now that in this province, 

the people are beginning to look to Premier Thatcher as being one of the greatest leaders of all times. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMULD: — I think we must remember that he‟s probably the only Premier in the provinces or in 

Canada that had to lead a province out of the state of wilderness that the socialists left it in. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMULD: — And in the short period of less than three years he has made it a progressive province 

and a prosperous one. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

336 

 

MR. ROMULD: — And now, sir, I would like to say a few words to my hon. friends who sit across the 

way. I am very surprised at the treatment that they have given me this year; it‟s much kinder than it was two 

years before. None of them have made any comment about my sitting in the House this time. Of course 

before, you know, I was subject to their snide, their sneering, and their insulting remarks that I was not the 

Member of the Canora constituency. And I suppose that had they known the Election Act they would not 

have been so persistent in trying to unseat me. It is quite evidence now that even the people who wrote the 

Election Act didn‟t know it or they perhaps would have been successful in unseating me in Canora. But at 

least I appreciate their kindness in this session so far and I think that one good turn deserves another, so 

today I‟m going to be as kind and gentle as I possible can be . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMULD: — . . . but still stay within the truth and the facts that are before us. Now, at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, I intend to comment on the Essential Services Act, a Bill brought before this House at our third 

session. The primary purpose of this Act was to ensure the people of this province that minority groups, 

encouraged by power hungry and ambitious labor leaders, would not be permitted to discontinue essential 

services through strike action, which could result in extreme hardships for our citizens and in fact, cause a 

real disaster in large areas of this province. When this government was faced with a strike by members of the 

OCAW union against the Saskatchewan Power Corporation that could have resulted in complete stoppage of 

our gas supply, Members on this side of the House, after long hours of deliberation, decided that a course of 

action must be taken to ensure the continuation of the essential services of our province, which are 

absolutely necessary for our day to day operations. For an example, if the gas supply was shut off many 

industries would be forced to close down, causing large numbers of our working force to be laid off. This 

would be the start of a chain reaction that would end in the closing of hospitals, schools, hotels, garages. 

Practically any business or institution you care to name could not escape the effects of such a strike. 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Had that debate last September. 

 

MR. ROMULD: — If the Member from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) will either contain himself or go to the 

bathroom he‟ll have his chance to get up and say something after. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROMULD: — To the Members of this House it became crystal clear that we had an obligation to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan. Their welfare must be our primary concern. What reaction this legislation would 

have on our political future was never considered. Mr. Speaker, we take full responsibility for this Bill. In 

my opinion, a responsible and reliable government must be prepared to protect its people from strike action 

that could result in the province becoming next thing to a disaster area. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

337 

Our Administration believes in protecting all classes of people and we are the defenders of labor and not 

their persecutors. When faced with a near crisis such as we were, the course of action to be taken is never 

any easy one. There are always alternatives that can be considered. 

 

Of course, we could have been like the previous administration burying our heads in the sand like the ostrich 

and refusing to face up to reality and the complex problems that come before us from time to time. This was 

not our intention last fall, and I can readily assure you that we on this side of the House will not shirk our 

responsibilities to our respective constituencies and to the people of this province. 

 

When the Essential Services Act was placed before this Assembly to receive approval, and during the debate 

that followed Members of the opposite side accused us of dragging our feet for five months. We were 

criticized for not taking the negotiations out of the hands of management and placing them into the hands of 

the government. 

 

However, the past performances of the old CCF administration do not coincide with the remarks expressed 

now that they are sitting in the opposition. 

 

Let us review the 1954-55 dispute which lasted well over one year. And it is most apparent now that the 

Members who sit opposite, the self-styled, the self-appointed experts of labor and management, can readily 

offer advice, but when they were in the responsible position of being a government, they could not keep their 

own house in order. 

 

It is interesting to note that the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor, which at the present time appear to be 

kissing cousins of the NDP, did not share the viewpoint of the socialists at that time. And here is what the 

union had to say and I have taken this from the Labor Gazette Volume 55, 1955, page 28. 

 

A demand that the Provincial Government rescind an order “freezing” the wages of unionized 

employees of Crown Corporations highlighted the 11th annual convention of the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour in Prince Albert, November 26-27. The convention, attended by 196 delegates, 

passes an emergency resolution noting that all negotiations were deadlocked between the employees 

of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Saskatchewan Government Telephones, Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance Office and other Crown Agencies. 

 

The resolution said that this exists because of a decree by the Provincial Cabinet instructing all 

management groups bargaining on behalf of the Government that they have no power to bargain on 

wages. 

 

This wage freeze decreed by the Cabinet Members nullifies the rights of free collective bargaining 

and lends support to the anti-labour forces throughout the nation. 

 

Sir, I ask you to hear what they had to say, and this is the attitude of the government: “In addition the 

Provincial Cabinet‟s action was condemned as being anti-labour, reactionary and completely dictatorial”. 

 

This was the government that sat in this House in 1955, and 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

338 

 

this is the reaction of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor at that time. This was the attitude of the 

government at that time. Now it amazes me that a party with that vicious attitude displayed in 1955 could be 

successful in hoodwinking our innocent working people, and leaving the impression that the NDP party have 

their interests at heart. You can cover a wolf with lamb‟s wool, but you cannot change the cunning and 

characteristics of the animal and I offer a warning to the friends in the labor unions. Do not be taken in by 

this wolf in lamb‟s clothing. Their actions in the past have indicated a split personality, a real Jekyll and 

Hyde, and I maintain it still exists. 

 

Now where was the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and his colleagues in 1955, the same people who 

stand in their virtuous manner and claim themselves to be the only defender of human rights? Where was 

their compassion for their employees of all the Crown Corporations at that time/ did they hear the cries and 

the pleas of the working forces then? No, they turned a deaf ear and closed the door in their face. 

 

MR. W. DAVIES (Moose Jaw): — Signed agreements. 

 

MR. ROMULD: — The great socialist humanitarians didn‟t seem to mind freezing the wages at that time. I 

think they enjoyed it. The wage freeze nullified the rights of collective bargaining. Now one can only assume 

that such action was taken for one or two purposes. 

 

First, that the government realized the importance of continuation of essential services or it wished to warn 

the employees of the great power it had in its hands. 

 

Whatever the reasons were, let us not forget that their friends, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor, 

dubbed them as anti-labor reactionaries and completely dictatorial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are often told that time is a great healer, and it seems that the scorn and resentment 

displayed at the convention of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor was soon forgotten, and those terrible 

villains of the CCF government were to become the idols of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor. 

 

In the February 8, 1967 issue of the Commonwealth, that noted news media that has the reputation of having 

a staff that sees all, hears all, and reports nothing, had this to say. 

 

„During the years of the CCF Government the support of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor was a pillar 

of strength in building public support for the new landmarks of progress that stand today as a testimony to 

the government that was provided.‟ 

 

Of course, sir, we must remember that in 1955 they were the old CCF party, and it appears they had more 

freedom to express their opinion as to what was good for Saskatchewan than they do since becoming 

affiliated with some of the largest labor unions. It is most evident now the unions who became affiliated with 

the NDP are the dictating force of that same party. 

 

To back this theory, I cannot think of a better expression than the famous words of the former Premier (Mr. 

Douglas) of this province, which on many occasions I have heard him say, “He who pays the piper calls the 

tune.” There is no doubt in my mind who 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

339 

will be calling the tune for my hon. friends who sit across from us. And I, Sir, cannot help but pity them 

more than I condemn them. It is obvious now, in their state of confusion, their complete lack of constructive 

criticism, they knew not what they were getting into when they granted permission for the marriage of the 

CCF party and the labor unions. Now it has become a tragic union and it is plain to see the bride was old, the 

groom was weak, and the offspring appear pathetic. 

 

However while I can sympathize with them, their future of doom is their own creation. Whenever the 

obsession for power becomes so great that a party will forsake the principle that they once stood for, they are 

headed for trouble. For the NDP it is only a matter of time till history repeats itself and like splinter parties 

before, will pass into oblivion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure we all remember how the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) described Bill 2 as a 

compost heap. He went on at great length saying how it was contrary to the Bill of Rights. We on this side 

believe in a Bill of Rights, but we also believe in the rights of people. We believe our citizens have the right 

to expect that their power will not be cut off. We believe they have the right to a continued supply of gas, 

and last but not least, we believe that the sick and aged have the right to continued care. 

 

I, sir, shudder to think what would have happened if the NDP had been in power in Saskatchewan last fall, as 

they are no longer the voice of the people being dominated by the unions. The howls and the protests that 

emanated from Members opposite were not the views shared by other Canadians. And I would like to quote 

from a few of the newspapers throughout Canada: 

 

A Vancouver daily has this to say: 

 

It is probably too much to expect Ottawa to do tomorrow what Saskatchewan has done today. 

Saskatchewan‟s Premier Ross Thatcher has pointed the way towards possible new Federal legislation 

with a law that provides for compulsory legislation for labor disputes in essential industries, where 

health, life and property are jeopardized. 

 

Now I will turn to the Edmonton Journal. 

 

The only thing wrong with Premier Thatcher‟s bill for compulsory arbitration in labor disputes that 

jeopardize life, health and property in Saskatchewan is that it does not go far enough. 

 

MR. W.E. SMISHEK (Regina East): — Turn to Canadian. 

 

MR. ROMULD: 

 

Saskatchewan‟s proposed legislation appears very similar to that which has been in effect in Alberta 

since 1960. 

 

From the Montreal Gazette: 

 

The CCF Opposition Leader, Woodrow Lloyd called it a compost heap of many of the most vicious, 

least democratic statues in Canada. But as he knows this Bill is patterned on similar laws now in 

effect in Ontario, Manitoba and British Columbia and the laws of these provinces have been accepted 

even if grudgingly. It is 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

340 

 

interesting to note that Mr. Thatcher said the Government would not proclaim this Act, unless it was 

absolutely necessary to get the workers back at the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The 

Government left the door open for a settlement to be reached by the usual collective bargaining 

process. 

 

As you will note, sir, I have taken the viewpoint of three of our daily papers, and I could have quoted from 

many more. At this time, I want to point out that our government would not have proclaimed this Act had we 

not been forced to. As the Montreal Gazette points out, we left the door open for settlement by collective 

bargaining. 

 

When you review the facts, one can question who was responsible for the strike by the OCAW union against 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Incredible as it may seems, it is very way to cast a suspicious finger at 

the Members who sit opposite to this Assembly. I‟m not saying they promoted the strike, but I am saying 

there is a possibility, and, Sir, I do not say this without a reason. 

 

MR. D.W. MICHAYLUK (Redberry): — Are you sleeping? 

 

MR. ROMULD: — I‟m not sleeping but you have been. Apparently the Member from Redberry (Mr. 

Michayluk) thinks he is a real wit. Well I have news for you, you‟re only a half wit. 

 

First, I would like to quote from the editorial page of the Leader Post, and of course, you know this isn‟t a 

biased paper, of September 10, 1966. 

 

The SFL put 13 organizers into the field to work for the re-election of the CCF Government. Now 

that should have read the NDP Government. The OCAW provided the services of five. One of these 

was Mr. Basken. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want you to pay particular attention to the next paragraph. 

 

It was also disclosed the OCAW union donated $2,000 to the SFL for political action on behalf of 

the CCF against other parties in the campaign including the victorious Liberal party. 

 

These shocking statements should leave no doubt where the OCAW stands politically as reported by the 

Leader Post. But in case there is doubt in the minds of those who sit across, I want to quote from page 53 of 

the Fact Book published by the OCAW: 

 

In Canada, the OCAW has encouraged support of the New Democratic Party and has been carrying 

on a program of expanded political action somewhat comparable to that of the CUPE in the United 

States. 

 

From these facts, sir, you can see why I question who was responsible for the strike. The close affiliation of 

the SFL and the OCAW union local indicates that strong political overtones evident in the strike are more 

real than imagined. 

 

As for the Essential Services Act, we on this side feel we were fully justified in our action. It was gratifying 

to see 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

341 

in the February 9th edition of the Leader Post, that the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool endorses a form of labor 

management court to provide for compulsory arbitration where an agreement cannot be reached in labor 

management disputes of industry which have special national importance. 

 

Now, Sir, being a Member from a rural constituency, I would like to turn to my own constituency and make 

reference to the Municipal Department, and how it has helped the various constituencies throughout the 

province. Now, the rural constituency of Canora, like several others in the province, does not have any cities 

within its boundaries; we do not have any large industries to bolster the revenue of our local governments. 

The taxes collected are from the proprietors of various types of business and the working people employed in 

these different towns. Our rural area is heavily populated by comparison to the prairie regions of our 

province; generally speaking, it is mixed farm operation. 

 

During the years of the socialist government, the people in my constituency and the citizens throughout this 

province saw their taxes increased by four and five times. Property tax was approaching a danger point for 

the small business man and the small farmer. 

 

When we became the government, we recognized the burden of high taxation. One major program we 

instituted to reduce the impact of property taxation was the homeowner grants, a program that has been 

widely accepted by the people of this province. I am sure we all remember how the opposition fought this 

legislation in this House, and we are all familiar with the comments about the homeowner grants during the 

recent convention of the NDP. The people of Saskatchewan must be made aware of the fact that if the NDP 

are returned to office the homeowner grants will be done away with, regardless of their promises before 

election. This government has eased the burden of property taxation by making increased financial assistance 

to municipal governments. 

 

We all know that municipal governments have two major sources of revenue. One is the property tax. The 

other is the grants from senior levels of government. The more in the way of grants, the less that has to come 

from the local taxpayer. And it‟s as simple as that. Yet the former socialists could not see it. 

 

One of the programs which have been of great assistance to the rural municipalities, and consequently of 

benefit to the rural taxpayer, has been the equalization grant program. 

 

Of great importance is the fact that last year we increased the equalization grants from $600,000 to 

$2,000,000. In addition to this, a new formula was devised for the distribution of these grants to ensure that 

they were channelled primarily to the less wealthy municipalities. After all, the purpose of the program is 

presumably to help the less wealthy municipalities. 

 

Now, I am told by my colleague, the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac) that no one in the 

Department of Municipal Road Assistance Authority has been able to determine the formula that was used 

by the previous administration. The same amounts had been paid to the rural municipalities, year after year, 

regardless of changing circumstances. In many cases, little or not relationship seemed to hold between the 

amount of the 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

342 

 

grants and the need for them. In other words, the grants, besides being small in average amount, were not 

being channelled to the municipalities according to the program‟s objectives. 

 

Now I say, Sir, that this type of confusion was not surprising, it is typical socialist planning. 

 

Last year, Dr. McIsaac instructed the Research Branch of the Department of Municipal Affairs and the 

Municipal Road Assistance Authority to derive a new formula for the distribution of equalization grants to 

ensure that the grant would be distributed in accordance with the program‟s objectives. In cooperation with 

the SARM a new formula was devised. 

 

The approach taken in this new formula was first to acknowledge by far the largest item of expense for rural 

municipalities was for road construction and maintenance. In order to estimate the final burden faced by each 

municipality on a standard basis, a complete road system was mapped out by the road authority for each rural 

municipality. This consisted of three classes: grid roads, primary access road, and secondary access roads. To 

determine this road system, factors such as location of highways, the location of farm residences and the 

situation of trading areas were considered. Basically this system provides for an all-weather road system for 

every farm residence. 

 

After mapping out this proposed road system the next step was to calculate the cost that the individual rural 

municipality would face to construct this road system over a period of years and to maintain it. Annual costs 

and maintenance costs were estimated. In addition, provisions were made for administration costs for each 

municipality. The result was a standardized measure of long-term financial responsibilities with the 

municipality‟s ability to pay. A less wealth municipality could be defined as one which had a low assessment 

in relationship to the long run financial responsibility. The largest equalization grants accordingly had been 

paid to those municipalities whose assessment was low in relationship to cost of service it must provide over 

a long period. As I mentioned previously not only a new formula derived but the size of the grants were 

increased to a very great extent. 

 

Now I use some examples from my own riding. The RM of Good Lake No. 274 received a grant in 1966 of 

$13,312. This compared to a grant of only $2,159 in previous years. Likewise the RM of Buchanan No. 304 

received an equalization grant of $1,301 in previous years whereas last year it received a grant of $11,215, an 

increase of close to $10,000. The RM where my farm is located, Preeceville No. 334, received an 

equalization grant of $17,752 compared to a grant of $3,009 in previous years, an increase of close to 

$15,000. They are 10 municipalities either party or entirely within the boundaries of my constituency. 

 

The total equalization grants for these municipalities under the previous administration amounted to 

$25,226. Last year the same municipalities received $126,570, an increase of over 500 per cent. 

 

When we add the snow removal grants which these municipalities have received and the grid road 

maintenance grants which they could received under the program, we find that these municipalities have 

received, or are eligible to receive, $181,242 in assistance. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

343 

Under the previous administration amounts going to the same municipalities for the same programs, as I 

mentioned before, was only $25,226. Of course, the grid road and maintenance and snow removal program 

were just instituted last year. 

 

In other words these municipalities that I have mentioned could have received an increase in provincial 

assistance of well over 700 per cent. Sir, I can assure you that this additional assistance has been well 

received by the various municipal councils. And they are most pleased that we have taken politics out of the 

distribution of grants. This has been expressed to me by councils of the rural municipalities, on many 

different occasions. 

 

Just consider what this grant means to the local taxpayers in these municipalities. The grant for the RM of 

Preeceville No. 334 is the equivalent of over seven mills on their assessment. When you add the homeowner 

grant to this amount you can readily see what we have done. A great deal to ease the burden of property 

taxation, in spite of what the opposition says. The homeowner grant has been of real value to the municipal 

and town councils. It has created an incentive for the residents to pay their taxes in order to qualify for the 

grant. In fact, the reeve of one municipality told me their taxes had never been paid before at the rate they 

were being paid this year, and it was the first time in history that the municipality was operating without 

borrowing money from the bank. 

 

With this increased assistance the opposition still insist that this government has made an effort to ease the 

burden of property taxation. They re either blind or are not aware of the true facts or perhaps a combination 

of both. Mr. Speaker, we are providing more assistance to local governments than ever before in the history 

of the province. Let us examine the socialist‟s record and their attitude. 

 

Their attitude has never been more clearly displayed than at the Provincial Local Government Conference in 

1956. At that time they were taking the first in a series of steps designed to force the county system down the 

throats of the people of this province. 

 

In speaking of grants to local governments, the former Provincial Treasurer stated, “Further financial relief, 

however should only be made to local government which is soundly organized and effectively administered. 

We cannot afford to waste the taxpayer‟s hard earned dollars.” 

 

This was the thanks the rural councils received for their many years of devoted service to their respective 

communities. They were told, “If you yield to our demands and from the county system more assistance may 

be forthcoming.” This was told to the members of rural municipalities by a man who was busy gathering his 

own bundle of loot which would later provide him with a generous retirement fund that is now being spent in 

the far south, to the best of my knowledge. 

 

This attitude is completely foreign to Liberal government. We do believe that there are ways in which local 

government could be improved, but we do not believe that local councils are wasting our money, such as the 

CCF laid the blame at the councillors‟ door. On the whole, our local government officials are doing a 

commendable job, and the Provincial Government can 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

344 

 

best help them in their efforts by providing increased financial assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a great number of points mentioned in the Throne Speech that I could comment on. 

However, it has been explained by my colleagues on this side of the House. The Throne Speech indicates 

another year of action under the capable leadership of our Premier. 

 

In view of my remarks I am sure, Sir, you are aware that I support the motion and vote against the 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W.A. ROBBINS (Saskatoon City): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to preface my remarks with a brief 

expression of sympathy and regret at the passing of John Cuelenaere, former Minister of Natural Resources, 

and Member for Shellbrook, in this Assembly. He was a sincere person; he was a thoroughly approachable 

person; he was a tolerant person. Saskatchewan was the better for his passing this way, and suffers from his 

early departure. My condolences, Mr. Speaker, to his family and his friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know how it happens, but every year it seems that I follow the Member from Canora 

(Mr. Romuld), via the Court of Appeal. He is a rather tardy member. It took him two and a half years to get 

here, and he is a bit tardy in the debate as well because he was in the debate of last September in the 

September session throughout his discourse this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to engage in prolonged debate related to the Speech from the Throne. 

However, there are a number of items which I would like to comment on specifically. Before doing so, I 

wish to commend the mover, the Hon. Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) and the seconder 

the Hon. Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). They spoke well and one might easily be tempted to place 

confidence in their statements if one was not already aware of the facts. The Hon. Member from Biggar (Mr. 

Lloyd) commented in his participation in the debate that the government was in a rather shaky position with 

its backbenchers apparently believing its own propaganda. Evidently, Mr. Speaker, Hooker has been hooked. 

 

I would like also, Mr. Speaker to offer congratulations to Cabinet Ministers appointed to new portfolios 

since the conclusion of the spring session of the Legislature. I would like to congratulate the new Minister of 

Highways (Mr. Boldt). I am reasonably certain that the appointment of the Minister of Highways was very 

much appreciated by everyone associated in any way with the Department of Welfare. This, I suspect, would 

apply to employee and recipient of social assistance alike. Yesterday in this House, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister contributed to the Throne Speech Debate. I believe the Hon. Member for Cumberland (Mr. 

Berezowsky) described this contribution as entertaining. Well, perhaps portions of it could be so classified, 

but I believe, Mr. Speaker, it could be more aptly described as a massive malfunction of parliamentary 

procedure. One often hears comments today with respect to highway and traffic problems, interspersed with 

quotations like this: “Well one of the major problems we have is that we have a lot of nuts on the road.” I 

suppose that, in line with this logic, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing really wrong with having the “odd bolt” 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

345 

in highways as well. The Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) currently Minister of Highways is also the 

Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. Political appointments result in rather 

strange anomalies. Here we have a Member of a party which condemned for almost 20 years the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office and the Automobile Insurance Act which it administers. It was 

in the words of one prominent former Liberal of this House: “the greatest fraud ever perpetrated on the 

people of Saskatchewan.” The Debates and the Proceedings of this House are replete, Mr. Speaker, with 

numerous speeches by Liberal Members when in opposition, including he Minister now in charge of the 

Government Insurance Office. Now, he defends it. Formerly he condemned it because it was compulsory and 

socialistic. It is still compulsory; it is still socialist, but now they say they operate it more efficiently. Mr. 

Speaker, had we not had a CCF government in Saskatchewan, there would not be a Government Insurance 

Office and there would never have been an Automobile Accident Insurance Fund. 

 

Now, the Minister defends it even against the remarks of eastern insurance executives. He says he invited 

insurance companies to come up with a better plan. They couldn‟t do it. He says we run this office more 

efficiently. Well, one may well ask: how much more efficiently? He asserts the insurer has a greater 

proportion of his insurance dollar spent on claims than was the case when the previous government 

administered the insurance office. He neglects, accidentally of course to inform the House that legal and 

adjustment costs were previously part of the claims cost structure, and now these are farmed out to private 

adjusters and legal firs. The costs are still carried b the insurance office but they do not appear in the claims 

statistics. He boasts about the reductions in the insurance costs of public buildings, schools, hospitals, 

effected according to him by winds of competition. He asserts the insurance office profits are greater than 

ever. He neglects of course to inform the House that while some reductions occur in insurance costs in 

relatively few commercial insurance policies issued on schools, hospitals and public buildings, they increase 

the rates by some 40 to 50 per cent and higher by raising the rates on tens of thousands of individually issued 

policies, and through the insertion of a number of clauses, such as removal of glass coverages, and the 

raising of deductibles, have eliminated numerous potential claims which naturally enough result in increased 

earnings. Does one use efficiency to achieve these results? One does not. All one requires is, (1) a ruthless 

disregard of the consumer of insurance; (2) an agreement with other insurers to remove the embarrassment 

of real competitive rates; (3) a capability of disdainful distortion of the facts of the case. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — The Hon. Member for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) quotes a Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance bid for the Saskatchewan Government Telephones insurance contract of $229,000 and states that a 

competitor submitted a bid of $56,000, winning the contract and thereby saving Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones $172,000. Mr. Speaker, even the mathematics in this case do not add up. I do not know whether 

the Hon. Member was using the new mathematics or the old. I would ask Members to note the obvious value 

and the tremendous saving that was afforded to the Saskatchewan Government Telephones by the 

competitive insurance bid. The 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

346 

 

Hon. Member‟s desk mate, the Hon. Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) and the Minister in charge of 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones, not to be outdone by his colleague, has announced that on March 1 

next, Saskatchewan Government Telephones will institute appreciably higher rates for telephone service. Mr. 

Speaker, with friends like these, who needs enemies? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the new Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) on his appointment. 

I‟m afraid however the Hon. Member‟s tenure in this office will not last very long. The Premier of this 

province has made it crystal clear that he is anxious to get all transients off the welfare role. We must 

reasonably assume that this is an ironclad rule and therefore applicable to all transients. The Hon. Minister 

may be classified as a transient. If you doubt this, look at the record. One year as the legislative secretary to 

the Minister of Health, two to three months as the Minister of Industry and now a few short months on 

Welfare until the Premier passes him on to some other transitory role with the transitory government. 

 

I would like to congratulate the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant). The Minister of Health got his picture in the 

paper today. I don‟t know whether you saw it or not. Quite a good picture. I congratulate him on it. I don‟t 

know whether it‟s to indicate that he is an industrious Minister of Health or a healthy Minister of Industry. 

I‟d like to challenge the Hon. Minister of Health to a mile race, but I want to warn him in advance that unless 

he can do it under five minutes, he had better leave his togs in the locker room. The Minister of Industry 

(Mr. Grant) is a person for whom I have considerable respect but I find it strange indeed that he argues in the 

Throne Speech Debate that this government has changed the investment in the industrial climate of this 

province. Here is an item issued by his own Department, called Index 67. May I read briefly from it? The 

petroleum industry has since the late ‟40s continued to grow. We had a CCF government in the ‟40s. It talks 

about sodium sulphate. We had this development under a CCF government. The Beaverlodge area north of 

Lake Athabasca famous for its uranium mines during the late ‟40s and early ‟50s when we had a CCF 

government. It talks about a large iron ore deposit located at Choiceland, east of Prince Albert. It talks about 

three companies producing potash and they were producing potash or capable of producing potash when we 

had a CCF government in this province. It goes on to talk about the largest potash mine in the world at 

Esterhazy and I notice in today‟s Leader Post, an article, Thatcher Gives Strong Lead by Peter Newman. 

Now I now that government Members opposite are not too pleased with some writers, although I haven‟t 

heard any criticism of Mr. Newman. He is supposed to be a fairly astute political writer. And here is a 

comment in this particular item which reads as follows: 

 

The most dramatic surge in the province is still in potash. That‟s a significant statement with a dozen 

mines expected to be operating by 1970. AT Esterhazy for example potash has changed a sleepy 

settlement of 350 into a thriving community of 3,500 since 1965. 

 

The fact is that mine produced a million tons of potash in 1962 when we had a CCF government in this 

province. 

 

We note again, Mr. Speaker, changes in the legislative 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

347 

secretarial appointments. It is interesting to note that only four government members out of 32 elected have 

not to date been favored with legislative secretarial appointments, Cabinet posts, Speaker or Deputy Speaker, 

jurisdiction. Only the Members from Rosetown, Bengough, Moosomin and Cannington have not as yet been 

provided with additional enrolments over and above the indemnity of an ordinary legislative Member. Mr. 

Speaker, this merely reinforces our contention on this side of the House that the legislative secretarial 

appointment were merely a gimmick for raising the indemnity of government members in this Legislature, in 

some cases along with other political plums to rather ridiculously high annual figures. I think it was the Hon. 

Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) who said something about socialists not earning their keep. The Hon. 

Member for Athabasca according to a return in response to an inquiry by the Hon. Member for Kelsey (Mr. 

J.H. Brockelbank) received in the last year, the following incomes: as an MLA 4,335 plus $2,165 in expense 

allowance as MLA, plus $24 as a travelling allowance, plus $8,284 for his position as a co-ordinator or 

supervisor of Northern Education, plus $879.50 as travelling allowance and expense for his duties as a 

supervisor or co-ordinator of Northern Education, plus $2,000 as a legislative secretary, plus $500 as a 

legislative secretary expense allowance; a total of $18,187.50. If you want to leave the room, sir, put up your 

hand and snap your fingers. Mr. Speaker, I am not in disagreement with this pay scale for the gentleman 

from Athabasca provided the decimal is moved two places to the left. The resultant $181.875 per annum 

would, Mr. Speaker, be a reasonable measure of his worth to the public life and the people of this province. 

Even that figure seems high, but taking into consideration, Mr. Speaker, the impact of inflationary tendencies 

in the economy, it may be a permissible level. Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, any change in legislative secretaries 

holds out some hope of improvement, if not in the new appointments, at least in the removal of the dead 

wood that was there. For who could mourn the passing of Members from legislative secretarial appointments 

such as the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougal). Heavy water MacDougal, Nipawin (Mr. Radloff), 

up-the-creek Radloff, and Athabasca, the $18,000 plus per year MLA. The only possible reason one could 

have for mourning their demise would have to be in the prospect presented by the Members who now 

succeed them. The Hon. Member from Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) has been appointed the legislative 

secretary for the Minister of Natural Resources. The only possible logic in this appointment must rest with 

the conclusion that the Department of Natural Resources should have both “the long” and “the short” of it. It 

is not one may reasonably conclude mere coincidence that one legislative secretary retains his position 

through all the change and decay taking place about him. The Hon. Member for Last Mountain (Mr. 

MacLennan) Mack the Knife, reigns supreme and untouchable. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech observes and comments on the economic prosperity in 

our province. Essentially this stems from the largest wheat crop in our history, 546,000,000 bushels with 

corresponding heavy yields in other crop categories. The impact of a buoyant Canadian economy also had 

major impact on our provincial economy, both in terms of revenue and general economic conditions. There 

is really nothing new on the Saskatchewan economic horizon since the election of this 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

348 

 

government with one exception, the Pulp Mill development at Prince Albert. The Oil and Potash 

Development, the Electrification Program, the Farm Sewer and Water Installation, the Sodium Sulphate 

Production were all here and have merely been extended and would have been extended under the previous 

government. The pulp mill complex will have an economic impact on the North, but no one can say at this 

point of time that it will be economically successful. Mr. Speaker, there is considerable evidence in relation 

to pulp mills located both in Alberta and Manitoba that there will be some economic difficulties for a pulp 

mill. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Minister of Natural Resources): — You sure hope there will be, don‟t you? 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — No, I do not, Sir. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ROBBINS: — Being completely logical in terms of economics, everyone knows that the pulp mill at 

Hinton, Alberta and the one located in Manitoba have had some difficulties, both in terms of the matter of 

freight rates and secondly in terms of the matter of markets. And the fact remains that the pulp mill located 

in Prince Albert is in a worse position both in relation to freight rates and in its relationship to markets. If the 

Hon. Member from Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) just can‟t see that, I suggest he get his glasses changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has announced its intention through the Throne Speech of enacting some 

protective legislation for consumers. Although I am interested in all the proposals, I am particularly 

interested in the one related to disclosure of the cost of credit. I have read the government‟s White Paper 

very carefully. I cannot clearly determine whether or nit it is the intention of the legislation to require full 

disclosure of credit costs at an annual interest rate as well as the dollar and cents figures. If it does not, it will 

fail to a considerable degree to alert borrowers to the real costs involved. It is obvious that the purchase of a 

$100 item at one place of business at a credit cost of $12 over a period of six months is less than the dollar 

credit cost for the similar $100 item at a second business establishment at a cost of $18 spread over 12 

months. It is not nearly as obvious that the actual annual interest rate in the second example is one third 

greater than in the first. It is just this kind of disclosure down the proverbial garden path and result in 

imprudent utilization of credit. I sincerely hope the proposed legislation will take this kind of thing into 

consideration. 

 

I am interested in any proposed legislation related to improved highway safety. Our record increase is 

highway fatalities in 1966 was the most disastrous and the most disgraceful in Canada. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that this is related in no small measure to the large increase in government liquor profits to a total of 

$19,290,809.97 in the fiscal year ending March 31, 1966. Judge Haines of the Manitoba Court has asserted 

that 80 per cent of all of the traffic accidents that come before him are attributable to some degree to the use 

of liquor. We are given to understand that the legislation will give a greater 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

349 

measure of control over the driver and that an alcoholic content in the blood of .08 will constitute 

impairment. I note, Mr. Speaker, that recent tightening of traffic laws in the State of Victoria, Australia, rules 

that a .08 alcoholic content in the blood content constitutes impairment. I believe this is a preferable level of 

measurement. Accidents are caused by varying factors, and I am well aware that, for example, an extremely 

tired driver can be just as potentially dangerous as a partially impaired one. Nevertheless the partially 

impaired driver is a much more prevalent person on our highways and this requires rigorous law 

enforcement. 

 

The Throne Speech comments on homeowner grants and states they have brought a measure of relief to 

taxpayers during the past years. While no one will dispute this, one may logically ask if it was the best 

utilization of the resources at the government‟s comment. Would it not have been much less expensive had 

the grant been a deductible item from one‟s tax bill, with submissions of tax payments and grant reduction 

made from some 800 municipal offices and cheques mailed to them for reimbursement rather than the 

issuing of 150,000 to 200,000 cheques to individuals? Of course there would not have been the opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker, and the cost of 150,000 to 200,000 newsy and expensive little propaganda sheets for mailing, 

blessed with the name of W. Ross Thatcher in no less than three locations. Mr. Speaker, one may also ask 

what impact the eight to nine million dollars homeowner grants payment might have made if it had been 

made available in municipal grants rather than paid directly to the individual. One wonder what impact this 

might have had in preventing mill rate increases in property taxes which were prevalent on a province-wide 

basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, pension benefits legislation is mentioned in the Throne Speech. It stresses the fact that it will 

give portability to a number of plans common to other provinces. It is to be sincerely hoped that the 

legislation will be preferred on the Ontario Pension Benefits Act which came into force in January 1,1965. 

Quebec has passed a supplementary pension Act permitting a reciprocal agreement with Ontario. Some 80 

per cent of the private pension plans in Canada are located in Quebec and Ontario. Alberta has initiated 

legislation of a similar nature effective January 1 this year, and although I haven‟t as yet had the opportunity 

to peruse it completely, I am given to understand it is essentially similar to the Ontario Act. I hope 

Saskatchewan legislation will be instrumental in widening the uniformity which is desirable in increasing 

portability of pensions. I will have more to say with respect to this matter, Mr. Speaker, when the legislation 

is before the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Gardiner) the Hon. Member for Melville, speaking in this 

debate on Friday last stated that water pollution has not yet become a serious problem in Saskatchewan. He 

mentioned my home city of Saskatoon and the problem associated with the discharging of untreated sewage 

into the river. It is becoming an increasingly difficult and serious problem. The city of Saskatoon has three 

times the population that it had 25 years ago. Mr. Speaker, most of that population growth occurred during 

that imaginary period of economic stagnation that the Premier is so fond of repetitiously relating. Reduced 

stream flows on the river because of the South Saskatchewan River Project have accentuated the problem. I 

plead with this government. Mr. Speaker, 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

350 

 

as I did in 1965 and 1966 to realize the increasing seriousness of this problem. The Throne Speech states that 

serious problems of water pollution will arise if preventative measures are not taken. I appreciate it that at 

long last there is some recognition of the problem. It has already arisen in my city of Saskatoon. Mr. F.M. 

Atton, the Chief Fisheries Biologist, of the Department of Natural Resources confirmed this during the last 

year, and this has been prevalent for the last three to four years in the area, particularly north of the city in 

relation to the sewage disposal from the city of Saskatoon and the discharge of chemical plants into the river. 

An ounce of prevention, Mr. Speaker, is worth a pound of cure. I welcome proposed action no matter how 

belated. 

 

The conclusion of the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, accentuated the barrenness of the Premier‟s 

argument that his government has somehow changed Saskatchewan from a have not to a have province. 

Alteration of the formula to measure income from person income taxes, corporation income taxes, and estate 

taxes to bring those provinces below the national average up to such an average, rather than the average of 

the two highest provinces formerly used is the primary and the paramount reason for the change in the 

Federal-Provincial arrangements, and its implication for our provincial revenue picture. Now I know that 

some people take exception to the image that the Premier gets in relation to newspaper coverage but here is 

further indication of what we might anticipate in this regard. I recall the Member for Regina West (Mr. 

Blakeney) in the debate last December accusing the government in terms of its negotiation with the Federal 

Government and using the argument that the whole problem arose, or basically arose from the fact that the 

present government had in fact forced out of the civil service, the people with the capabilities to do the 

negotiating with those in Ottawa. It is confirmed in this newspaper article, confirmed by a person of no less 

stature than the Premier of this province. And what does he say? 

 

We were just taken to the cleaners. I don‟t think our people will ever forgive Ottawa. I have enough 

grief out here without shooting off any more about Ottawa. They just send us up the wall, and the 

more I say the more indignant they become. Then when we go to the conference, they just murder us. 

 

That‟s the Premier of the province speaking and confirming the fact that they just didn‟t have the horses to 

carry out the proper negotiations in relation to provincial-Dominion agreement. Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 

Treasurer‟s post will not have to be passed on to someone else, to save the Premier from the tarnishment and 

the embarrassment of pending tax increases which are certainly now in the offing. Who will get the job? 

Will it be Mack the Knife or will the transitory Minister in the position of the Welfare role be moved over to 

the Provincial Treasurer‟s position. Mr. Speaker, I shall support the amendment to the Speech from the 

Throne and vote against the main motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.H. WOOFF (Turtleford): — I would like at this time o identify myself with those who have 

expressed their sympathy toward Mr. Cuelenaere‟s family and friends. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

351 

I would also like to extend my congratulations to the mover and the seconder, to the Ministers on their 

appointments. At the moment, Mr. Speaker, may I call it 5:30. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Hon. Members are asked leave to call it 5:30. Agreed? 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, just before we call it 5:30 in reply to the 

question asked to me by the senior Member for Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) and the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd) I would like to just pont out that the senior Member for Saskatoon is not only confused but has 

succeeded in confusing the Leader of the Opposition. There was no form sent out by the Provincial 

Department of Welfare. However, the Federal Old age Security Administration is now sending out 

application forms for guaranteed income supplement. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:30 p.m. 

 

MR. WOOFF: — It is y intention to deal with what I believe to be a very important problem in our part of 

the country, the problem that I consider the government has failed to deal with in an adequate manner. 

However, before I proceed I would like to preface my remarks by referring to some of the statements that 

have already been made during this debate. At the outset the Premier spoke in glowing terms of the 1966 lop. 

By the time he was through we were inclined to believe it was the Liberal party and not the farmers who had 

produced the bumper crop. He went on to eulogize the Liberal party in Ottawa and Regina for the marvelous 

job that they had done of selling wheat. He said: 

 

Why, if this wonderful party had not made such an outstanding job of selling our wheat, the farmers 

of the province would not be in the prosperous position in which they find themselves today. 

 

To whom, Mr. Speaker, did he sell the wheat? To the communist countries, those terrible socialists that he is 

always talking about. And I‟m all for it, Mr. Speaker, but let me say this. If the communists had not bought 

our wheat, the Premier would have been up to his neck in wheat and he would have been shouting and 

waving his arms for a very different reason than he was during the opening of the House. Just where the 

Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Steuart) could have been in that pile of wheat, I‟m not sure. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOFF: — Necessity makes very strange bed fellows. It seems that some can change their bed 

fellows just as easily as they can change their shirt. There is one other matter I would like to clear up before I 

go on with the main part of my address. For some months past, we have heard over and over again on radio 

and television what a wonderful, final wheat payment we got and, Mr. Speaker, it was pretty good. But it‟s 

not good enough to keep with the constant rise in the cost of farming. The constant rise that has taken place 

ever since 1945 when this wonderful Liberal party lifted the controls and let prices keep on spiralling. Just 

where prices are going to finish, I‟m not 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

352 

 

sure. Again, it seemed there was the attempt to leave the impression that the final grain payment was good or 

that we got it at all because of the Liberal government. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the final payment came to 

the farmers of Saskatchewan like all the other final payments, for one reason and for one reason only, 

because the farmers fought like tigers, back in the ‟30s to get the Wheat Board. And they got it, not because 

of the Liberal party; we got it in spite of them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOFF: — The Wheat Board came under the R.B. Bennett Government and then we fought the 

Liberal government for ten years to get them to take coarse grains under the Wheat Board. The Liberal party 

has fought against more good legislation from coast to coast than all the other parties put together. Although 

we had a record crop over almost the entire province, yet ironically enough there was one area in the 

province that had a consecutive crop failure. This Mr. Speaker, was the third consecutive crop failure in a 

row. Drought and flood have plagued this corner of Saskatchewan for three successive seasons. I farm 

myself on the edge of this area and came all together too close for comfort in sharing the fate of the 

northwest as a whole. I am interested in the welfare of these people: first, because they are fellow human 

beings in need of help; secondly, because this area forms a part of my own constituency; and thirdly, at one 

time it was my privilege to represent almost all this drought area, during the first Legislature which it was 

my privilege to sit in, roughly an area north of St. Walburg and east of Meadow Lake. I said roughly. I wrote 

to the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) long before harvest, warning him of the situation and I will 

say this much for the Minister, he answered my letter which is more than I can say for some of his 

colleagues. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOFF: — As early as July 18, about 100 farmers met at Peerless. Mr. Coupland, MLA from 

Meadow Lake was present, but, Mr. Speaker, nothing happened as a follow-up. Again, August 5, Mr. Roy 

Atkinson, president of the Farm Union, et with the same group of farmer s at peerless and a survey was 

organized which eventually covered 260 farms and turned out to be very accurate. The Minister received this 

report along with the Farm Union brief about January 17. Again, on August 17, the Federal MP, Mr. Bert 

Codieu, met the Peerless farmers once more. Mr. Codieu contacted the federal Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 

Greene but again, Mr. Speaker, nothing happened. Mr. Lloyd wrote to the Minister on September 28 drawing 

his attention to the existing problem and asking for any government policy that would meet and deal with 

this serious situation. On October 18, the Minister replied to Mr. Lloyd‟s letter stating that late rains had 

averted a feed shortage. This, Mr. Speaker, is true. This was in evidence as early as the 1st of September. 

Though there is enough feed in the area, I think, to meet all needs, there may be a few farmers short of their 

requirements, who will find it very difficult to finance the purchase of sufficient food supplies to see them 

through the winter. In his letter to Mr. Lloyd, the Minister goes on to discuss the debt situation in the area, 

and I‟d just like to read the paragraph dealing with the debt problem: 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

353 

A check regarding the debt situation has also been made. You‟ll appreciate that this is an area of 

small farms, but our information, at least as far as bank loans are concerned, is that there are fewer 

farmers in arrears and less total arrears than existed in December of 1964 and 1965. 

 

I don‟t know what kind of a check was made of the debt situation. I have a letter from a farmer in that area 

under date of September 20, in which he says there is about 90 per cent of the farmers who were in debt 

difficulties. If we turn to the Farm Union survey, we find that out of 260 farms checked, 198 were having 

debt problems. On November 30 a mine-farmer delegation met the Minister in Saskatoon and presented him 

with a memorandum. Here again, the debt problem was pointed out to the Minister. These farmers told him 

that even the credit union inspector had advised the board to collect overdue accounts. It was pointed out to 

the Minister that this meant land would have to be taken where titles were involved, that livestock that was 

security for loans would have to be sold. The Minister did speak of moratorium protecting for farmers faced 

with debt collections. Just how firm this commitment is, I cannot say at the moment. I hope, Mr. Speaker, 

that it is adequate. What I am saying is that the only real point in the Minister‟s letter to Mr. Lloyd regarding 

debt was to minimize the seriousness of the situation, and this is not borne out by careful investigation. Now 

I would like to turn to the Minister‟s statement at the opening of the Legislature when questioned by the 

Hon. Member from Cutknife (Mr. Nollet) regarding crop failure in the northwest. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, regarding PFAA payment, I commend the Minister (Mr. McFarlane) for assisting in 

getting these payments into the area at an early date. Secondly, the gesture of free hay permits was a step in 

the right direction. However, Mr. Speaker, the Minister‟s remarks on both these items must have been made 

to some extent with his tongue in his cheek. That he made headlines in a friendly reactionary Press was to be 

expected. What the Minister did not reveal was just how much in dollars and cents the government would 

have contributed if all the hay in the country had been cut. Neither did he tell the House over how large an 

area the $200,000 was spread. If you little more than double the number of farm units surveyed by the Farm 

Union, which I am sure is a very, very conservative estimate, it would amount to about $300 per farm. It 

looks like an attempt once again to hide provincial responsibility behind a federal program which to a large 

extent, Mr. Speaker, the farmers pay for themselves. 

 

Let us look a little closer at PFAA payments, good as they are, and necessary as they are. Because of the 

method of administration, there are many who do not qualify as individuals to receive payment, while the 

reverse is also true that many who qualify as individuals receive nothing. The complaint that is being made 

up there in the area is that, for some unknown reason, some with the better crops received a larger amount 

per acre than some of the ones with the poorer crops who got little, and in some cases nothing. The first 

statement the Minister made was to the effect that it was not true that there was a three-year crop failure, that 

some people had 20 bushels to the acre. There is just enough truth in this remark to allow a callous and 

unexplained statement like that to be made. Certainly there were wheat fields that yielded 20 bushes to the 

acre. There 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

354 

 

were wheat fields where showers crossed and re-crossed, there were fields on the lower ground where spring 

water and runoff collected. However, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer the Minister to the Farm Union 

survey report, page 2, appendix A, on 1414 farms, a total of 7.700 acres were plowed down, an average of 55 

acres per farm. The Minister well knows that on the average farm of 158 acres of cultivated land, what a 

total loss of 55 acres of wheat means. On many farms it was the entire wheat crop. What is more, the 

Minister knows as well as anyone of us knows, that 20 bushels to the acre only pays the cost of operation. 

Just in case the reactionary gentleman opposite should ask the question, “What did the socialists do?”, I 

would just like to read you some excerpts from Debates and Proceedings, volume 5, page 4, 1955: 

 

We also carried on a program of work and wages to take care of people in those areas that were badly 

flooded. Even before the rust was apparent, there were areas in the province which had had no crop 

for two, and in some cases three successive years because of flooding. A Special Cabinet Committee 

was established last July and they set up a work and wages program, most of which was carried out 

in the northeast and across northern Saskatchewan. 

 

These programs, Mr. Speaker, make up an estimated expenditure, which the government could not possibly 

foresee of $1,600,310, and again volume 15, page 17, Debates and Proceedings, part 1, 1955. I should like to 

draw your attention to the particular case of the estimates of the Department of Agriculture. 

 

The revenue account budget shows a drop from $3,400,000 to $2,900,000. In actual fact, however, 

this has been brought about because of the emergency steps taken by the government during the 

current year to pay out in cash the full credits earned by settlers in northeastern Saskatchewan, thus 

help to relieve a very serious situation which exists in that area. This is an expenditure brought 

forward as an emergency relief measure during the current year. The capital account vote for 

agriculture has been increased from $1,700,000 to $2,000,000 with the major increases going to 

finance clearing and breaking improvements on Crown lands leased to farmers. The additional funds 

provided will, in general, make it possible for settlers to receive payments in cash as rapidly as they 

are able to progress. This will be a particular benefit to the northeastern area and given a break from 

the weather, we hope that the new system of payments will aid greatly in stabilizing this modern-day 

settlement program. 

 

Again in the Budget Debate of 1960, February 26, on the expenditure side, substantial increases in 

appropriation must be obtained. The largest is $3,000,00 for making the acreage payments to farmers who 

had more than half of their crop under the snow at December 15. To date, some 18,000 farmers have already 

received payments under this program involving some 3,000,000 acres. 

 

And again, in the 1960 Budget Debate, the Department of Agricultural Annual report mentions programs 

carried out under the supervision of the Plant Inspection Branch and it goes on and uncovers what has been 

done in this area also. 

 

I‟m starting to read now something that one of the 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

355 

opposition Members (Mr. McNutt) had to say during the 1955 Budget Debate: 

 

Now I am fast coming to the conclusion that as long as this government is in power, we in 

northeastern Saskatchewan will not get what we‟ve been asking for and fighting for, more aid to 

farmers with no crops. It will not be until the Liberal government gets back in power and takes over 

the reigns of government, that northeastern Saskatchewan will come into its own. 

 

It would be interesting to know how many farmers in northeastern Saskatchewan have come into their own 

since the Liberal party got to power. And I would add the northwest area of Saskatchewan to that. Let us turn 

to what at present is the final act in this six-month-old multiple act drama. January 27 saw the Minister (Mr. 

McFarlane) himself on the stage in Goodsoil with an assembly of 200 farmers present. These farmers were 

offered a $70,000 Work and Wages Program, which sounds pretty good as headlines again in a friendly 

reactionary press. I have here on my desk, Mr. Speaker, a news clipping of the Minister‟s remarks. However, 

let us look at the program through the eyes of the people of that area before we too quickly applaud the 

scheme. Work and wage is quite commendable and I believe in it; it‟s a good approach under reasonable 

circumstances and conditions. 

 

I am now going to tell you what the people pointed out to the Ministers: firstly, that quite a sizeable amount 

of the $70,000 would go for administration and these costs are bound to increase in cold weather; secondly, 

farmers would have to drive from a few miles up to twenty or twenty-five at their own expense to take part 

in this program; thirdly, clothing of all kinds would suffer and need replacing as bush work is one of the 

toughest jobs on clothes, you can go to. Again looking at the Farm Union report, I see that 225 farmers were 

asked about work away from the farm. Some 46 said they could go, and 179 of these mixed-farm farmers 

said they could not. It was pointed out to the Minister that once again the program had drifted into the depth 

of winter, with cold weather and deep snow along the roads and lake shores, making work difficult for the 

men and costly for administration. However, there is no doubt in my mind that such a program will help with 

living expenses to those who can take part in it. But remember again, this government is not spending 

$70,000. Much of this money again is coming from Ottawa. The Provincial Government also had something 

to say about SEDCO policy. He expounded it to his audience but it seemed to fall on a deaf ear, not because 

SEDCO is not good from many angles, but it was like offering a drowning man a house instead of a life 

buoy. Good for the future but nothing for the immediate present. SEDCO just meant more borrowed money. 

Social aid was offered as a way out for those in the worse circumstances, those who could not take part in 

the work and wages program. The Minister was told in no uncertain terms that liberty they lost was relief by 

a former Liberal government. What help will social aid be in keeping a farm operating as a going concern. 

 

MR. STEUART: — They offered them work. 

 

MR. WOOFF: — Government policy has been that of near destitution 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

356 

 

before any one qualifies for social aid. There were other government policies outlined, but the officials 

admitted there had not been enough money allocated to get them off the ground. The Minister was asked 

about poplar wood as pulp for the Prince Albert mill. Again he was forced into the future. The mill is not 

operating as yet and so far there is no formula for using poplar that is practical. Then he was told there was a 

good market for pine poles for special fences and corrals that there was a good stand of pine poles not too far 

from Goodsoil, but it appeared that a contractor as far away as Prince Albert held a permit on this timber. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOFF: — In fact, Mr. Speaker, the timber business has just about disappeared in my constituency, 

both at Leoville and other areas like Goodsoil since 1964. And with the loss of the timber, many people not 

only left the area, but they left the province also. A representative of Social Welfare suggested that had 

Department or Branch of the Department could help with the education of the children. Good but not good 

enough to meet the present need and again it was in the future. The Minister mentioned debt moratorium, as 

I said a little while ago and I hope that it‟s going to be effective. I think the climax came when the Minister 

finally summed up the afternoon‟s discussion and brought the meeting to a close. He said, admittedly the 

area in the northwest was having difficulty at the moment at least, but assured those present that government 

policies would benefit the area in the long run. He didn‟t even express the hope that those in deep trouble 

would find a way to survive until that bright morning in the future dawned. He comforted them with the 

suggestion that the south country had had its troubled periods too. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WOOFF: — The whole approach was one of precious little but advice. Pretty cold comfort at anytime, 

never to talk about the middle of winter. The Minister knows there is no comparison between the thirties and 

today. He knows the day is gone when just free hay leases, or even assistance of a seed program, or debt 

moratorium, is enough. Agriculture tolls today on oil, and rubber, and machine repairs, if not new machines, 

or it doesn‟t roll at all. In other words, agriculture is motivated by cash like any other modern business or it 

is a black outlook. 

 

For someone like the Minister who in opposition was vociferous, voluble, and often vitriolic, but evidently 

volatile as well, the performance was rather dismal. I as sorry for the Minister. He was shadow-boxing 

behind the colossus who sits magnificently astride the treasury chest of the province. However, this is where 

the Minister chose to be and says he likes it. 

 

I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the people in the northwest were happy that the Minister could visit them in a 

$90,000 plane, even if he only got as far as Meadow Lake in it. I am sure that they will sleep sounder and 

rise in better spirits to shovel snow and cut brush, because they know we MLAs are walking on $500,000 to 

$750,000 worth of new marble floors. I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker. They will fight harder to survive because the 

Provincial Treasurer in a fit of temper, threw over a 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

357 

million dollars down the drain in last summer‟s bond sale. They won‟t have to worry about money-lenders 

having to cut brush to make up a deficit. 

 

Last night in this House, the Members for Rosthern (Mr. Boldt), the Hon. Minister for Highways, was 

making almost an emotional appeal for young farmers and training of farm help. Mr. Speaker, there has been 

very little emotion lost by this government or the people in northwestern Saskatchewan to help keep them on 

the farms that they‟ve put, in many cases, half a lifetime into building. 

 

It‟s rather ironic that it took a Liberal government of 35 years ago to throw many people back into the bush 

to exist as best they could, that it takes another Liberal government to almost abandon the next generation in 

another drought extremity. 

 

I see nothing in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, that is going to bring immediate relief to this area in the 

province. And as you no doubt realize by this time, I am not going to support the motion. I will support the 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks on the Throne Speech, 

tonight must be to associate myself with the remarks of other Members in this Assembly, in an expression of 

sympathy over the passing of one of our highly respected Members of this House, the Hon. John Cuelenaere. 

I did not have the opportunity of knowing Mr. Cuelenaere before he was elected, but in his very short stay in 

this Assembly, he certainly earned the respect and admiration of all of us. I want to express my sympathy to 

the member of his family, and certainly I can say that all Members of this Assembly will miss the Hon. John 

Cuelenaere. 

 

I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address in Reply to the 

Throne Speech. Certainly they did a commendable job in keeping with the traditions of this House. 

 

It is my intention this evening, Mr. Speaker, to give a report on the Department of Welfare. However, before 

doing so I cannot refrain from making a few comments and observations about my department that have 

been made by the Members of the opposition. 

 

First of all, like all of us in the House, I‟ve listened to this Debate to date, with interest. However, one 

significant fact has stood out this year in this Assembly. There seems to be a complete lack of argument, 

debate, or controversy by the Labour party across the way. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) gave an ineffective speech. He concentrated on individuals, 

geography, Federal affairs, and justified his policy on labor. I cannot help but also compliment the Member 

from Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky). I want to say that all of us in this Assembly enjoyed his speech last 

night. He should certainly consider running for the Leader of the opposition after their next defeat at the 

polls, when the member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) may go the way all losing 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

358 

 

politicians do, into obscurity. I cannot help but contrast this with the Premier‟s remarks. In clear, concise 

language, he outlined the policy and the programs for the future and development of this province. I have 

never hear d him as effective in outlining the achievements and contributions of this government. It was an 

outline that should have made him proud to see the results of his personal leadership. Certainly his drive, his 

dedication, and his determination to see Saskatchewan march ahead, were very clearly evident in his 

remarks. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on the remark by the Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), in 

elation to Christmas bonuses. I think it‟s time once and for all this House cleared up the policy of Christmas 

bonuses. First of all I would say that this party believes that any additional revenue provided must be given 

to welfare recipients on a continuing basis. It should be reflected in the monthly budget, and that public 

funds should never be used for a one-shot effort. The Provincial Municipal Committee, which reviewed 

financial assistance, recommended the doing away with Christmas bonuses. 

 

I also want to clear several misconceptions now held by the general public and other members of this House 

regarding Christmas bonuses. First of all, the former government never at any time initiated Christmas 

bonuses for any program which they directly administered. The former Minister never initiated Christmas 

bonuses for any program that he directly administered. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — They never had a program. 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — Yes, they did participate in payments by a few municipalities who administered the 

social aid programs. A year ago, the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw gave Christmas bonuses, I 

would like to say that the total amount came to approximately $30,000. I also want to say that no other 

municipality in the province received Christmas bonuses. If there is one single factor about welfare, it must 

be that it must be administered with uniformity and equality right across the province. I also want to point 

out that even in the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw, all welfare recipients did not receive a 

Christmas bonus. For example, in the city of Regina, one year ago, 830 people received Christmas bonuses. 

There was a total of 1,853 social welfare recipients who did not receive a Christmas bonus. People who are 

disabled, widows, mothers, people that are blind, senior citizens, were not getting Christmas bonuses. People 

that lived next door to another person on social aid did not receive a Christmas bonus. I fail to see the 

difference in need between a person who is seriously disabled a person that is blind, a widow, and a person 

who receive social aid. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it is the proper role of government to administer 

Christmas bonuses, or social aid with equality and uniformity. I also want to say that the Member from 

Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) indicated that this government turned around and gave a $5 increase to a family of 

four, through the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. I would ask him to check over the regulations. An 

individual receives $5 a month, a total of $ 54.10 a year. A family of three receives $16.95 a month or a total 

of $203, as compared to a $24 annual Christmas bonus. I want to point out that the former government at 

Christmas gave $30,000 to the social aid recipients in the three cities. This government passed on and 

increased allowances over the past year, a total of over $1,000,000 in increased allowances. We believe in a 

Christmas bonus every 

 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

359 

month that is reflected in the monthly payments. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Where‟s your socialist arithmetic now? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I also want to say a word to the Junior Member from Saskatoon (Mr. J.E. 

Brockelbank). I would suggest that perhaps the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) turned to the Junior 

Member and said that because he was the youngest Member of the opposition perhaps he should be the critic 

of the youth agency. After reading his transcript I failed to find any criticism. The only two points I could 

find were: First of all, he didn‟t like my picture on the front. Well, unfortunately I can‟t help the face that I 

was given. However, I would like to suggest he‟s no Marilyn Monroe. 

 

I also want to point out that the second thing he did was to quote a sentence referring to the Youth 

Representative Council. He said: 

 

So far as I know this is the first time that any government has officially recognized youth. 

 

Then he went on to say that this government and other governments in Agriculture and other departments in 

Education recognized youth. Well, gentlemen, I have heard of a lot of people taking a sentence out of a 

paragraph, a paragraph out of a page, but that‟s the first time I‟ve ever seen a part of a sentence taken out of 

context. Let me read the complete sentence: 

 

So far as I know this is the first time that any government has officially recognized youth, the first 

time that young people have been given a direct and active goal, and the operation of a government 

agency concerned with the interests of youth. 

 

If he had bothered to read the rest of the sentence to the House perhaps they would have all understood. 

I would also like to say that of all the departments in this government that have been most subject to attack 

and abuse by the Members of the party opposite, that has been the Department of Welfare. First of all they 

have criticized the Minister, second they have criticized the policy, third they have criticized civil servants. 

The man who led this attack was the senior Member from Saskatoon (Mr.Nicholson) and usually the Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). Yet this year, in a year of the greatest change perhaps in the history of this 

department, in a year of complete reorganization, in a year of new policies, they had nothing to say about 

what went on in the Department in the past year. These remarks, his remarks have been centered around 

criticisms of issues two and a half years old. 

 

First of all the problem in the city of Saskatoon. I don‟t know what he‟s going to do this year. I don‟t know 

what this House would do without having to listen to him challenging the policy of the city of Saskatoon. It 

is now settled. It is now completed to the satisfaction of this government and the city of Saskatoon. The 

second thing he brought up was the Embury House and of course, the problem of emotionally disturbed 

children. I will have a little more to say about that later on. But he made the remark, why should they be 

ignored? I might say that his 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

360 

 

attack was very weak and ineffectual. He was no longer crying about the lack of humanitarianism on this 

side of the House. He was no longer crying that dollars come before people. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because our 

record of achievement in this field is very, very clear. For example in 1964, when they were the government, 

and when we took over there was only one resource for emotionally disturbed children in this province. That 

was the Embury House. They looked after nine emotionally disturbed children. This was the only answer to 

this problem, this was their only excuse for failure to take further action. Two and a half years later, what 

have we got in the Province of Saskatchewan? Five resources: Kiwanis Group Home, Victoria House, Ranch 

Ehrlo, Brown‟s Camp, and the Saskatchewan Group Home, resources for 47 children right here in the 

province. In addition, a new Dales‟ House more than doubling the capacity to 8 boys. On top of that the 

Boys‟ School is used to the maximum. In addition to that we are now sending $750,000 more on child 

welfare than at any time in the past. Then the next point of criticism. He suggested that these were bad 

resources because they were private resources. He said that we should return to the public approach. 

 

It is a little strange, Mr. Speaker, to hear those kind of remarks when I look back at 1964 to find that they had 

exactly the same approach. They used four private resources outside the province. Our Lady of Charity 

Home in Edmonton, Marymount School in Winnipeg, St. Angus School in Winnipeg, and the Knowles 

School for Boys in Winnipeg. There was only one basic difference between their policy and ours. We 

brought these resources to the Province of Saskatchewan where we would have a better opportunity to 

supervise and observe their actions and their treatment. 

 

The next thing he did he turned around and challenged the fact that the child welfare director was on the 

board of directors of Ranch Ehrlo. Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the same philosophy as the former 

government used when it put Members of their government on the board of directors of such private 

concerns as IPSCO. Why? So that we would have an opportunity to view, first hand, to supervise first hand, 

or to participate in any discussion of policies and future arrangements. Then he turned around and suggested 

that in the city of Saskatoon, welfare was costing a great deal more, because we had 81 people employed in 

the Department of Welfare as compared to 47 when he was there. I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, the former Minister 

and the Member from Saskatoon (Mr. Nicholson) recognizes that now there‟s been a reorganization of 

welfare in Saskatchewan, that it is now done in a regional basis, and that it is no longer the city of Saskatoon, 

but the Saskatoon Region which comprises more than the city of Saskatoon. I‟m sure he also realizes that his 

includes all the people on the welfare staff. Those on child welfare, those that look after the categorical 

program and so forth, as well as the social aid program. The only increase in staff in the city of Saskatoon 

has been four workers. These four were hired in order to provide a better service in proportion to the ratio of 

caseload. 

 

I would also say that he asked why there was no report on the number of employable people in the city of 

Saskatoon. I might also like to point out that he knows as well as I do and as well as the Members of this 

House, that previously the social aid was administered for the city of Saskatoon. The city of Saskatoon was a 

unit. Today the Saskatoon region includes far more than the city itself. All the records as far as the computer 

is concerned are for the Saskatoon Region, which includes the 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

361 

rural areas as well as the city of Saskatoon. There is no computer data for the city of Saskatoon. It is all 

based on the Saskatoon Region. I just wanted to make those comments, Mr. Speaker, because I feel that of 

all the departments in the government that has made a record of achievement over the past year, certainly it 

is the Department of Welfare. 

 

The year 1966-67 has seen remarkably progress in this department. The implementation of the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan, the expansion of benefits to clients, the expansion of child welfare resources, increased 

federal participation, initiation of new programs, are only a few of the major achievements over the past 

year. 

 

Perhaps the most significant factor has been the substantial reduction in the number of people receiving 

assistance. The total case load in both the needs and means tested programs has been reduced by an 

astounding 30 per cent from the end of March 1964, to the beginning of November 1966, the data of 

implementation of the Saskatchewan Assistance Act. The number of recipients has declined by an equally 

astounding figure of 27 per cent during the same period. 

 

I want to discuss very briefly each of those topics. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan and of Canada as a whole have long been concerned with the rising costs of 

welfare and the shortcomings of our social security approaches. For too long the obsolescent idea that 

welfare was a form of relief has dominated Canadian thinking. Failure to provide services to overcome the 

problems which create financial need has resulted in increasing expenditures and generations of people 

depending on the state for a livelihood. Factors other than need have often been the criteria of benefits. This 

trend has been reversed in Saskatchewan. 

 

Eliminating all duplication of caseload when we became the government in 1964, the total number of 

recipients was 5,543. The caseload was slightly greater. At the end of October 1966, the total number of 

recipients had been reduced to 38,011. This included all means-tested and means-tested programs in 

Saskatchewan, a total reduction of 14,532 in the number of recipients. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — The most significant reduction in the total caseload has occurred since the 

implementation of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan passed by this Assembly one year ago. 

 

In the seven months following, the total recipient had been reduced from 45,725 to 38,011, a reduction of 

7,714 recipients. One of the basic purposes of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan was to eliminate 

duplication of cases by initiating one uniform program. This is now a practical reality. 

 

What does it mean to the people of Saskatchewan? It means that in Saskatchewan. We estimate that less than 

2 per cent of our total caseload are individuals who could be employed. The majority of this 2 per cent are 

emergency or temporary clients caused by seasonal employment. 

 

It means that people receiving assistance in Saskatchewan 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

362 

 

today are the needy, the aged, the blind, the widow, the physically and socially handicapped people. They are 

the people who need assistance and to whom all of us cheerfully render the help they require. 

 

I might point out that we would expect that over the winter months when seasonal employment is normally 

at its worst, that an additional estimated 1,500 cases will be added to our files on a temporary basis. There 

are many reasons for this reduction. First, the buoyancy of the Saskatchewan economy has provided jobs for 

everyone who wants to work. In many cases these are most difficult to place in the workforce. Despite this, 

jobs have been found. It is a positive indicator of the health of our economy. The Liberal government‟s claim 

of a job for everyone is a practical reality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — To give a positive illustration of this trend, would point to the city of Prince Albert, 

a community that has always been an area of chronic unemployment. 

 

The overall number of persons on assistance has declined from a monthly average of 503 in 1964, to 368 in 

1965-66. The monthly average of persons removed from assistance because they were known to have found 

work or didn‟t return and were presumed to have found work, rose from 29.8 in 1965 to 38 in 1966. 

 

The second cause for this reduction can be attributed to the change in the minimum age of the Federal old 

age security program. Because of the change in eligibility, 2,287 of our senior citizens qualified last year. I 

want to point out that this change in the minimum age requirement has not had as great an impact on the 

reduction in caseload as originally anticipated. A very high percentage qualify for additional assistance under 

the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, once they transfer to the old age security pension. We still provide help 

for a very high percentage. They remain on our rolls. 

 

Third, the implementation of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan with uniform assessment and administration 

by a single agency has reduced the duplication in all programs by approximately 2,000 cases. This includes 

everyone receiving aid from one program and supplemented by another. This transition throughout 

Saskatchewan has been accomplished with little difficulty. It is amazing that, since the introduction of the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, there have been only 12 appeals against decisions made by regional offices 

of the department an four against decisions of the local units of Prince Albert and Moose Jaw. Of these, four 

were further appealed to the Welfare Board. 

 

This speaks very highly for the treatment of the public by the social workers in the field. It also speaks highly 

for the calibre of the assessments made. 

 

Fourth, the emphasis on rehabilitation included in the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan has resulted in many 

clients resuming a productive role in the community. The Saskatchewan Assistance Plan is a program based 

on the needs of the individual or his family. Need is the criterion of eligibility. It accepts the principle that 

the level of assistance must be sufficient for them to live decently. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

363 

In keeping with these two principles, benefits under the plan have been substantially increased. Special 

priority was given health. For example? 

 

First, an increase in the allowances of over $1,000,00 was provided to keep pace with the rising cost of 

living. The increase in schedules are as follows: Food 12 per cent; fuel, 12 per cent; power 25 per cent; and 

minor adjustments in personal and household incidentals. This was the first increase in these allowances 

since 1959, with the exception of a small increase in clothing allowances in 1966. How much we have heard 

from the opposition about the cost to the consumer, the rising cost of living. Yet only once when they were 

the government in five years from 1959-1964 did they both to raise the social aid allowances. 

 

Second, in the field of health, all persons formerly on the social aid program receive two cards, one for 

insured services and one for non-insured services. These non-insured services include a percentage of drugs, 

dental, optical and other necessary service. Before the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, these people were the 

responsibility of the municipalities or the vendor of the service. Over 20,000 people now receive the benefit 

of this extension. The Saskatchewan Assistance Plan also provides for a procedure to provide the type of 

health service needed by people who can live on a day-to-day basis and are not welfare recipients, but are 

unable to meet health needs. These people can now receive health benefits without receiving financial 

assistance. 

 

Fourth, effective July 1st, all children recipients of the program under the age of 18 receive 100 per cent of 

drug coverage. 

 

Fifth, grants for dentures have been increased this fall from $30 for a single denture and $50 for upper and 

lower to $50 and $100 respectively. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — I am sure that all Members of this House are interested in the progress to date of the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. Under the new legislation which came into force in April 1966, 

municipalities can elect to administer assistance programs provided accreditation standards are met relative 

to quality of staff, caseload per worker and number of workers per supervisor. After the Act was passed, 

senior staff of the department discussed with municipalities concerned, the implication of the new plan. All 

municipalities except four, elected to have welfare services provided by provincially administered units. 

The city of Prince Albert and the RM of Prince Albert, the city of Moose jaw and the RM of Moose Jaw 

elected to form their own unit. During the transition period from April to November, the municipal welfare 

cases were transferred to the Department of Welfare. 

 

Services are presently rendered by 11 provincial regional welfare offices located in all the cities except 

Estevan and Lloydminster and the towns of Melfort and Meadow Lake. Sub-offices are located in Estevan, 

Creighton and La Ronge and one will be opened very shortly in Buffalo Narrows. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

364 

 

Under the new Act provincial public assistance and municipal social aid are being amalgamated into a 

coordinated program. It has resulted in better service to our clients. A worker can now visit any client in his 

region, conduct an interview and provide assistance immediately if necessary. Previously, the provincial 

public assistance cases had to wait a considerable length of time for the first cheque unless the municipal 

welfare official was prepared to grant emergency aid. Now, under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, 

payments for all recipients are made in advance, on the day he becomes eligible with no waiting. A good 

example of the emergency service is the city of Saskatoon. A total of 860 emergency cheques were issued in 

that city during the month of January from the department‟s regional services account. 

 

A recruiting program was also initiated to fill additional positions required for the new program and to 

replace workers who left the department. A total of 152 new people were recruited, 107 with B.A. or 

equivalent university degrees; 37 with grade 12 with related training; eight B.S.W. or M.S.W. people. This 

latter group of eight were recipients of bursaries from the department. The increasing demand for social 

workers across Canada requires intensified recruiting. The department has sponsored 18 persons, who are 

presently away at professional schools of social work. A total of 12 persons returned to their jobs after 

sponsored training in the summer of 1966. 

 

The real answer to this problem lies in the establishment of a professional school of social work in 

Saskatchewan. This now appears to be a reality in the near future. The Senate of the University of 

Saskatchewan has approved plans for such a school. The fall of 1968 is a target date for enrolling students. I 

would also like to report on the services of the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. 

 

Most of the energies of the department during this first year of operation of the Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan were absorbed by the administrative task of taking over cases formerly handled by municipalities. 

Nevertheless a beginning has been made on extending services to recipients. Since April 1, 1966, according 

to all estimates from our regions, some 1,400 recipients have received some type of rehabilitative service. 

Many of these were brief contact but a good many of them involved extensive service. Typical services were: 

vocational assessment and counselling, assistance to secure educational upgrading, assistance to secure 

vocational training, making arrangements for training on the job, referrals to Manpower for employment 

placement, sheltered workshop placements, referrals to Agriculture representatives for counselling. 

Recipients undertook training in such courses as hairdressing, business courses, teaching, nursing assistance, 

X-ray technology and other trade training. Perhaps one of the most positive approaches that has been 

inaugurated in Welfare in Canada for many years. 

 

In addition, preventive services were given to some estimated 1,500 recipients. Services provided included: 

counselling regarding budgeting and home management, individual and family counselling, including 

counselling in relation to problems of alcoholism, marital problems and parent-child relationship, 

homemaker services, assistance to secure improved housing, assistance to find nursing home care, legal 

assistance, encouragement of children to continue to return to school, vocational counselling of children in 

assisting families, referrals to 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

365 

mental health services, encouraging recipients to participate in community activities. A further 600 cases 

were reported for various types of medical care. In summary, rehabilitative and preventive services were 

extended to between six and 13 per cent of the caseload. This represents a significant investment in 

developing the human resources of the province. 

 

I want to comment on the Canada Assistance Plan and Federal participation in our program. Without doubt 

this national plan of the national Liberal government has provided outstanding leadership and impetus to the 

entire scope of welfare programs across Canada. It complements the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. It will 

pay 50 per cent of the cost of assistance provided by the province, municipalities and any provincially 

approved agencies. It will pay 50 per cent of the increased cost of services based on the ‟64-65 fiscal year. 

Shareable welfare costs do not include capital costs or equipment operating costs. Services that are shared 

include: rehabilitation, casework, counselling, assessment, referral services, homemaker and day care, 

community development services, consultant and research, staff training, administration and clerical. Child 

welfare is also now included in the shareable items for the first time due to the vigorous negotiation by our 

department and other provincial departments. This will return approximately $1,000,000 in the present fiscal 

year. Instead of the province paying 88 per cent of child welfare services in 1964, we will pay 47 per cent in 

1966-67. 

 

In the field of child welfare, several significant advances have taken place in the past year. The most 

significant is the expansion of resources in Saskatchewan for the care of emotionally disturbed children. 

Emotionally disturbed children continue to be a major problem facing society today. Little is known about 

the methods of treatment or the results achieved. Many new methods of treatment are currently being 

experimented with. Here in Saskatchewan the Department of Welfare is encouraging the establishment of 

private resources in this province to offer treatment in this area. In 1964 when we took office only one 

resource was available — Embury House, a government-operated institution that provided service for up to 

nine children. Today in Saskatchewan. Private resources available to the Department of Welfare now 

provide treatment for 47 children in this category, and this number will increase by 11 in the near future and 

thus bring resources for a total of 58 children in this province. In addition, out of the province institutions 

have been used for approximately 21 children per year in addition to the above figures. Another valuable 

addition to the resources of the child welfare branch is the new Dale‟s House which will accommodate 38 

children. 

 

With these new resources and the program developed, we now have a grater variety of institutions available 

for children. We can place children more appropriate into the kind of facilities they need. On November the 

30, 1966, there were some 80 children in treatment centres compared to 39 on April 30, 1964. In November 

the total number of children in care was 3,273 with 2,150 of these in boarding homes. A total of 543 children 

were in adoption homes on that date. The major challenge facing the child welfare branch is the adoption of 

Indian and Métis children. It is with increasing concern that we have noticed the number of Indian and Métis 

children in care has been rising annually by approximately 150 to its present figure of 1,150 children. About 

35 of these children are placed for adoption each year, the rest remain in foster homes. This problem must 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

366 

 

receive top priority in the months ahead. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words about several programs operated by private agencies 

and special aid programs within our department. First, work activity projects to supply work as well as 

guidance in social orientation for people in low skill level and limited job experience are now being 

developed. One opened in Prince Albert on January 9th and a second in Lebret will begin shortly. Strong 

representation by the Hon. D. Boldt, my predecessor, succeeded in having these included in cost-sharing 

with Ottawa. Second, a special $30,000 construction grant was made by this government to the 

Saskatchewan Council for Crippled Children and Adults towards their new sheltered workshop in 

Saskatoon. It opened in September and accommodates up to 150 workers. Another sheltered workshop was 

opened in Yorkton to make a total of four in the province, employing approximately 220 mentally, physically 

and socially handicapped persons. We hope to see a continued expansion in this field in the coming year. 

Three, a new program for vocational rehabilitation of legal offenders is being initiated and will be fully 

operational by 1967. The John Howard Society is the agency which will administer this program. It too will 

be cost-shared with Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, I do not at this time intend to mention corrections. I will have 

something to say about this later on in this House. I‟m also not going to speak about the Youth Agency at 

this time. It will also be mentioned in a further debate. I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I do not support 

the amendment and I support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.N. NICHOLSON (Saskatoon): — Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member would permit a question 

before he sits down. I wonder did he indicate that the Decision Sheet has the square for the municipal quoted 

at the top. In a place like Saskatoon where I understand there are 34 municipalities, is there no difference 

between the citizen who is from Langham, Asquith, or Colonsay as compared with Saskatoon? Does this 

form not indicate where the person lives, where the code is for the municipality? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — All the computer data is based on a region not on an individual municipality. 

 

MR. NICHOLSON: — But is there not a place for on the code, for the number of the municipality where 

the person lives? 

 

MR. MacDONALD: — yes, there is, but every town in the Province of Saskatchewan here an individual 

lives, is not programmed in the computer. 

 

MR. R.A. WALKER (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I presume though that Saskatoon is one of those places and 

I think that the Minister has demonstrated such a facility and grasp of the affairs of his department, that it 

wouldn‟t be beyond the realm of his capability to find some way of taking from the computer these very 

interesting figures about the city of Saskatoon. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

367 

I want in opening my remarks, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) 

first of all on his elevation to the Cabinet and to congratulate the Premier on having found a replacement 

who presumably and to all appearances will be able to bring order out of the Department of Welfare, but I 

would point out to him that he won‟t, he needn‟t expect to be able to make such competent replacements 

every day. What he‟ll do with the Department of Highways in another year challenges the imagination. He 

pulled a rabbit out of the hat but whether he can do it a second time I don‟t know. 

 

The Minister of Welfare ought to be emulated and copied by some of his senior colleagues. He has given us 

a factual statement of the operations of his department replete with a great deal of useful information and I 

hope that when he is making up his list, his mailing list for his speech, he will be kind enough to include me 

and send me one because there is a lot of information in it which I find useful. I think that like all Ministers 

who give a lot of factual information in their speeches, he undoubtedly had to rely heavily on his expert staff 

in compiling it. The only thing I‟m sorry about is that he didn‟t channel it all through some single person 

because he started out by quoting figures at length to show how the department had curtailed and restricted 

and restrained its activities. I had the impression that the Department of Welfare was about to wither away in 

the prosperous Province of Saskatchewan in 1967. The next four-fifths of his speech seemed to be devoted 

to figures which expanded the operations of the department. I suppose it‟s all right to curtail some activities 

and increase others, but it seems to me that there was a bit of a split in personality involved in the person 

who composed the figures. The point of view seemed to change drastically after he left Saskatoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have mentioned the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt). Before I leave him I want to 

congratulate him on one thing. I notice from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of Wednesday, February 8, that one 

Milton C. Hogan, who was said to be President of Wawanesa Insurance Company, made a speech in 

Victoria. He devoted his speech to an analysis of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Plan and the 

House might be interested in some of the things he said. He described the Saskatchewan scheme as an 

“iniquitous and unprofitable state monopoly.” 

 

The Minister has assured the House that the profits of the insurance office are reaching an all-time high but 

in addition to a continuous string of profits for some twenty years, the insurance office has had another 

extremely profitable year. I hope that somehow this man Hogan will hear about the statement of the 

Minister. 

 

Hogan also told the commission: 

 

that the Saskatchewan Plan denies the car owners freedom of choice, subjects them to politically 

motivated rate-fixing and denies them the services of a sympathetic agent. 

 

Well I know a great many people in Saskatchewan who have exercised their freedom of choice in the 

purchasing of automobile insurance, and so I am sure that the Minister recognizes that statement as being 

completely false. 

 

Mr. Hogan labelled a false claim that the Saskatchewan Plan 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

368 

 

insures everyone and offers low-cost insurance. As far as I know the Saskatchewan Plan does insure 

everyone and does offer low cost insurance. I am sure the Minister could easily refute that statement. 

 

Then, Mr. Hogan said: 

 

The fact that Saskatchewan had created an unsatisfied judgement fund from which to 

compensate victims of insured drivers proves that the claim is false. 

 

I‟m not aware that Saskatchewan has instituted an unsatisfied judgement fund and therefore it doesn‟t prove 

anything of the kind. As far as I know there is no unsatisfied judgement fund in Saskatchewan and therefore 

his under-pinning of proof just doesn‟t exist. 

 

Then he said: 

 

By the flat-rate original premium of $17.50 the Saskatchewan taxpayer was subsidizing the 

scheme. 

 

As far as I know during the years that I was in the Government, the province did not subsidize the scheme 

and so far as I know the present Government doesn‟t subsidize the scheme nor did it prior to my entering the 

Government. There is no truth whatever in the statement that the Government subsidized the scheme. As a 

matter of fact the levies collected into the fund have paid all the benefits that have been paid out. It may be in 

the last few months the fund has had to go slightly in the red to be recovered from succeeding income, but 

these benefits are charged against the new year‟s premiums and not paid out of Consolidated Funds of the 

Province. And so far as I know not a single five cent piece has been appropriated from the public treasury to 

this purpose. So that there is just no truth in this statement at all. 

 

Now, I wish I could congratulate the Minister on the fiery and spirited reply he gave to Mr. Hogan. A least I 

congratulate him on the fact that he did not agree with Mr. Hogan or that he didn‟t encourage Mr. Hogan in 

these false notions and on the restraint he showed, knowing the feeling of the Liberal party toward the 

Insurance Plan. The fact that the Minister exercised restraint not to add to the confusion deserves 

congratulations and I make that statement sincerely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said a moment ago that some of the senior Ministers ought to emulate or try to emulate the 

new Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) in reporting on their Department. I think that the best example of 

where this advice could have been used to advantage was in the address made by the Attorney General (Hon. 

D. V. Heald) the other day. The Attorney General departed from his prepared text and read from another 

prepared text in which he lamented in wailing moans a statement or an article which apparently had been 

written in some yellow journalism, some magazine or newspaper published down at the Lead Post Building 

and issued from the Leader Post Building. He took great umbrage at this and called this a reflection on the 

Province of Saskatchewan. Well, I got home last night and I said to my wife that the Hon. Attorney General 

considered that she had a reflection cast upon her by something that appeared in the Leader Post. But she 

told me that she didn‟t feel any guilt about this at all, because she took no responsibility whatever for the 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

369 

choice of the present Premier, the present Premier being in office. As a matter of fact the number of people 

who need to feel any resentment about that . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — Are you sure, Bob? 

 

MR. WALKER: — . . . Those people who supported the present Premier‟s election to office are actually 

smaller than the people who opposed his election to office. I suggest that the resentment may be confined to 

a much narrower circle than the Attorney General indicated. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to casting reflections upon the Province of Saskatchewan 

there is a past master of that art and he sits in this House and he sits in the Premier‟s chair. I‟m going to do 

my best to confine myself to the use of parliamentary language, Mr. Speaker. I wouldn‟t want to have it 

thought that this innocuous little article that appeared in the Canadian the other day was the grossest example 

of slander against the Province of Saskatchewan, not by a long shot. I‟ve been getting clippings from 

newspapers all over the United States for the last several months and some of these are shocking indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should say that I rode down to the depot last night in a taxi, and I said to the taxi driver who 

didn‟t recognize me, 

 

I understand there‟s a great fracas going on up at the Legislature this afternoon. The Attorney 

General was complaining about something that appeared in the paper here in Regina over the 

weekend. Did you see anything in the papers? 

 

He said, “Well, there was an article”, and I said, “What was it about?” “Well, it was a very poorly written 

article,” he said. “There were a lot of swear words in it” and he thought it was a very poorly written article. 

He didn‟t like his youngsters to read this, every sentence starting with “Jeez” and “blankety blank damn 

socialists”. He didn‟t like his kids seeing the language. I asked him whether he objected to the article and he 

said he certainly did. I asked him why, and he said because of all the bad language and that he didn‟t blame 

the Premier for being angry about it, if he was angry about it, because he said, “He did say a lot of nasty 

things about the Premier.” And I said, “Well, did you think any of them were untrue?” “Oh, no,” he said, “I 

don‟t think any of them were untrue, but it is a reflection on the Premier.” And I said, “In what way?” “Well, 

that he would allow such a thing to be published in Saskatchewan.” I don‟t know whether . . . 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — Have fun, you like that. 

 

MR. WALKER: — I‟m not finished with you. 

 

MR. A.R. GUY (Athabasca): — Same thing as in the Commonwealth garbage from the word go. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I have clippings and I‟m only going to refer to one or two of them 

and I can understand the Member 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

370 

 

from Athabasca (Mr. Guy) being uneasy about these because these clipping and these statements emanate 

from the biggest liar since the Baron Munchausen. 

 

MR. GUY: — Commonwealth! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I can understand that he might be a little uneasy . . . 

 

MR. GUY: — Commonwealth! 

 

MR. WALKER: — . . . and the article is printed from the PG and E Progress published by the Pacific Gas 

and Electrical Company, San Francisco, California and it is called “Socialism in Saskatchewan”. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the kind of article which has been appearing in practically every newspaper in the United 

States and I say this article is defamatory; it is a slander of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I will put this article up against the one that Mr. Heald was complaining about any time. 

More people in Saskatchewan will object to the tone and the contents of this article than will ever object to 

the tone and the contents of the article that he drew attention to. 

 

MR. GUY: — No question about it. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Well, the Members for Athabasca may not like this but he‟s just going to have to listen 

to it. 

 

MR. GUY: — I won‟t. I‟ll get up and leave. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Perhaps if the Hon. Member can‟t behave himself he should go to the bathroom. 

 

MR. GUY: — I don„t have to go. 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Labour): — That‟s right, you go there. 

 

MR. WALKER: — There‟s a place for that sort of thing. Mr. Speaker, this article starts out: 

 

Saskatchewan, for 20 years from 1944 to 1964, had a socialist government about the only one in 

North America except Castro‟s. 

 

As a matter of fact his geography must have been neglected when he went to school and that‟s not the only 

thing that was neglected because as far as I know Cuba is not part of continental North America, never was 

and still isn‟t. Secondly, well it‟s just a statement of fact, Mr. Speaker. Of course, if every misstatement of 

fact the Premier makes is going to arouse his attempt to try to prevent it being refuted, then he‟s going to 

have a busy time. This statement . . . 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

371 

MR. GUY: — . . . the Chinese Communists. 

 

MR. I.C. NOLLET (Cutknife): — Aw, this is good, go and wash your mouth out. 

 

MR. WALKER: — The very first statement, the very first sentence, Mr. Speaker, is untrue and I suggest 

that if the Premier made this statement he knew that it was untrue. If he didn‟t make this statement he should 

complain about being misreported. 

 

About the second statement, sir, that in 1944 the socialists promised to solve the unemployment problem by 

building government factories. Now, Mr. Speaker, I never heard of a socialist making that kind of a 

statement. I never heard of a CCF speaker making that kind of a statement in 1944. I don‟t know what the 

present Premier was saying around the province in 1944 but if he was as careless then as he is now about the 

things he says, he may have said this. But it wasn‟t being said by any socialist that I know or that you know, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Tommy Douglas and Clarence Fines. 

 

MR. WALKER: — They said that this would solve the unemployment problem. They promised to use the 

profits to build highways, school, hospitals, and to finance better social welfare measures generally. Mr. 

Speaker, the records of the government show that in every single year under CCF administration, over 

$500,000 and sometimes up to $1,000,000, was put into the revenues of this province out of the profits of 

Crown corporations. And I speak of the Crown corporations which are not the traditional power and 

telephone corporations, but these new CCF Crown corporations. Money was in fact taken from the profits of 

those Crown corporations and was taken into the revenues of this province and was used for highways, 

schools, hospital, and better social welfare measures. And any Member who takes the trouble to look at the 

official records knows that‟s true, Mr. Speaker, and the Hon. Premier couldn‟t possibly have made that 

statement without knowing better. 

 

Then he went on to say: 

 

At the time we had taken over the government 24 months ago, 12 of the Crown corporations had 

gone bankrupt or have been disposed of. 

 

Now some of them have had their names changed, but disposed of! Gone bankrupt! There is just no truth in 

that. The Premier can make up a list of the Crown corporations, a list of the 12 that went bankrupt, and then 

I‟d like to see the list because it is impossible. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Tommy lost the debate! 

 

MR. WALKER: — It is impossible. 

 

MR. GUY: — Tommy lost the debate! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Then he says others were kept . . . 

 

At 9:30 p.m. Mr. Speaker interrupted the proceedings under 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

372 

 

Standing Order 30(03) and put the question on the amendment. 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

YEAS — 27 

Lloyd     Whelan    Snyder 

Hunt (Mrs.)    Nicholson    Broten 

Wood     Kramer    Larson 

Nollet     Dewhurst    Robbins 

Walker     Berezowsky    Pepper 

Brockelbank (Kelsey)   Michayluk    Brockelbank 

Blakeney    Smishek      (Saskatoon City) 

Davies     Link     Pederson 

Thibault    Baker 

Willis     Wooff 

NAYS — 30 

Thatcher    Loken     Leith 

Howes     MacDougall    Radloff 

McFarlane    Grant     Romuld 

Boldt     Coderre    Weatherald. 

Cameron    Bjarnason    MacLennan 

Steuart     Trapp     Larochelle 

Heald     McIsaac    Hooker 

Gardiner (Melville)   MacDonald    Gardner (Moosomin) 

Guy     Gallagher    Coupland 

Merchant (Mrs.)   Breker     Mitchell 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-

Willowbunch). 

 

MR. WALKER: — Your Honour, I shall now try to confine myself to the motion, the amendment having 

been disposed of. I‟d like to just draw attention to the next statement contained in this perfidious report. He‟s 

speaking about Crown corporations. He said, “Others were kept operating by repeated and substantial 

government grants.” Mr. Speaker, there were in some years, subsidies paid to fishermen to supplement the 

price that the Fish Board was able to obtain by the sale of their fish, but there were no subsidies or grants 

made to Crown corporations for the purpose of keeping them out of bankruptcy or anything else. There were 

no grants paid and the Premier knows it. 

 

HON. W. ROSS THATCHER (Premier): — Saskatchewan Guarantee and Fidelity. You put millions . . . 

 

MR. WALKER: — Mr. Speaker The Hon. Member knows very well that any funds that are required to take 

are of deficits by Crown corporations were used out of the surpluses of other Crown corporations and that 

notwithstanding the fact that there were some losses by some Crown corporations and that those losses were 

recouped and that . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Some? 

MR. WALKER: — . . . those losses were taken 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

373 

out of the profits of other Crown corporations. Nevertheless, the Crown corporations of this province turned 

back to the people of Saskatchewan $16,000,000 in the 20 years of the CCF government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — They absorbed every single loss by any Crown corporation. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Socialist arithmetic. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Well, the Hon. Premier I‟m sure doesn‟t . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — You are worse than Tommy! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I am sure the Hon. Premier didn‟t use that kind of arithmetic in running his hardware 

store, the kind he uses when he is talking politics down in United States where nobody who knows better can 

hear him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there just is no truth in this story that others were kept operating by repeated and substantial 

government grants. Any funds that went to any Crown corporation came out of surplus funds of other Crown 

corporations and not out of the Treasury funds. The Hon. Premier knows this, but by saying this he thinks he 

can create the impression of . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — You kept pouring it down like it was going down the sink. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Then he went on to say, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — How about Government Airlines? 

 

MR. WALKER: — . . . . “During the whole period the socialists waged war against private business.” Now 

as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the socialists have a better record of enticing private business into 

Saskatchewan than the Liberals have. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the echoing of those various laughs reflects nothing but the contents 

of the heads. Mr. Speaker, the plain fact is the Liberals prior to 1944 had a dismal record of attracting 

industry into this province and since 1964, Mr. Speaker, their record is still not as good as it was under the 

CCF administration, and the figures show it. He said, “The making of profits was condemned as an 

unforgivable sin.” Well he used to say too, that, “The making of profits was condemned as an unforgivable 

sin”, but that doesn‟t make it so. He is not able to find any instance where the making of profit was 

condemned by the CCF government or any CCFer as an unforgivable sin. So he says, what is the results, 

“Investors simply turned their back on the socialists.” They fact is, Mr. Speaker, the burgeoning development 

of industry that occurred in this province during the regime of the CCF government put to shame the record 

of this Liberal government or the previous Liberal government. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

374 

 

He said, “Dozens of oil companies pulled up stakes and moved out.” Mr. Speaker how ignorant and 

backward did he think his listeners were? Maybe there were people there who didn‟t know any better. The 

fact of the matter is there wasn‟t a single barrel of oil produced in this province until after the CCF 

government attracted oil industry to this province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J.R. BROCKELBANK (Kelsey): — . . . 330 barrels. 

 

MR. WALKER: — My desk mate here says that there were 300 barrels produced prior to 1944. Just enough 

to grease the skids to put them out in 1944. 

 

MR. STEUART: — We were too busy fighting the war. 

 

MR. WALKER: — This is so obviously and patently untrue to any person n Saskatchewan who saw the 

number of oil wells in this province rise from none, or practically none to over 5,000 during the regime of 

the CCF government that it is incredible that the Premier would make these statements knowing that they 

would get back and be seen by the people of Saskatchewan. Surely he has a complete and utter disregard for 

what honest people think of him. Look at the next one, “After 18 years of socialism there were fewer jobs in 

manufacturing than exited in 1945.” 

 

MR. THATCHER: — True . . . 

 

MR. WALKER: — He says it‟s true. Well I suppose the Bureau of Statistics doesn‟t know as much about 

these things as the Premier does. I admit there are some things the Premier does know more about than the 

Bureau of Statistics but facts isn‟t one of them. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I have here the report of the Dominion Bureau of Statistics and the Premier won‟t like 

these facts but they are facts. In 1945 the number of jobs in manufacturing industry in Saskatchewan was 

11,617. In 1964 it was 14,100. Now that might be socialist arithmetic. I don‟t know, but it is a plain fact that 

the Bureau of Statistics sows that there was an increase there of over 20 per cent during the period that the 

CCF party was in power. And as a matter of fact if he will look — let‟s disillusion some of these jackdaws 

on the other side — to show them that the Premier isn‟t always right and infallible in the statements that he 

makes. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the last years from 1958 to 1965, here they are: 1958, 

11,774; 1959, 12,009; 1960, 12,267; 1961, 3,539; 1962, 13,679; 1963, 13830; 1964, 14,100; 1967, 14,400. 

So that it increased continually. As a matter of fact the total increase in the last two years has been lower 

than it was during some of the years when the CCF were in power. 

 

As a matter of fact in the last two years the number had increased by only 1,200 and if you take off the steel 

mill which as built in this city over the dead body of the Premier, you 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

375 

cut that in half because half of that increase of 1,200, there are at least 600 people working out there and I 

don‟t know how many there are in the cement plant. 

 

The plain fact is that the record of this government is not a record of industrial success or successful 

industrial expansion. But this doesn‟t stop this Premier from going to San Francisco and making statements 

which are completely contrary to the facts. Then he says . . . 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Not one was contrary to the facts. 

 

MR. WALKER: — The Premier may think they are true in the world he lives in. They may appear true to 

him but the fact is that they don‟t conform to the statistics put out by any public or officials body in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — What about the pulp mill? 

 

MR. WALKER: — “After 18 years” — I‟ll come to the pulp mill. 

 

MR. STEUART: — I‟ll bet you will. 

 

MR. WALKER: — He says, “After 18 years of socialism there were fewer jobs than existed in 1945, this 

despite the investment of $500,000,000 in Crown corporations. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — True facts again. 

 

MR. WALKER: — These 22 Crown corporations that he spoke about, he said there were 22, had an 

investment of less than $10,000,000, it never reached $10,000,000. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What about the Power Corporation? 

 

MR. WALKER: — Oh, but the Premier wasn‟t talking about the Power Corporation. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — You‟re worse than Douglas was. 

 

MR. WALKER: — If you include the Power Corporation then it is more than 22. Well, I‟m prepared to be 

compared with Douglas any time. Then he says: 

 

The socialists promised a greatly expanded program of social welfare measures, there was to be free 

medical care. 

 

Well I recall this Premier kicking on the door of the Legislature trying to prevent the implementation of a 

free medical care plan. I can remember the Liberal party opposing the free hospitalization plan. I suppose 

that down in San Francisco they don‟t know about these facts. Then he says, “free drugs and so on.” Well the 

free drugs was something that he promised in 1964 and 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

376 

 

which he now repudiates. 

 

MR. GUY: — What are you reading from? 

 

MR. WALKER: — If my hon. friend had been listening he would have heard what I was reading from. Of 

course, he says, in the overall picture there were no profits, rather there were colossal losses. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — True. 

 

MR. WALKER: — The plain fact is, Mr. Speaker, that these Crown corporations produced as I have 

already said over $15,000,000 in profits excluding Power and Telephones after allowing for the losses of 

those Corporations which made no profits. Then he says, “There were 600 completely new taxes.” Well, all 

one has to do is look at the estimates, Mr. Speaker. There are only eight or ten or a dozen taxes altogether in 

the whole budget of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the Premier says that because there was a licence fee put on gas inspection services this was a new tax. 

But there was no gas system in Saskatchewan prior to 1944, so that there were a lot of services that were 

provided for which there was a fee for service which the Premier chose to call new taxes. The mere fact that 

he recites this round figure of 600 completely new taxes shows that he doesn‟t surely mean to be taken 

literally in anything he says. 

 

Then he says; 

 

Twenty years ago the socialists promised to make Saskatchewan a Mecca for the working man 

instead we saw the greatest mass exodus of people out of an area since Moses led the Jews out of 

Egypt. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — That‟s really a gem. “Since the war 270,000 of our citizens left Saskatchewan to find 

employment elsewhere.” Now if this is true, Mr. Speaker, it has only been exceeded by the record of that 

government in the last two years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Because the population growth in this province has been depressed to the lowest level 

in years as a matter of fact with a new increase in population of only 3,000 in the last year compared with an 

average of 10,000 increase in each of the last ten years of CCF government. This government has suffered a 

70 per cent decline in population increase since it took office. That is a fact which the Bureau of Statistics 

reports. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker here is a funny one — 1962, Estevan, Saskatchewan, a clipping from the Leader Post, 

December 29, 1962: 

 

Giving an example, Mr. Thatcher pointed out that the gross public debt of the province as at March 

31, 1962 was nearly $533, 000,000 including funded debt, treasury bills and contingent liabilities. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

377 

The headline says “Thatcher Deplores Increasing Debt.” Well his own statement issued in December, 1966 

points out that while the debt in Saskatchewan in 1964 was $587,000,000 it is now $652,000,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a look at a statement which was published in 1964. 

This government is to be condemned, I submit, on two grounds. First of all its Leader cannot be trusted. He 

not only cannot be trusted with the affairs of the province, he can‟t be trusted to tell a simple straight-

forward fact. The government ought also to be condemned because it has broken its promises; it has 

flagrantly broken its promises. I am reading from a pamphlet published by the Saskatchewan Liberal 

Association of Regina: 

 

They promise the creation of 20,000 new jobs in manufacturing in its first four years of office. 

 

In two years 1,400, he has only 18,600 more to go. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Then he say he will reduce hydro power and natural gas rates to levels comparable with 

other provinces. Has there been any reduction in power, hydro or natural gas rates? None at all. The only 

places where they have changed rates are to increase them. They have increased the rates on my constituents 

in Warman and in Martensville and so he obviously doesn‟t mean to keep these promises . . . 

 

MR. STEUART: — Ten per cent in the city of Regina, Bob, you better smarten up. 

 

MR. WALKER: — . . . when he is moving in the other direction. He says: 

 

It will provide land at cost to new industries and provide sewer and water on the local improvement 

basis. 

 

This government is conspicuous for doing one thing about sewer and water and that is turning down bylaws 

passed by municipalities to build sewer and water systems. I say, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 

subverted the Local Government Board. This government has told that Board what it must do. This 

government has told it that it must put a freeze on construction, and I ask the Premier to deny it, if not true. 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that this Board has taken upon itself the job of trying to prevent local governments 

from providing themselves with the things they need. Why? I suppose, for the ulterior purpose of trying to 

prevent local tax rates from increasing, to try to make the Premier‟s government‟s failure to restrain the level 

of local tax rates less conspicuous than it is now. 

 

Then he says: 

 

The new Liberal government will first set up an independent body to uncover the inefficiencies in the 

operation of the Saskatchewan government and its agencies and 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

378 

 

recommend the ways of saving valuable tax money. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Who did that? 

 

MR. WALKER: — Look at the floors in the Legislative Buildings. Well, Mr. Speaker, if this commission 

of inquiry was supposed to eliminate any inefficiencies and save valuable tax monies which are now being 

wasted, then the Premier had better do some explaining as to why the budget of this province has risen from 

about $225,000,000 to $300,000,000 in a space of only three years. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this 

government is extracting more money from the people of Saskatchewan than any government in this 

province has ever taken . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — . . . and is doing it by taxing the people who can least afford to pay. This government 

hasn‟t found any inefficiencies or found any more efficient ways of doing things. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . an airplane. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Well, yes, a $200,000 airplane which takes the Premier off on his $50 a day jaunts to 

San Francisco, to make these statements about our province. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Bob, your facts are . . . 

 

MR. WALKER: — This is what the platform says: 

 

It will then extend the list of goods now exempt from the sales tax to include such essentials as 

children‟s clothing and shoes. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Turkey saddles. 

 

MR. WALKER: — No performance at all, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a government that has inherited the richest 

exchequer of any government in the history of this province and has failed to implement these simple little 

pledges that it made to the voters. “It will initiate a study to find way of reducing land and property taxes.” 

Well, if it initiated the study, the study came to naught. If the study had come to anything, the government 

didn‟t pay any attention to the study, as nothing has happened. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — . . . Homeowner Grants. 

 

MR. WALKER: — Property taxes in my constituency are up an average of 20 per cent since this 

government was elected. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — He says that it will establish means of reducing personal income taxes to a level 

comparable to those paid by Canadians in other provinces. No performance, in spite of the most buoyant 

revenues in our history. 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

379 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Bob, did you get your taxes? 

 

MR. WALKER: — Then it goes on to say: 

 

A new Liberal government will immediately enact short and long-term measures to give 

Saskatchewan farmers a fair share of the income in a new and invigorating economy. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — So $15 a year, tax fee gas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. STEUART: — The people like it, Bob. 

 

MR. WALKER: — The day is past, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, when people can run on an election 

platform of a hamper for Christmas from the Tammany Hall bunch. The day has passed when a $15 hamper 

will buy any votes. 

 

He says: 

 

It will immediately revise the present legislation restricting farm credit to give a square deal to young 

people wishing to start farming and to small farmers wishing to enlarge their farm operations. 

 

Where is it, Mr. Speaker? It will make loans to these people at low rates of interest covering 80 per cent of 

the farm value with 30 years to repay. I have a farmer who wants to buy a grazing lease. Six years to pay, one 

third cash, six per cent. Where are those famous Liberal promises? 

 

At the present time Saskatchewan farmers are forced to — this was written in 1964 — pay the 

highest interest rates of farmers anywhere in Canada. 

 

The interest rates have only gone up, Mr. Speaker, since 1964 because of the tight money policies of the 

Liberal government down at Ottawa. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — He says, “It will remove grazing leases from the political arena.” 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — I wish Mr. Lewry was sitting here. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — We‟ll hear all about these grazing leases removed from political interference. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Tell us about Toby‟s leases. 

 

MR. WALKER: — “It will . . . 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

380 

 

MR. STEUART: — . . . up your elbow. 

 

MR. WALKER: — 

 

. . . It will greatly reduce taxes on farmlands and property. It will establish a formula to reduce the 

unfair burden of taxation which farmers now pay. It will halt the flow of farmers from the land. It 

will work to improve and expand the Medical Health Program. It will institute a Drug Insurance 

Program to care for major drugs, work to improve the Health Insurance Plan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in June 1964, a scant 90 days after these people came into office, here is the headline in 

the Leader Post — “Canada Cannot Afford Medicare”, in quoting Health Minister, David Steuart, from 

Saskatoon — Canada cannot afford it. As a matter of fact part of the reason for the complaints which the 

Premier now voices about his money, the tight money situation, is because his Minister of Public Health 

persuaded the Government of Canada to delay the implementation of the Canadian Medical Care Plan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — This government, Mr. Speaker, cannot get away from it by laughing. This government 

deprived the people in the Province of Saskatchewan by at least $12,000,000 of cost sharing on the Medical 

Care Plan if this government had done its duty by the people of Saskatchewan. They are so imbued with their 

Goldwaterism, their retrenchment theories of politics that they are willing to saddle the people of 

Saskatchewan with an extra burden of $12,000,000 by delaying their Medical Care Plan by a year. 

 

He says: 

 

A new government will overhaul and quickly step up Saskatchewan‟s road building program 

throughout the entire province. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare): — That‟s because they are being built probably. 

 

MR. STEUART: — What‟s the matter, were you lost? 

 

MR. WALKER: — As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, anybody who takes the trouble to drive on 

Saskatchewan‟s highways knows that it has been decades since the highways of this province have been in as 

bad shape, as poorly maintained as they have been in the last year and a half. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Everybody in Saskatchewan knows it and is talking about it, Mr. Speaker. This was the 

government that was going to modernize and streamline our highways. Well, sure they spent $40,000,000, 

Mr. Speaker, they pour out the money but it takes more than money. It takes a little bit of planning, a little bit 



 

February 14, 1967 

 

 

 

381 

of concise thinking by the government in power to have that money spent to good advantage instead of 

pouring it out in bucketfuls. I understand they get a percentage of it back like they used to do before 1944, 

but this is one of the things, Mr. Speaker, which the CCF government after the next election will do. It will 

put an end to this old system of going around and tapping the contractors for part of their contract money to 

finance the party. It will put an end to that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to read the whole of this dismal tract, but this 

contained the keynote speech of the Premier, speaking in his first campaign speech, on March 23rd, to 

officially open his party‟s campaign. (I think he was speaking in Gravelbourg, although the report doesn‟t 

say so). Mr. Thatcher told his cheering audience: 

 

It is time for political parties to get their votes by assuring thrift, economy and efficiency and not by 

outbidding and out-promising each other. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WALKER: — Well I can read you the rest of these promises, Mr. Speaker, but I point out that this 

document, while it says it is published by the Saskatchewan Liberal Association, does qualify that. In the 

next line it says, it is “authorized as second class mail.” 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART: — How did you make out on that platform? 

 

MR. WALKER: — Well, as a matter of fact you made out not so well. You got ninety-three votes less than 

this side of the House got on that election. 

 

MR. STEUART: — We got the government, eh, Buddy? 

 

MR. WALKER: — Mr. Speaker, now it being almost ten o‟clock, I‟d like to adjourn the debate. I wasn‟t 

quite finished however. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


