



















































Hansard: March 21, 1968


1229 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

26th Day 

Thursday, March 21, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. F. MEAKES (Touchwood):— Mr. Speaker, may I introduce to you, and through you to Members of 

this House a group of 37 grade ten students from Kelliher high school. They are here with their teacher, Mr. 

Ehman, and their bus driver, Mr. Kaytor. I am sure that all Members wish with me that they will enjoy their 

stay here, and that they will reach home safely having learned something of the democratic process. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G. G. LEITH (Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to you and through you to the Members of 

this Assembly seven students in grades ten and eleven from the Elrose constituency. They represent all high 

schools but one in the constituency. They are accompanied by their drivers, Mr. Alex Milton, Mr. Frank 

Thom, and Mr. Albert Mewis. They will be in the city today and tomorrow. I hope that they have a profitable 

and educational visit and a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. A. PEPPER (Weyburn):— Mr. Speaker, again today I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to all Members of the Assembly, two groups of students from Weyburn. The first group that I will draw 

to your attention is the last portion of the Junior high school, some 65 in number in the east gallery, which 

has made a total of 214 grade eight students from this Junior high school. Again today they are accompanied 

by their teachers, Mr. Fletcher and Mr. Nedalcov, and also their bus drivers, Mr. Ashbey and Mr. Tate. The 

other group which I am pleased to welcome is a group of students from St. Michael’s junior high school in 

Weyburn. These students are situated in the west gallery. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, we welcome both these 

schools to sit in on the happenings of our Legislature today. We hope that their visit will prove educational, 

and will be remembered as a highlight in their grade eight school program. I know we all wish them a 

pleasant and safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1230 

BRYANT ORATORY WINNER 

 

MR. M. KWASNICA (Cutknife):— Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to place on 

the records of this Assembly a very significant accomplishment of a Saskatchewan student from my home 

town of Lloydminster. Miss Catherine Elizabeth Faber, age 14, who is attending the Lloydminster Junior 

high school, has won the Bryant Oratory Cup for Saskatchewan. Miss Faber who is in grade nine chose as 

her topic - a topic that was very dear to her - "Saskatchewan". 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I first heard this young student speak for 10½ minutes without a single note or cue card, I 

knew that she was a capable and eloquent speaker. In the Bryant Oratory Finals for the province, held in 

Assiniboia last Friday, March 15, Miss Faber won out over five other worthy contestants. To my knowledge, 

she is the only junior competitor in grade nine to win the Bryant Cup since its inception in 1922. 

 

I am proud of Miss Faber and the honor she has brought to her family, her school, our city and to Cutknife 

constituency. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W. A. FORSYTH (Saskatoon Nutana South):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and 

through you to the Legislature a group of students from Prince Philip school. This school is located on 

Climhill Drive in Saskatoon Nutana South. The students are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Pierce. 

They also have an extensive program of visits to other points of interest in Regina. I know that you will join 

me in wishing these young people a pleasant and profitable tour, and a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C.L.B. ESTEY (Saskatoon Nutana Centre):— Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce 

to this Legislature students from Albert school in Saskatoon who are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. 

McMillan. We thank Mrs. McMillan for giving her students the opportunity to be with us this afternoon. It is 

our hope the students will enjoy their visit to the Legislature and we wish them a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 

 

Owing to a breakdown in the recording instrument debate on the following Motions for Returns was not 

recorded. 

 

Nos. 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1231 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

For the same reason the opening remarks of the debate on Resolution No. 9 were not recorded. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 9 - THE OFFICE OF AN OMBUDSMAN 

 

Mr. C. G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale) moved, seconded by Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the appointment of an 

Ombudsman in order to provide further means of redress for grievances of citizens against 

administrative injustices. 

 

He also said: We had asked in the past that the Government appoint an Inter-sessional Committee to study 

this question and to make recommendations to this Legislature. Well, the Government through the Premier 

has in the past said No and we anticipated that the answer would be No, again. He is opposed to any Inter-

sessional Committees. So, Mr. Speaker, we have changed our request somewhat this year. Three times our 

requests have been turned down by the Government opposite, by the Premier opposite. In the new motion I 

am introducing today, Mr. Speaker, we have dropped the request for a study. It is our opinion now that the 

position of an Ombudsman has been fully researched and has been proven fully by experience in many parts 

of the world. 

 

This Government didn’t act, Mr. Speaker, but others have and now we find that such Provinces as Alberta, 

New Brunswick and Quebec have passed legislation and have set up Ombudsmen. In 1964 the previous 

Government, the Government before the one that sits on your right, Mr. Speaker, made favorable mention in 

the Speech from the Throne re an Ombudsman for Saskatchewan. I quote from the 1964 Speech from the 

Throne where it says: 

 

Study has been given to measures adopted, notably in the Scandinavian countries and in New 

Zealand, which provide citizens with direct and easy access to appeal from administrative decisions 

thought to be arbitrary or unjust. It will be suggested that a Special Committee of the Legislature be 

asked to inquire into the best means of providing similar access for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The fact that while in Opposition, this party to your left, Mr. Speaker, has seen fit to introduce resolutions in 

four consecutive sessions urging the creation of the position of Ombudsman indicates the importance that we 

attach to this matter. 

 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier):— 20 years, George! 

 

MR. WILLIS:— For the benefit of those Members who are new this year in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, I 

would say that an Ombudsman is an official directed by Parliament or the Legislature to 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1232 

investigate citizens’ complaints against administrative officials or bureaucracy. Mr. Speaker, maybe the 

word Ombudsman is the trouble which the Premier had. It could be that he can’t pronounce the word. I’ll 

have to admit that I had trouble too sometimes but in spite of this I attempt to say the word, Ombudsman. It 

is a Swedish word and probably comes in an alien manner to his tongue. But translated the word means 

citizens’ defender. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that since the Premier knew that the translation was citizens’ 

defender this is probably why he would have nothing to do with it. 

 

I want to say that I am not going to speak very long today, Mr. Speaker. If anyone is interested in the 

question of an Ombudsman there are new books in the library which I would advise them to study. There is 

one, "When Americans Complain" by Walter Gellhorn - it has a subtitle, "Governmental Grievance 

Procedures." There is another one by Walter Gellhorn called "Ombudsman; Citizens’ Protectors in Nine 

Countries." The Institute of Governmental Studies at the University of California at Berkley has put out 

"Canadian Ombudsman Proposals" by Stanley V. Anderson, published November, 1966. These books do 

summarize and bring up-to-date what has happened in the world regarding the Ombudsman. 

 

The office of an Ombudsman has been successful in Sweden where it originated in 1809, and in various 

Scandinavian and other Western countries where it has been adopted since. The Ombudsman for Denmark, 

where the position was created in 1953, did much to popularize this throughout the western world. Insofar as 

Canada is concerned the success of the New Zealand Ombudsman first appointed in 1962 helped greatly in 

bringing this institution to Canadian attention. A Bill was introduced in the House of Commons, Bill C 113, 

1966, to establish the office of Parliamentary Commissioner on a Federal level, while Ombudsmen have 

been authorized also, as I mentioned, in Alberta, New Brunswick and Quebec. 

 

An Ombudsman would receive complaints of the citizens who believe that their rights have been infringed 

upon by the Provincial Government, its agencies or departments. He would have the right to question civil 

servants and employees of Government agencies and Crown corporations. He would have access, Mr. 

Speaker, to Government files pertaining to complaints. The Ombudsman would report to the Legislature, if 

the Government or one of its agencies refused to do anything to rectify a complaint which the Ombudsman 

felt justified. 

 

The present Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) moved one of the motions regarding an Ombudsman 

in two previous sessions. And in 1965, Mr. Speaker, he said and I quote from his address at that time: 

 

Broadly such an official keeps watch over the way in which Government officials apply the laws and 

regulations to the public and investigate complaints of private citizens against such officials. He 

doesn’t have the power to 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1233 

overrule officials, but he is in a strong position to suggest that abuses might be corrected. He would 

report directly to the Legislature probably annually. 

 

Those who argue against an Ombudsman say that such an office is not needed because the Members of the 

Legislative Assembly perform all the functions of such an office. This is not so, Mr. Speaker. MLAs have 

neither the time, the staff, nor the means to investigate complaints. They haven’t access to files. They merely 

refer complaints to people who are responsible in the first place for the decision to which objection is taken. 

MLAs are and should be available to receive and investigate complaints and certainly should continue to act 

in this capacity. To quote from the Canadian Ombudsman Proposals, the book which I referred to earlier by 

Mr. Anderson. Mr. Anderson says: 

 

He, the elected Member, cannot hope to be as effective as an independent specialized agency which 

has the right to demand information, the power to investigate impartially and the duty to report 

irregularities. 

 

Nor would an Ombudsman interfere directly with policies laid down by the Government. He does not make 

policies, but he helps those who do by calling attention to unworkable or unfair policies. 

 

And again, in the Canadian Ombudsman Proposal, Mr. Anderson states: 

 

An Ombudsman’s office does not alter the basic structure of governments. It does not lessen the 

executive branch’s primary responsibility nor his policy-making prerogative. On the contrary the 

operations of the Ombudsman are supportive of these functions. The pertinent acts and parliamentary 

instructions in all the Ombudsman statutes discussed in the preceding chapter are designed to keep 

the Ombudsman within proper grounds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the House as a whole, I think, would be interested in the report which is made to the New 

Zealand Legislature by the New Zealand Ombudsman for the year ending March 31, 1967. The number of 

complaints received by the Ombudsman was 713 for the whole year. The number of complaints dealt with by 

the Ombudsman was 625. Still under action were 88 complaints. Of the 625 cases dealt with, 348 did not 

call for full investigation mainly because they were not within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman. 351 were 

fully investigated, and out of these 295 were not considered justified, while 56 cases were justified. But the 

large number of complaints, Mr. Speaker, received in one year is an argument in favor of an Ombudsman. 

That so many are justified further argues for an Ombudsman even more. As I said, Mr. Speaker, we have in 

Canada at the present time, three Provinces which have established the office of an Ombudsman. I have here 

the references to these Ombudsmen which have been printed in the Financial Post of January 20 of this year, 

1968. The Financial Post reports an Ombudsman for Quebec, and it says 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1234 

in the Financial Post that Quebec may be the third Province in Canada to have its own Ombudsman or, as he 

will probably be called, "Protector of the people." The principle has been approved by the Cabinet and now 

awaits official legislation. The office of Ombudsman has already been created in Alberta and New 

Brunswick. The creation of an Ombudsman for Quebec is one of a long series of judicial reforms now 

coming close to fruition in the Province and these reforms which are mentioned in the article include 

creation of a Commissioner of Human Rights as well as legislation involving civil marriages, prisons, 

payment prisoners’ labor, reduction of prison sentences and liquor control. And here, Mr. Speaker, we have 

fallen behind the Province of Quebec in providing, what to me is elementary, for the protection of citizens in 

a democracy with the appointment of an Ombudsman. And then in the Financial Post of an earlier date, we 

have a similar press release headed "Now Canada has a Second Ombudsman" and this was released October 

14, 1967. 

 

New Brunswick became Canada’s second province to appoint an Ombudsman, when Dr. 

Remington’s appointment to this post was announced this week. The first Canadian Ombudsman is 

George B. MacLellan appointed Ombudsman for Alberta in April, 1967. The Ombudsman will 

investigate grievances or injustices caused by the actions of departments, agencies and offices of the 

province brought to his attention by private person’s organizations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in "Western Business Industry", the May issue, we have the announcement of Alberta 

appointing the first Ombudsman for any of the Provinces of Canada or any of the jurisdictions on the North 

American continent. The article in the Western Business and Industry periodical says: 

 

"Alberta appoints first Ombudsman." Eyes of Canada will be focussing more sharply on Alberta next 

fall, when the first Ombudsman in the history of this country assumes this new Provincial position in 

Edmonton. 

 

To fill the position from a field of 232 applicants from throughout Canada, the Alberta Government 

selected George B. MacLellan, Canada’s top policeman as commissioner of the RCMP for the past 

four years. He’ll be paid $20,000 in the entirely new job to which he has been appointed for a five-

year term. 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that the salary corresponds to that of a judge. Having served 35 years in the 

RCMP, the 57-year-old commissioner is fully qualified for his post. Britain recently appointed an 

Ombudsman and several other Canadian Provinces have been considering legislation along the same lines as 

Alberta. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that we have considered legislation in this Province, but because of the 

do-nothing Government on the other side of the House, a Government which has no concern for the rights of 

people, we have done nothing here in Saskatchewan. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1235 

Britain, the article goes on, recently appointed an Ombudsman and several other Canadian Provinces 

have been considering legislation along the same lines as Alberta. According to legislation adopted 

by Alberta this spring the duties of its Ombudsman will be to investigate any decision or 

recommendation made to a Government Minister for any act done or omitted relating to a matter of 

administration and affecting any person or body of persons in its personal capacity in or by any 

department or agency or any officer or employee or member thereof in the exercise of any power or 

function conferred on him by any enactment. The duties of the Ombudsman will also allow him at 

any time to enter any premises occupied by an agency or department of the Government to carry out 

its function. Top-ranking business executives, police officials, lawyers, judges and school teachers 

made up a large percentage of the applicants for the position. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, even after three Provinces have moved in appointing an Ombudsman here in 

Saskatchewan we do nothing. We have no concern for the rights of those people who may be inconvenienced 

or harassed by Government decision. In another one of these books which I referred to earlier, Mr. Speaker, 

in "When Americans Complain", Mr. Gellhorn states, "Governmental activities nowadays touch so many 

people in so many ways that bruises and scratches are inevitable." Again on the book cover it is recorded that 

"Modern government which rubs ever more frequently against private citizens probably adds to the sum total 

of human well being". But it certainly adds also to the sum total of human friction. And then to quote in 

conclusion, Mr. Speaker, from John Milton, "When complaints are freely heard, deeply considered, and 

speedily reformed, then is the utmost bound of civil liberty attained that wise men look for." And believing 

that an Ombudsman is a logical next step in our efforts to attain maximum civil liberty, thereby relieving the 

sum total of human friction, I move, seconded by the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale, (Mr. Romanow) the 

above Resolution. 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale):— Mr. Speaker, in rising in support of the Resolution 

introduced by my colleague from Melfort, I want to remark very briefly, that very often, in the very rapidly 

changing world that marks the characteristics of Saskatchewan now, we sometimes tend to overlook in 

economic advancement the very real need to keep up-to-date and keep in step with the social and civil 

liberties’ aspects of government. The discussion of an Ombudsman is one which has been revolving around 

many of the Legislatures of Canada for quite some time. It has, Mr. Speaker, as you and Hon. Members 

know, been the subject of some considerable comment in many of the legal and other professional journals 

in Saskatchewan and in Canada. Essentially, and I’m going to elaborate later in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 

about some specific aspects of the office of Ombudsman, but essentially in these particular articles it seems 

to me that what each individual writer is saying and, it seems to me, what each individual speaker is 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1236 

saying when he gets up and voices his support for an Ombudsman or a Human Rights Commission, or some 

such similar authority to guarantee and protect civil liberties, this point that I emphasized in the beginning, 

that is, to say, in our fast-paced world we tend to overlook, when we have economic progress, when we have 

some of the material comforts of the day-to-day living, the very real aspect of civil liberties. 

 

Now, it’s only natural I think to acquaint the fact that economic progress will necessarily carry with it a 

certain amount of civil liberties. Unfortunately I think the comments made by my colleague from Melfort are 

very appropriate. With the increase in technology and economic growth, government grows also. 

Government today is big business, and as government gets larger, it’s inevitable that more and more of the 

average people and average citizens of Saskatchewan are going to be affected by the day-to-day decisions of 

governments. I am not now talking about the day-to-day decisions of a government, as it is here today 

constituted in this Legislature, although that is also applicable; but I’m talking about the various tribunals 

and administrative functions, the administrative offices, the day-to-day decisions of inspections, licensing 

motor vehicles and the like, that from time to time crop up and affect each and every one of us. I think in the 

light of this increased growth and, if I may add, creeping growth of government into our personal lives, 

we’ve got to have the proper legislation instituted that is going to give some measure of redress to the 

average person of Saskatchewan. This is not a new solution that Members on this side of the House are 

proposing for the consideration of the Hon. Members opposite. The Ombudsman has been an institution and 

a very admirable feature of many of the very progressive countries of Europe for quite some number of 

years. Sweden has had the office of an Ombudsman since 1809, Finland since 1919, Denmark since 1955. 

Hopefully and fortunately in Canada we are moving towards the position and the institution of the office by 

the recent implementation of the Ombudsman in the Province of Alberta. I think discussion of the type that 

the Hon. Member for Melfort generates every year and unfortunately, obviously to deaf ears of the Members 

opposite, is the type of discussion which is going to gradually move public opinion to the day when we here 

in Saskatchewan are also going to recognize this need for the proper legislation for the protection of our 

individual civil liberties. 

 

I think we can quite reasonably pattern and follow the very successful experience of Sweden with respect to 

its Ombudsman. Members opposite will know that the Swedish Ombudsman becomes seized of a particular 

case, Mr. Speaker, in various numbers of different ways. First of all, his office is easily accessible to the 

public who can lodge any complaint that they have with respect to the operations of an administrative 

tribunal or an administrative officer of government. They may launch these complaints either in writing or by 

verbal communication. This to me seems to be one glaring area of neglect that we as legislators - and I’m not 

now talking from a partisan standpoint - have fallen down in the Province of Saskatchewan. It’s very 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1237 

easy, I’m sure, for Members opposite to say, "Well it’s simple for an individual Member of the Legislative 

Assembly to simply write to the Minister in charge or their MLA and action would be done." I think that all 

of us like to think that we look after our constituents as well as we can. But the fact of the matter is that 

because of the Government’s growth, and it’s going to continue growing, the channels of communication are 

sometimes impaired. The quick ready access to governmental information and more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, the opportunity to have quick and decisive action is lacking. In Sweden this opportunity is now 

available with the office of the Ombudsman. There is a minimum of formality, Mr. Speaker, and 

requirements with respect to papers or supporting evidence. The Ombudsman’s office also, Mr. Speaker, 

peruses daily papers. It does so with a view to keeping an eye open for reviewing possible cases that merit 

the attention of the Ombudsman. Statistics show that something close to one-fifth of the cases in Sweden 

that come before the office of the Ombudsman for his consideration are cases that he has gleaned as a result 

of his careful perusal of the daily papers in Sweden. I think that the interesting conclusion that we can draw 

from that statistic is that far too often in the day-to-day occurrences people may be aggrieved or they feel that 

they have been aggrieved by a particular government decision, but rather than taking on what to them seems 

a very cumbersome and burdensome task of carrying their complaint to a government official or to a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly or for example, to hire a lawyer, he lets the matter rest. The advantage 

of the Ombudsman perusing the papers is of course to help uncover and bring to the attention of government 

and to the Legislature inequities that individual citizens are sometimes frustrated by. I think this is a very 

important and desirable feature that right now the Province of Saskatchewan simply does not have, and that 

the office of an Ombudsman would help to rectify. Also, Mr. Speaker, some 30 per cent of the cases in the 

Ombudsman arise from the inspection from time to time of the various public offices and court rooms which 

the Ombudsman is making to make sure that certain inequities there haven’t taken place. Once the 

Ombudsman takes up and gets certain information, he then has ready and quick access to all of the 

governmental information. If he finds no evidence of maladministration and misconduct, that’s the end of 

the matter. But if the case warrants it, Mr. Speaker, he either issues a reprimand or a recommendation to the 

proper minister of government or the proper administrative tribunal and perhaps even initiates a prosecution 

against the minister or the tribunal and then lets the court decide the outcome and the issue it heard. Again, 

Mr. Speaker, to me this is a highly desirable feature. 

 

I think that the Province of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan will be able to benefit by the 

Ombudsman having access to certain Government papers on a day-to-day basis. It is, after all, Mr. Speaker, 

only a six to eight weeks’ session that Members of the Legislative Assembly concern themselves with. We 

ask as many questions about the workings and the activities of government as possible; we make as many 

speeches, perhaps some Members make far too many, on the issues of the 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1238 

day and some of the inequities as we see them. But after that eight or ten week period is finished our 

communication and contact with the bureaucracy of government, and I use that word in a good sense, are 

really limited to phone calls or a letter, and that’s all. Very often the individual MLA and again the 

individual citizen who has a particular right just simply cannot pursue it any further. I think the argument 

that we, as MLAs and as servants of the people, ought to be carrying out the functions that I have now very 

briefly discussed, that the Swedish Ombudsman carries out, really is a specious argument because it just 

doesn’t permit for the proper type of surveillance and looking after the people’s civil liberties on a day-to-

day basis that such offices as the Swedish Ombudsman affords. It’s a sophistication of government, Mr. 

Speaker, that I submit we can ill afford to go without much longer. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, some Hon. Members will want to know of course just how far the Swedish Ombudsman 

goes and how far Members on this House would advocate the office of the Ombudsman be allowed to go. I 

would admit there is a valid area for differences and perhaps in the give-and-take in negotiations some 

delineation of the Ombudsman’s power can be finally made. I personally hold the view that the Ombudsman 

and his investigative powers in the Province of Saskatchewan should stop short only of the Cabinet 

Chamber. 

 

At this point there was a further recording failure. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood) moved the adjournment of the debate. 

 

The question being put on the adjournment motion, it was negatived. 

 

Resolution negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS - 22 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Wooff Kramer 

Willis Wood Dewhurst 

Meakes Berezowsky Romanow 

Smishek Thibault Whelan 

Snyder Michayluk Brockelbank 

Baker Pepper Bowerman 

Matsalla Kwasnica Kowalchuk 

Messer   

 

NAYS - 30 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Grant Leith 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Bjarnason Mitchell 

Boldt MacDonald Larochelle 

Cameron Estey Gardner 

Steuart Hooker Coupland 

Heald Gallagher McPherson 

   



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1239 

 

McIsaac MacLennan Charlebois 

Loken Heggie Forsyth 

MacDougall Breker McIvor 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 27 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. C. G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale) 

for Return No. 27. 

 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Deputy Premier that 

the proposed motion of Mr. Willis that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 27 be amended 

showing: 

 

(1) The amount paid to MacLaren Advertising Company Limited during the fiscal year 1966-67 (a) by 

each Department of Government; (b) by each Crown Corporation; and (c) by any other Commission, 

Board or Agency of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2) The total of (a), (b), and (c) above be amended by inserting the words: "News media for advertising 

placed through" after the word "to" in the first line; and by adding the following words to the motion: 

 

(3) The amount of commission paid to MacLaren Advertising Company Limited; (a) by each 

Department of Government; (b) by each Crown Corporation; and (c) by any other Commission, 

Board, or Agency of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

(4) The total of (a), (b), and (c) in paragraph (3) above. 

 

MR. C. G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale):— Mr. Speaker, I certainly object to the regulation of this motion. 

First of all, I don’t think the government has the information which they are offering to give. They pay 

MacLaren Advertising Agency a certain amount. And now they say they know what commission they pay 

MacLaren Advertising Agency. They pay them a sum amount, 100 per cent, MacLaren Agency subtracts 

their commission from that. The Government has no information regarding the amount of commission which 

they pay MacLaren Agency – 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WILLIS:— I don’t think you do – . . . a full amount and this is certainly not being factual, Mr. 

Speaker. I asked for the total amount paid to MacLaren Advertising Agency, not just that which is placed 

through the news media. Surely the Government hasn’t anything to hide. And if the Government wishes to 

say that MacLaren Agency took 10 per cent or 15 per cent or paid 20 per 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1240 

cent, they could have included that in the question without mutilating the question and hiding information, 

another effort on the part of the Government, Mr. Speaker, to deprive, to keep information from us, to 

deceive us as to the final amount which is paid to MacLaren Advertising Agency. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 46 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino) for 

Return No. 46. 

 

HON. D. BOLDT (Minister of Highways):— Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Cameron that Motion 

for Return No. 46 be amended as follows: 

 

That parts (2) and (3) be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

"(2) The cost of reconstruction including surfacing." and that part (4) be renumbered as part (3). 

 

MR. E. I. WOOD (Swift Current):— Mr. Speaker, is it possible to ask the Member before he sits down at 

this point why he cannot separate the two figures? 

 

MR. BOLDT:— Well this gives to the Member the information he is asking for. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino):— Mr. Speaker, I don’t think it gives the information and I don’t see why 

it should be such a hard job to break these things down. This surfacing - you must know the cost, unless it is 

not in the public interest to know. What have you got to hide here? I’ll tell you there are a lot of rumors 

around our country and we’d like to know. This is why the question is on the Order Paper; that’s why I’m 

here. We want the facts, that’s all. I’ve been asked this question over the years. You took four years to build 

that highway and now you refuse to answer this. Well, this will just mean that there is something to hide. I 

would ask the Legislature to vote against this amendment because it makes this job smell still higher than it 

did. 

 

MR. F. A. DEWHURST (Wadena):— Mr. Speaker, I see no reason why the Department couldn’t furnish 

the breakdown of these figures as asked for by the Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) because from 

previous questions asked in this House on previous occasions, I know that the Department has the statistics, 

segregated one from another. We heard on a recent debate that a Member can go into the Department to see a 

file and get information. How can we get the information when we have these two juggled together, so that 

we cannot get the information on what each one is to the component part? 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1241 

The Minister of Highways will leave us no alternative, if he insists on this amendment, but for us to be of the 

opinion that he is trying to hide something, and he has not given us all of the information. I see no reason 

why any Minister of the Crown should want to withhold information from Members of this House, when this 

is public money that was spent for a public highway. We are asking for the breakdown by components . . . 

for the construction of the grade and for the surfacing of the highway. I’m sure the Minister can supply this 

information. We are not trying to embarrass him or his staff. We are just asking for a breakdown of the 

different types of work. I hope the Minister will reconsider it and give us this information on a broken-down 

basis, because it will give us more information on the cost of highways and the cost the Government and the 

Department is facing in construction in this day. So I hope they will reconsider and give us this information. 

 

MR. C. G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale):— Mr. Speaker, I too am very much surprised that it took them so 

long to lay such an egg. This Motion has been on the Order Paper for three weeks at the most and finally 

they come up with a Motion saying they’ll give us the information but they must add together the cost of 

grading and the cost of paving. Now I don’t know what the reason for this is, Mr. Speaker; there must be 

some hidden reason for it. The grading was done by Government crews. Maybe this could be the answer. 

Maybe they don’t want people in Saskatchewan to know how cheaply Government crews work. It could be 

the answer. We already know what the cost of the paving was. We asked the question last year. We have 

this. If the Minister thinks he is hiding the cost of Government crew grading, he’s mistaken. We can ask 

another question. We can get the cost of paving by itself. Well why not give us the information in the first 

place? Surely to goodness you people have withheld information now to an extreme and this doesn’t even 

make sense. I’m surprised, Mr. Speaker, very much that the Government would mutilate a question like this 

in order to put two parts together which mean nothing. 

 

HON. A. C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, there is no mutilization of the 

question. It is not being mutilated at all. What is hurting the Opposition is that the Government is supplying 

the complete information on the total cost of the highway. They don’t want the total cost. They want 

fractions of costs here and there so they can build a story out of it. We are giving you more than you’ve 

asked for; we are giving you the complete information of the total construction and finishing of the highway. 

Now how do you call that mutilating the Resolution when it is giving you yours plus more on top of it? 

 

HON. W. S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition):— The Government for some reason or other is 

confusing the House and confusing the country, it seems to me. A perfectly straightforward question has 

been asked and this type 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1242 

of question has been answered on previous occasions. The Minister has not said that he doesn’t have the 

information. The Minister (Mr. Boldt) has not said that they do not keep the information in this form. The 

Minister does not even lead the argument used by the Government on previous occasions this year that it is 

going to cost a lot money. Even that raging and ageing Shakespearean actor, the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron), didn’t pretend that this was going to cost $25,000 or enough money to build X 

number of new schools. As a matter of fact the Government gave nothing whatsoever for rejecting the 

requests which were in the original Resolution. It has on the other hand said that it wants to give a lump cost 

in a certain way for some strange reason. It has given no reason at all as to why it can’t answer it in the way 

the question was asked. The Member indicated it was of particular interest to him to have the question 

answered in this way. One of the responsibilities of a Member is to find out about the works of the 

Government in his constituency. One of the needs of this House, in order to judge the actions of the 

Government on how well it is spending its money, is to get information of this kind. The Minister of 

Highways (Mr. Boldt) in particular should be aware of the fact of the way in which his Department is 

administered, is under serious attack from one end of the province to the other. He should be aware of the 

fact that questions are being raised over and over again as to why we are spending the amount of money we 

are for the kind of roads we are getting. He should be particularly anxious to supply information of this kind, 

particularly when he has not said that this is not available. Mr. Speaker, one has to be suspicious in cases of 

this kind. One has to get again the feeling that I expressed the other day in the House that the Government is 

willing to reduce this Legislature to a body other than it is intended to be, when it keeps on refusing 

information which the Members of this Legislature and the public have the right to have. And I too want to 

ask the Government to supply the information in the form that it was asked for by the Member from 

Kinistino (Mr. Thibault). 

 

MR. BOLDT:— On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, it was implied that we are hiding . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! Now the Member moved the amendment and in moving the amendment, 

he spoke to the main motion, because anybody who moves an amendment to any motion speaks to the 

motion and to the amendment in the same breath and at the one time. And the Member cannot re-enter the 

debate. 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS - 32 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Howes McFarlane 

Boldt Cameron Steuart 

Heald McIsaac Loken 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1243 

 

MacDougall Grant Coderre 

Bjarnason MacDonald Estey 

Hooker Gallagher MacLennan 

Heggie Breker Leith 

Radloff Weatherald Mitchell 

Larochelle Gardner Coupland 

McPherson Charlebois Forsyth 

McIvor Schmeiser  

 

NAYS - 22 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Wooff Kramer 

Willis Wood Dewhurst 

Meakes Berezowsky Romanow 

Smishek Thibault Whelan 

Snyder Michayluk Brockelbank 

Baker Pepper Bowerman 

Matsalla Messer Kwasnica 

Kowalchuk   

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The debate continues on the motion as amended. 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT (Kinistino):— Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to carry this debate much longer. I want to 

say that the attitude of the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) does not surprise me, but the attitude of the 

Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) does surprise me. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— I don’t know about that. 

 

MR. THIBAULT:— Well, you might not agree with me but I’ve always held him in pretty high esteem. I 

want to say again that both of these questions involved large sums of money, the resurfacing and the grading. 

I believe they were done by two different outfits. The questions have been raised time and time again. Can’t 

you imagine why when it takes from 1963 to 1968 to complete a piece of road like that? At times we didn’t 

know who was gaining on the road, whether it was the poplars in the ditch or the highway equipment. The 

people are asking questions. Just a simple question. The Minister has the answers. He cannot complain it is 

going to take 50,000 hours to get these answers or $150,000 to get these answers. He can get these answers 

in a matter of minutes; he is only refusing to give the information to this House because he’s got something 

to hide. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT:— Nothing else. What are you hiding? Tell us. That’s all I’m going to say and I hope he 

does some re-thinking. I want this information, and I insist on getting it. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— . . . The House is not yours! 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1244 

MR. THIBAULT:— When we form the Government again, we’ll expose it. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! 

 

MR. WILLIS:— Mr. Speaker, again the same objection . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The debate is closed. I ask the Member, is he rising on a point of order? 

 

MR. WILLIS:— I thought you were on No. 3. I was out for a minute. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! 

 

The motion as amended carried. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 47 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Thibault (Kinistino) for Return 

No. 47. 

 

HON. D. BOLDT (Minister of Highways):— Moved seconded by Mr. Cameron that Motion for Return 

No. 47 be amended as follows: 

 

That parts (2) and (3) be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

"(2) The cost of reconstruction including surfacing." and that part (4) be renumbered as part (3). 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I want to say why this is being done. The Opposition has the tendency of 

asking questions as to what was the cost, for instance in oiling a road in 1967. Last year we answered this 

question, and we put a note on it: the oiling by highway crews, gravel taken from the stock pile that was 

perhaps stock-piled five or six years ago, but they ask for the cost . . . I have the floor . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Sit down, sit down! 

 

MR. WILLIS:— This has nothing to do with the question under review; he’s talking about oiling. This is 

paving. 

 

MR. BOLDT:— I’m speaking on the Motion. I’m telling you why we are doing this. So last year we gave 

the House the answer to the question. What was the cost of oiling for 1967, so we couldn’t include the cost 

of the stock-piling from previous years. So the answer was, the oiling was X number of dollars. Then you 

ask the question; what is the cost of the private contractor? 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1245 

As you know we don’t have too many contractors going into oiling, but we said in the answer that the cost of 

oiling by the contractor included the gravel out of the pit, plus the oiling. 

 

MR. WILLIS:— On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! The question before the House is on the Motion of the Member for 

Kinistino that an Order of the Assembly do issue for the Return showing with regard to Highway No. 3, 

Kinistino to Birch Hills: 

 

(1) The standard to which the highway is built. 

(2) The cost of construction or reconstruction of the grade. 

(3) The cost of surfacing the highway. 

(4) The mileage of highway involved. 

 

The Minister of Highways has moved an amendment. He is speaking to the Motion and to the amendment at 

the same time in moving his amendment, that Motion for Return No. 47 be amended by deleting parts (2) 

and (3) and substituting the following: "(2) What was the cost of reconstruction including surfacing", and 

renumbering the other parts, etc. I think that the question of what it costs and how it was done is relevant to 

the Motion. 

 

MR. BOLDT:— Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. WILLIS:— The point of order has to do with the remarks that the Minister is making. He’s talking 

about dates. There is no date at all here; it has to do with the total cost. He’s talking about dates, about 

something else entirely, something that hasn’t got anything to do with this Motion. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Don’t embarrass your Members more than you have to. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Well, if there are no dates in the Motion in connection with the cost of construction or 

reconstruction, if there is no date in connection with that, I would almost think the Motion might be out of 

order. Somebody has to decide somewhere along the line as to its admissibility. Go ahead. 

 

MR. BOLDT:— I can continue if the Hon. Member for Melfort will sit down, I remember that I let him 

speak and I want to bring this point across to the Members, just how dishonest the Opposition is in relating 

to the public. We told them in a note on the answer that the contractor’s cost of gravelling in that year and 

the oiling were included in his cost, and they were not included in the highway cost. So this year we 

answered a similar question. It happened that the contractor also took the gravel from a stock-pile, and the 

difference between the contractor’s 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1246 

price and the Government crew was only $200. You went around during the election saying, "Here look at 

this." The Highway crews can oil for $3,000 and the contractor’s price is $5,000 and some. Those weren’t 

true figures. You had the note underneath the question, but you never exposed that to the public. You left the 

wrong impression. What I am trying to do with this question is that the two pieces of road are not the same 

base, so hence there will be a difference in cost. If I made a notice of it you would say, "Well look, here is 

the Government crew that did a certain job for $200,000. The contractor that did an entirely different job, a 

better road and at a cost of $400,000. But the ordinary taxpayer will not see the difference of the base of the 

highway. So we’re telling you we built a road, we’re giving you the whole cost so that you cannot confuse 

the public. 

 

I want to make this matter very plain. You are accusing the Department of Highways that there is grave mis-

administration. What you are doing is throwing a reflection on the Deputy Minister and every one of the 

officials in the Department. For your information every one of them you hired. I want to tell, and I am sure 

that you will believe that, if I knew that the Deputy was not honest, he wouldn’t sit there. I am confident that, 

if the Deputy thought that I wasn’t honest, he wouldn’t sit there. The Department is run as efficiently as any 

department in government in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOLDT:— The only reason why you are criticizing the efficiency is because we are doing a good job 

in Highways. We are building highways and you just can’t swallow the fact that this Highway Department’s 

budget meets with the approval of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W. S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition):— I want to make a few comments arising out of the 

comments which the Minister has just made. Somebody may have followed his reasoning for now answering 

the questions as they are on the Order Paper. Certainly I got only one conclusion from it. That conclusion 

was that the Minister does have in his possession the information in the form that it is asked for. There is no 

problem whatsoever with respect to getting it; there is no added cost whatsoever with respect to giving it to 

this House. But the Minister refuses to make it available. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that Members in this 

House have a right to ask for information in the form in which they think explains the situation. That’s what 

the Member from Kinistino has done. The Minister however, attempts to be the arbiter of the use of the 

information. That isn’t his job. It’s up to the individual Member how he is going to decide to use the 

information. If he uses it wrongly, then the Minister is perfectly right to criticize him for using 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1247 

it wrongly, but the Minister is not right to refuse him the information, because he thinks the Member is going 

to use it in a certain way or other. The Minister’s whole argument substantiates what’s being said on this side 

of the House up to this point, namely that the information is available, easily available, readily available and 

could be supplied to this House in a matter of minutes. He ought to answer in the form which the Member 

asks. It is not for the Minister to decide what kind of questions Members will ask. It is for a Member to 

decide on the basis of his own knowledge of the situation and his own needs as a Member of the Legislature. 

 

Let me turn to the second part of the Minister’s remarks. Certainly nobody on this side of the House has 

impugned any dishonesty or inefficiency to individual members of the staff of the Department of Highways. 

The Minister is quite right when he says that most of them were there when we formed the Government. 

Most of them were young men who were recruited into the service during that period of time. There is 

nobody here suggesting there is any dishonesty or inefficiency. The Minister has lost some of his good men, 

I admit that. The Minister hasn’t replaced enough, I think that may well be true. He has not given his 

officials a proper chance to do the job that they can do for the Province of Saskatchewan. I think that is true. 

Secondly, I think the Minister has not listened to the advice of his officials in the way that he ought to. 

Certainly when we see jobs being broken up over a period of time, as they have been in every corner of this 

province in recent years, then we have to believe that somebody else other than the department officials are 

making decisions which interfere with efficient operation of the Department. And that, Mr. Speaker, is our 

complaint, that the officials are not given a chance, that their advice is not being adequately listened to, that 

there is too much political planning and too little economic and technical planning involved in the work of 

the Department of Highways. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD:— On this matter of costs, Mr. Speaker, on this matter of reasons why there is room for 

suspicion that the Minister and his Cabinet colleagues are interfering, let me draw attention to a recent study 

released by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. I know that the Minister and his colleagues don’t like using 

the facts supplied by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. They prefer to develop their own, but people can’t 

ignore a body with the reputation and the skills of the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. The study which I refer 

to has to do with highway construction costs. DBS has just published a revised series of highway 

construction price indexes covering the period 1956 to 1966. They break this into two parts, the period from 

1956 to 1963 and the period since 1963. In this latter period take the costs for the years 1964, 1965 and 1966 

as compared to 1963. What do we find? We find that the increase in highway construction costs across 

Canada was 26.8 per cent, but the increase in Saskatchewan was 63.5 per cent. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1248 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD:— Does anybody wonder that there is a basis for the concern that there is a wastage with 

respect to highway spending? May I repeat those figures. The increases for Canada, which I should add but 

don’t include, because the figures weren’t available, those for Prince Edward Island, Quebec and Alberta but 

the figures for the rest of Canada were 26.8 per cent in those years. But the increases for Saskatchewan were 

63.5 per cent. We have the very dubious and doubtful honor of having the greatest increase in the cost of 

building highways during that time. 

 

Let’s look at some other provinces and what their experience was during the same time. Remember that all 

provinces experience the same effects with respect to machinery costing more, with respect to wages going 

up, with respect to materials being more. In the Province of British Columbia the increase was 33.8 per cent; 

that increase was roughly 30 per cent less than Saskatchewan. In the province of Manitoba the increase was 

only 27.2 per cent; that I think is 29.3 less than Saskatchewan. In the Province of Ontario the increase was 

only 24.4 per cent; that I believe is about . . . what, 29 per cent less than in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

These are not, Mr. Speaker, I say again, our figures. These are not figures which were dredged up by some of 

our research people. These are the figures of the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. These show that there is 

reason for concern with regard to the highway mileage that we are getting for the highway dollars spent in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD:— I said that the study covered the period from 1956 to 1966. Let me go back and give the 

Legislature the relative increases in costs of building highways for the period prior to a Liberal Government 

in this Province. From 1956-1962, the all-Canada index dropped by about one-quarter. In Saskatchewan 

during that period under the administration of the Minister of Highways, my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale 

(Mr. Willis) who just took his seat, it dropped by one-third. The all-Canada change was down a quarter, the 

change in Saskatchewan was down one-third. Now surely there hasn’t been that much difference in 

conditions with respect to building roads during that period to warrant the great increase compared to 

Canada’s since the Liberals, and a different and better experience before that day. Surely the New 

Saskatchewan doesn’t involve also greater difficulty in building roads to that extent. During 1956-1962 the 

Canadian index dropped by a quarter, the Saskatchewan index dropped by a third. In 1963, costs rose slightly 

in both Canada and in Saskatchewan. During 1963-1966 the costs for Canada rose 26.8 per cent, the cost for 

Saskatchewan rose the highest in Canada, a startling, surprising, worrying increase of 63.5 per cent. Against 

the background of information of this kind, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1249 

I would think the Government would just tumble over themselves to give us every bit of information, every 

kind of detail we might ask for. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Stand up, Davey, get up on your chair! 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer):— If the junior Member from Saskatoon would just open 

his ears and close his mouth for awhile he might learn something. Well that’s the way you should keep it. 

Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition quotes from DBS, we get the same kind of a story that we 

did when they take the information they get and then twist this information and take it out on the hustings, 

and don’t tell the whole truth. They tell half the truth in an attempt to smear our program. Now let’s talk 

about the DBS figures. Sure, the costs went up since we became the Government. Of course they did and 

we’re very proud of this. Why? Because first, we’re building 50-foot roads, Mr. Speaker, not 24-foot trails as 

they did. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART:— We’re building paved highways and double-lane highways. That’s why the costs have 

gone up. Let me tell you another reason the cost went up, Mr. Speaker, because when we report to the DBS 

now, we report all the facts, including the overhead. When I became the Minister, and this is typical, in 

charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation I found that, when they reported how much it cost their 

crews to do a job, it looked very fine on paper. They said, "Look how wonderful we are." The same Highway 

crew, but when you dug into it you found you only got part of the story which is typical of the Socialists, 

because they didn’t put down the overhead. It’s a good example when they say how much it costs for a 

Government crew to oil, but they talk about oil, but they don’t talk about the gravel that’s used. 

 

MR. LLOYD:— Talk about DBS. 

 

MR. STEUART:— All right I’ll talk about DBS. Compare the figures, but you have to compare the 

standards. You’ve got to compare two things. First they never got all the facts when you were the 

Government, given to DBS. Second, we are building a far higher standard of roads than when you were the 

Government. That’s why you got turned out as the Government, because, if you went to Manitoba and 

Alberta, they were building a higher standard of road. You know if you came into Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, when the CCF were in, you didn’t have to see the sign. You just had to close your eyes and you hit 

a bump and you knew you were in Saskatchewan. And now the reverse is true. We have 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1250 

built highways, $24 million is the most you ever spent in your best year, the biggest spending year you had in 

highways when you were the Government. Last year we spent $60 million and we got value for every dollar 

spent. Mr. Speaker, why? Cloverleafs, out here on Highway No. 1 we finally put a cloverleaf out there. How 

many people were killed there, 11 people, in recent times. We put in a cloverleaf; we put an interchange. 

This is part of building highways, modern highways. Of course there is a difference in the costs of highways 

since we became the Government, but the value is there. You just have to drive out on any highway and you 

can see the value is there. You can’t compare narrow gravel roads to the wide-paved roads that we’re 

building. We are also building roads into northern Saskatchewan. Northern Saskatchewan sat there and I 

know it. It sat there; there were no roads built, or very few roads built into it. We’re pushing roads in to 

service the mines and the pulp mill, and make no mistake, those roads are costly. They’re costly. 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords):— Tell us about Primrose, Davey! 

 

MR. STEUART:— I’ll tell you about Primrose. We’ll have a good industry there, not because of anything 

you’ve done in spite of the fact you tried to sabotage it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. STEUART:— We’ll talk about our record in the north and compare it to yours. The north was sitting 

there dead, unopened. We put roads in at very high costs and we’re proud of this fact. So don’t compare your 

record, of building roads and bridges with our record. DBS figures if you want, but this is typical of what 

you do. We’re going to give you the answers and we are going to give you the whole truth. The Member for 

Kinistino and the rest of the Members including the Member for Melfort don’t want the truth, because they 

want to go out and smear and tell half-truths . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Tricky little half-truths! 

 

MR. STEUART:— Not too tricky, either because the people recognize it. They tried this in the last 

campaign and the people recognized it. That’s why they’re still over there in Opposition and we’re still the 

Government. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to give them the truth, the whole truth. What they do with it after 

they get it, I don’t know. But don’t let them get up here in the House and cry crocodile tears in an attempt to 

use one set of figures and compare apples to oranges. The public won’t swallow this no matter how often or 

how loud they cry or how often they repeat these smears. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1251 

MR. J. E. BROCKELBANK (Saskatoon Mayfair):— Mr. Speaker, he still remains Dubious Dave in my 

estimation. He talked about narrow gravel trails, Mr. Speaker. He says, "They’re not building narrow gravel 

trails." Well, Mr. Speaker, neither is the Province of Manitoba building narrow gravel trails. This is a unit 

price comparison today with Saskatchewan versus Manitoba or Saskatchewan versus Canada. Mr. Speaker, 

for the Minister to rise and drag a red herring across this trail is inexcusable. He’s comparing what happened 

in Saskatchewan any number of years ago with what’s happening today. That’s an unfair comparison. If you 

went to the Province of Manitoba you could make the same comparison, what’s happening in Manitoba 

today to what was happening in Manitoba 20 years ago. You could make the same kind of comparison that 

has no relevance whatsoever to what we have been discussing here this afternoon, that’s the Government’s 

refusal to present the information that we asked for in this House. They’re afraid that the public will find out 

that this Government is building political highways in the Province of Saskatchewan and not supplying the 

people of Saskatchewan with value for their dollar as has been shown by the facts from the Dominion 

Bureau of Statistics. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! I believe we are debating the amendment. If I understand the record 

correctly, I think the Member has already spoken to the amendment. 

 

MR. WILLIS:— That was on No. 2, Mr. Speaker. I came in by mistake and thought you were on No. 3. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WILLIS:— Mr. Speaker, I never fail to marvel at the people on the other side of the House. The 

Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), whenever he is caught off-base, gets up and yells, and the louder 

he yells, the further off-base you know he’s been. The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), when he’s caught 

off-base, gets up and immediately becomes ugly about something. He tells somebody to shut his mouth or 

keep his mouth, . . . but there’s a difference between the two men, Mr. Speaker, even though they do sit so 

close together. The Provincial Treasurer gets up and tries to confuse the issue. He talks about building wide 

highways compared to narrow ones we built. These prices which the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) 

read into the records this afternoon were unit prices per square yard, and you have just so many square yards 

whether you have a mile or whether you have 20 miles. It is all based on that square yard. These prices are 

regardless of the width of the road, whether it is 50 feet or whether it is 25 feet, and the Provincial Treasurer 

knows that. He is trying to confuse facts. Another statement was that when you travel along Highway No. 1 

all you have to do is close your eyes and you know you are in Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1252 

all I can say is that I’ve driven over No. 1 between Manitoba and Saskatchewan or Manitoba and Alberta. 

The only thing I can say is that my friend, the Provincial Treasurer must have been driving with his eyes shut 

because he was driving the wrong way. When you go into Manitoba, you immediately notice a difference 

between No. 1 on the Saskatchewan side. The Saskatchewan side is much better and it has been for years, 

that’s right. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. WILLIS:— And boasting about what has been done in the province, Mr. Speaker, this Government 

opposite has followed mainly the plan which was left by the previous Department of Highways, the previous 

Government. He talks about an intersection at No. 1 and No. 6. This was on the planning board when we 

left. We were planning it. He talked about the four-lane between here and Moose Jaw. We had already laid 

out the route for that, the location of that highway. We were planning to build it. We weren’t going to have a 

crash program or have it built in one year or half a year. This Government’s crash program did force the 

prices up. The unit cost prices, not the mileage prices. It can boast all it wants about spending money, but 

that’s all it spent. It has really spent money, wasted money, Mr. Speaker. Then talking about opening the 

north, my friend, the Provincial Treasurer doesn’t know anything that happens, that hasn’t happened north of 

Prince Albert, say. But even north of Prince Albert we had a contract for the extension of No. 102 north of 

the Churchill River. It isn’t finished yet, four years, and it isn’t finished yet. And the contract for 104, north 

of Canoe Lake, you finished with it. That’s right, you gave it up. You wasted money here again, boasting 

about this. 

 

MR. STEUART:— Where does the road go? 

 

MR. WILLIS:— And the Minister doesn’t even know that there is a road from Smeaton to Flin Flon, No. 

106. This was built long before his time, but he does know about the road which they built from No. 102 

across to No. 106 for a mining company. I was looking at the traffic count regarding this road, Mr. Speaker, 

and I see that at each end of this road, there were traffic counts of 15 vehicles a day, a great help to a mining 

industry! This means at the most, 7 trucks, 7 going one way, probably with ore, 7 coming back empty and a 

car thrown in for good measurement, 15 vehicles a day using this highway which it spent $2 million 

building. And he boasts about it. Comparing apples to oranges, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the 

Provincial Treasurer didn’t know these prices were unit prices we were talking about, unit prices whether it 

is Saskatchewan, Manitoba or Alberta. And they were comparing unit prices and DBS figures that the unit 

prices here in Saskatchewan are up 63 per cent and in Manitoba 29 per cent, twice as high here in 

Saskatchewan under the Liberal Government, and not because of an inefficient department. We have an 

efficient Department of Highways. I’m very much surprised and shocked when the Minister of Highways 

(Mr. Boldt) 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1253 

gets up and calls in question anything to do with his officials. He talks about his officials being honest. We 

know they are honest; we appointed them; they are honest. It would take a very good Department of 

Highways to keep prices down, when the Government insists that they have crash programs and they go 

ahead and build roads regardless of costs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D. W. MICHAYLUK (Redberry):— Mr. Speaker, I would like to make specific reference to some of 

the remarks that were presented in this House a few moments ago by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). 

He is talking about roads, I’d like to see those good roads, he mentioned in the part of Saskatchewan where I 

come from. We have Highway No. 40 from Prince Albert to North Battleford. I would like the Provincial 

Treasurer to take a drive over that highway and see all the bumps that there are. This highway was relatively 

a good highway two or three years ago. Today it is pitted and it is full of holes. Not only is Highway No. 40 

in bad shape, but you can select any oiled surfaced highway in Saskatchewan and it is in the same shape. For 

anyone to get up in this Legislature and say that the Department of Highways is building wide expensive 

highways is not in accordance with fact. Where are they? Between Regina and Moose Jaw, that’s about what 

your building program has amounted to. 

 

MR. STEUART:— How about Saskatoon? 

 

MR. MICHAYLUK:— That’s right. Moose Jaw and . . . Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a clipping which 

appeared in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix on November 20, 1964 and this was shortly after the Liberals were 

elected to form the Government in Saskatchewan. It’s entitled "Private enterprise best for road care, Royal 

Commission told." That was a hearing in Regina and I want to quote just parts of this report: It says, may I 

quote: 

 

The suggestions came from the Saskatchewan Road Builders Association and the Association of 

Consulting Engineers of Canada, both of which presented briefs to the Johnson Provincial Royal 

Commission on Government efficiency at its opening day of public hearings here. 

 

And then to quote further: 

 

The Road Builders Association said it was certain studies would show that private enterprise could 

handle highway maintenance work much more cheaply than Government forces. 

 

In a Return given to this Legislature in a session of 1967, Sessional Paper No. 148 and a question asked by 

the former Minister of Highways (Mr. Willis), the question was put in this manner: For all Provincial 

highway capital improvement projects with an estimated bid value exceeding $100,000 finalized in the 

current fiscal year upon which final total payments made since 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1254 

April 1, 1966 exceeded the estimated bid value by 10 per cent. a) names of contractors b) date of awarding 

each contract; c) estimated bid price and d) total final payment. I used this in the election and I’m going to 

use it again when the occasion arises. Now may I quote some of the figures, in respect of the costs, what the 

bid price was, what the final price was and the difference. Now let’s take No. 1, the contract No. C6461 

awarded on March 31, 1965. Contract price, $426,825. The final price for this contract, Mr. Speaker, was not 

$426,825 but $665,915.98 - $239,090.90 more than the contract bid price. This is efficiency, isn’t it? Mr. 

Speaker, when this contract was let there must have been other contractors who bid on the construction of 

this particular project. We see in this instance that over a quarter of a million dollars was paid more than the 

contract was let at. This is only one of many. Let us take another contract, No. C6534, awarded on May 26, 

1965. Contract price, $339,014, final price, $509,358.97, $170,344.97 more than the contract was let for. 

This is what goes on in highway building. These are the types of bids and contracts. This is what this 

Government is doing in building highways. Is there any wonder why the DBS figures show that the cost of 

building highways in Saskatchewan has exceeded every province in Canada? The Provincial Treasurer stated 

that we have used this and we misuse these facts and thus we abuse the Government. This is what I used on 

the platform and we will continue to do so. Our municipal people that have been building grid roads are 

astounded by the Department of Highways performance because they have built municipal grid roads. They 

tell me that at no time did they pay anything extra over the bid for which the contract for grid roads was let. 

But what goes on in respect of highways is evident. When a contract is exceeded by $250,000, $170,000, and 

$121,000 than the bid was let at, this is definitely misuse of public funds and that is why our cost has gone 

up by 63 per cent. Higher than in any Province in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. T. McFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture):— I think the crux of the discussion this afternoon 

all started because this Government believes in giving information. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McFARLANE:— Now for the benefit of the younger Members on the other side of the House, I think 

it can be pointed out - I’m sure they are not aware of this - but I think it can be pointed out that year after 

year after year, when we stood on the other side of the House and asked the Government of the Day that was 

not headed by the present Leader of the Opposition because he didn’t have the confidence of the people of 

the province at that time, but still the former Minister of Highways, the former Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, the former Minister of Natural Resources, the former Minister of Co-operatives and one person who 

should 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1255 

have been in the Cabinet but was never allowed to get in there, the Member for Prince Albert East-

Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky), time after time when we got up and asked a question on the comparative 

cost between the cost of building a mile of highway under the Department of Highways or Government 

crews and under private crews, we were turned down, day after day after day with less debate than we’ve 

heard here this afternoon, because invariably they said, from the Minister of Highways at the time, Jack 

Douglas, right down to the great storm trouper, Mr. Fines that it wasn’t in the public interest. So each session 

year after year when these questions were asked we could never get the information. Since 1964 because this 

Government through the Minister of Highways was honest enough to give the people of the province the 

information they sought, then they have tried to compare costs of building a unit of construction under 

Government crews versus private crews. When they go out on an election campaign they use the tactics that 

the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) here this afternoon said they would use. He said "regardless of 

whether the Minister of Highways gives us this information or not, regardless of whether it’s factual or not, 

then our Members will go out and use the type of information they want to use." This is what he inferred 

here this afternoon. The reason why you would never give us the costs of unit construction when you were 

the Government is because you never included overhead in the construction costs of your unit construction. 

In the case of your own Government crews, all this was hidden so all you ever indicated to the people of the 

province at that time and to the Legislature was the actual cost of construction, having no regard to the 

capitalization of the crews that you had under your service. But this hasn’t been the case with this 

Government. And then the Leader of the Opposition says the highways were in a deplorable condition. We 

sat in this House year after year, knowing that just prior to election, the Leader of the Government of that 

day, the Premier of the Province would see to it that a highway was oiled or paved from Regina to Weyburn, 

his home seat. A year or two after each election, the highway would be abandoned. It wasn’t even fit for jack 

rabbits and parts of it are still down there as evidence of the waste and squandering of public monies at that 

time. You drive down there and you’ll still see parts of those highways. But after every election, this had to 

be taken care of - he had to win that seat. Well when he joined the Federal NDP, the party went into 

oblivion. Under the present Government this hasn’t been the case and we’ve saved the people of the 

province hundreds of thousands of dollars. But I want to say this to the former Minister of Highways 

delegation after delegation would come in asking for hard topping, asking for oiling, asking for 

improvements in highways. He turned them down, I suppose possibly because they weren’t represented by a 

person of his political faith in the Government. Year after year, the people from the southern part of the 

province, part of this province right through to the north asked you to take portions of No. 35, which should 

have been in the highway system into the system and relieve the municipalities concerned. Year after year 

for almost 20 years, delegations on behalf of those who used Highway No. 35 came in to see the Minister of 

Highways. Year after year those people who had used 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1256 

Highway No. 47 came in to see you as a Minister and your predecessor. For 20 years they were turned down. 

Today those parts are both in the highway system and portions are being oiled. Then the Member for 

Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank), got up and said his piece. He didn’t tell the people of this House that 

when his father represented the constituency of Kelsey for some 30 years, all he ever provided for those 

people in all those years was some 13 miles of dust-free highway. Thirteen miles after 30 years of sitting in 

this House. His successor, the present Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) has got up on occasions and 

complained because now after four years of Liberal Government, they’ve got a tremendous mileage of dust-

free roads, and because we didn’t go out and put salt on them they were a little icy this year. So this is the 

type of thanks the Government gets for going in and helping the people of that area of the province. Thirteen 

miles under 30 years of CCF and today because there isn’t a little bit of salt on the roads and they are a little 

bit icy, in spite of the fact they are all hardtop, then he feels justification for complaint. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, all this argument this afternoon simply boils down to the fact that this Government, 

after 20 years of Socialist Government withholding this information, is willing to provide this information to 

the people of the province. When the Minister wants to give the full information, then it should go out to the 

people in the interests of the Department of Highways and in the interests of all the taxpayers. Now they are 

trying to amend it so that it couldn’t be put into this form. The Leader of the Opposition says he is quite 

willing to have the people on this side of the House go out and carry on these rumor mongering campaigns in 

which they have no equal in any province in Canada as far as starting rumors or rumor mongering is 

concerned. But he wants to be able to get the type of information that they can twist and warp to suit their 

particular conditions and suit it to those people in the province who may be inclined to listen to them. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the point is well taken by the Minister of Highways when he asked to have this 

return amended, so that the people of the province could get the full information and an honest comparison 

between the prices of units that are constructed by private crews versus Government crews. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F. MEAKES (Touchwood):— Mr. Speaker, I’m a very good-natured man and I hesitated to enter this 

debate until the Provincial Treasurer got into it. When he talked of all the good roads in Saskatchewan and 

how smooth they were, I would invite him to come into Touchwood. There isn’t a good road in there 

anymore. They’ve all been ruined since this Government took office. If he is talking about waste then I’d like 

to point out to him that piece of Highway No. 10 between Ituna and Melville which has been rebuilt and 

oiled, and now it’s going to be oiled the second time, according to the Minister of Highway’s statement in 

the House in a 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1257 

previous debate. I just want to point out this one thing, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll try to come back to what we are 

discussing. The Minister of Agriculture just said that they are trying to give us all the information. I want to 

suggest to this House that it is very much the same as if I contracted to build a house and the contractor in 

the end refused to separate the cost between the cost of painting a house and the cost of erecting the building. 

All we are trying to do is to find out the final figure divided in the two pieces of work, the two contracts and 

just two contracts, the contract of building the roads and the contract of hard-surfacing the road. And I say 

that he is not giving all the information. He refuses to separate the information into two so that we can get a 

true picture. So for this reason, Mr. Speaker, I say the Minister of Highways should give this House the 

information as requested by the Member for Kinistino. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. B. D. GALLAGHER (Yorkton):— Mr. Speaker, I only want to say a few words about this. The 

Opposition want to get a set of figures that weren’t very accurate to go out in the country and try and prove 

something, a set of figures that weren’t very accurate, Mr. Speaker. I think even a Socialist should know that 

no person can tell exactly how much or what portion of the maintenance and the overhead and the storage 

and the shop facilities should be charged to a particular section of a piece of highway. But what they wanted 

to do was what I got quite used to last fall, listening to my CCF opponent from Yorkton talking about the old 

Liberal pork barrel. He said this is the old Liberal pork-barrel method of building highways. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, to shut him up - and we did shut him up by a considerable majority - I had a joint meeting with him 

that shut him up once and for all, when he made this accusation at a public meeting that this was the old 

Liberal pork-barrel method of building highways. I went to the trouble, Mr. Speaker, of contacting the 

Department in Regina here, I had done that last winter sometime and lost the figures and I did it again just 

before the election to counteract the accusation made by my friend from Melville. The figures I got show that 

in the last year of the CCF Government, they moved one-third as much dirt as we moved in 1966. They built 

one-half as many highway miles, less than one-half as many highway miles. They paved just less than half as 

many highway miles. We moved five times as many cubic yards of gravel. We did this, Mr. Speaker, using a 

larger percentage of contracting services than we did Government services, but we didn’t have to spend 

three, four or five times as much money in our capital budget to do it. Surely, Mr. Speaker, all they are 

looking for is a set of figures that they know are not going to be very accurate, that they can go out into the 

country and peddle this to try and make a few cheap votes. 

 

MR. J. MESSER (Kelsey):— Just how stupid does the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) think the 

voters in Kelsey are? He makes 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1258 

reference to Mr. Brockelbank only building 13 miles of dust-free road in that constituency. In spite of 

redistribution and a great many rumors that went around that constituency against me and slandering me, I’m 

still the Member in this House with 90 some odd votes. If they want a by-election it will be 900 and some 

odd votes after that. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— He made further reference that I have all dust-free roads in Kelsey now. He’s forgotten 

several hundred miles that are still gravel surfaces and dust. He also has neglected to talk with his colleague 

across the aisle from him in regard to 8½ miles of road built west of Hudson Bay. It started in 1966 and it 

still isn’t finished. Thirty-three days overtime worked now last year in the best construction year this 

province has ever seen and is there anything being done about it? Nothing. This is where the waste of our 

money in the highway program is going. He made further reference to an icy and hazardous driving 

condition in my constituency which he brushed off as being highly overrated, it really didn’t amount to very 

much. The Minister of Highways was aware of it too and it did amount to a great deal. There very well could 

have been death and injury involved in this. There were dangerous, hazardous, ice conditions, December, 

January and February, and for several hundred dollars, the Department of Highways would not remove those 

conditions. Instead it gives all the money that is being appropriated to highways to contractors for exorbitant 

prices and does not build the mileage of roads that there should be for the dollar value that is invested in 

them. He further mentioned for the younger Members’ benefit - I guess he considers me one - that they were 

answering questions and this is why they got into trouble. They are not answering questions and the only 

reason they give for not answering questions is, they say, that the former Administration did not answer 

questions. And I say they did, but this is irrelevant. I’ve heard the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of 

Highways, the Minister of Mineral Resources, the Provincial Treasurer, the Minister of Welfare, all say this, 

because the former Administration wouldn’t answer questions so they are not going to. Now what kind of a 

Government is this? I’m not concerned about the former Administration, I’m concerned about the problems 

right now and the people I represent. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER:— And I suggest that, if they don’t soon smarten up, this old, old government is going to be 

replaced by a younger, vigorous one that moves ahead and this is the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. I. WOOD (Swift Current):— I believe the Hon. Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) indicated that 

there were two pieces of road under consideration 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1259 

here, and there were different standards of construction used which would have a bearing on the cost per 

mile and such. I’d like to point out that in these questions and in both questions that have been asked this 

afternoon, the first thing that was asked was to what standard the highway was built? So I think that this is 

taken care of in the questions themselves. They are asking to what standard the highway is built. We all 

recognize the fact that it costs more to build a good highway than what it does to build a poor one. 

 

The Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) was speaking in regard to what the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) had said about the rise in the cost of building in highways in Saskatchewan in the 

years since the Liberals have come to power. The Hon. Leader of the Opposition pointed out that there had 

been a drastic increase in the cost of building highways in Saskatchewan in the years since 1963. The Hon. 

Treasurer rose to his feet and told us in effect that it cost more to build good roads than what it costs to build 

poor ones. Well, we all know this, Mr. Speaker. We know that it costs more to build an overpass than it does 

to go straight through. This is not something new that the Hon. Provincial Treasurer was telling us but what 

he was trying to drag a red herring over, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that what this price index as put out by the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics is not dealing with miles of road in regard to the raise in cost, is not 

comparing good roads with poor roads or new roads with old roads. It’s comparing the cost of specific parts 

of building a highway, the cost of moving a yard of dirt, the cost of paving a square yard of highway and 

such. It’s got nothing to do with the cost of building a good mile compared with the cost of building a poor 

mile. 

 

This paper, Mr. Speaker, is put out by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics on December, 1967, "Prices and 

Price Indexes." It says the revised base weighted highway construction price indexes, 1956, equals 100 for 

the period 1956 to 1966 - they are presented on pages 5-20 of this issue. Indexes are published for seven 

provinces and for an aggregation of these provinces. On page 2, I believe, it says: "The revised base-

weighted highway construction price indexes, all items and major components combined and Provincial 

indexes annually from 1956 to 1966 and 1956 equal 100." If I may read this to you, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The revised base-weighted highway construction prices indexes presented herein for the period of 

1956 to 1966 include seven provincial indexes and aggregate indexes for these provinces. 

 

Take note of this: 

 

The indexes express the relationship of prices highway departments are paying in any given year to 

prices paid in the base period for an unchanging or equivalent program of construction. 

 

We are not comparing narrow roads with wide roads, we are 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1260 

comparing the basic components of these highways. Prices included in the prices in the index relate to bid 

items of contracts awarded and to prices the Departments pay for material supplied. I go down a little 

further: 

 

The price indexes of highway construction in Canada, express prices paid by provincial governments 

in contracts awarded for highway construction each year as a percentage of prices paid in 1956. 

Base-weighted indexes are published annually and measure the effect of price change on the cost of 

specific programs of highway construction in Canada represented by highway construction contracts 

to $50,000 or more awarded by specified provincial governments over the period of 1956 to 1966. 

Weights of items in the index representing the relative importance of units of construction in the 

specified base-period are held constant. Only prices change from year to year and the index thus 

measures the movement of prices through time. The all-items index or its components are useful for 

planning and budgeting for highway construction programs, in escalating or updating previously 

costed road-work, in estimating replacement costs of previously completed road work and as 

historical measurement of price trends in highway construction. 

 

It makes it very clear here in this following paragraph if you’ll bear with me a minute, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Prices contained in the index are . . . for units of construction work put in place such as an acre of 

clearing, a cubic yard of earth excavation or a ton of bituminous hot-mix paving. 

 

The Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has endeavored to make the Legislature think this afternoon that 

what this index was talking about was the comparison of one mile of road work, a poor mile of road work, 

he is trying to intimate, as compared to a good mile of road work. That is not what these figures are talking 

about, Mr. Speaker. They are talking about the cost as it says here very clearly: "For the units of construction 

work put in place, such as an acre of clearing, a cubic yard of earth excavation or a ton of bituminous hot-

mix paving." Under this Government, Mr. Speaker, the figures that are shown in this report show very 

clearly that the costs of these things have escalated tremendously in this province, not the cost of building a 

good mile as compared with a poor mile, but the cost of putting one yard of earth in place has grown under 

this Government as compared to what it was under the old Government. What the Provincial Treasurer has 

had to say in this debate is simply a matter of a red herring trying to confuse the issue and to confuse the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan as to what is being done with their money in regard to road building. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1261 

HON. A. C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources):— Mr. Speaker, I will be very, very brief. I am 

not going to speak long or ramble on to make the point I want to make. I want to reply to the Member for 

Redberry (Mr. Michayluk). You know I presume he has great confidence in the former Minister of Highways 

and I presume he is naive enough to take everything the former Minister of Highways tells him as gospel. He 

stood up - and I think it’s through misinformation, I wouldn’t like to attribute any other motive to him - and 

said: "You know under the NDP and in former Government, there was never an overrun on any highway 

contract." He said, "What the contract price was that’s what the cost of the highway was and now we want an 

accounting of these extra monies." I just happen to have with me, Mr. Speaker, . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON:— . . . mention of grid roads in the municipalities, I did not mention highway 

construction. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. CAMERON:— Oh well, I understand it better now. Ahhhh! He wasn’t as naive as I thought he was, 

Mr. Speaker. Because I have a little information here which probably he does know about and that’s why he 

left out highways. Now I want to give you Highway No. 3 as an example between Manitoba border and a 

point 12 miles west, done in May, 1962. The contract price was $97,000, the final price paid was 

$122,036.54, $2,500 per mile more than what that contractor contracted the job for, an overrun of 26 per 

cent. I’ll give you another one, just down in the south, Highway No. 18 between Glen Ewen and Oxbow. A 

contract was let April, 1963; it was completed in 1964. The contract price was $588,900, final price 

$687,128.24. Let there be no more talk about no overrun on construction of highways. Let there be no further 

talk that the contract price was the guaranteed price and it was the finished price. If your Minister of 

Highways had been telling you that, ask him to check again on Highway No. 3 and Highway No. 18. As I 

said in one of my other debates, you know, Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to eat a whole egg to know it’s bad. 

All I quote is two instances because they indicated precisely what I set out to do. 

 

The House recessed until 7:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

MR. E. KRAMER (The Battlefords):— Mr. Speaker, we heard quite a lot about highways and the cost of 

highways from the Members across the way and all apparently because they don’t want to, or are afraid to, 

answer one or two simple questions about the cost of highways. It seems to be that I have never seen a 

greater performance of throwing up smoke screens that we have over these two sections of highways that the 

Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) would like to know about. 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1262 

It would seem to me that it would have been much easier and saved a great deal of time in this House, if the 

Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) had done what he should have done and answered the question. 

 

As someone said earlier, we have heard a great deal from one of the Members over there suggesting that any 

Member could go into any Department and look at the files and get the answers. But after Mr. Lloyd, the 

Leader of the Opposition, exposed the facts that highway construction had gone up 63 per cent in 

Saskatchewan, according to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, when he exposed what has actually been 

happening and proved what we have said all along has been happening, there was a great flurry and a great 

to-do. We saw the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) come out with his red herring. He started talking about 

the width and the height of the roads, and all the time all we were talking about was a cubic yard, a cubic 

yard of dirt in place, as the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) has said. All we got from over there was a 

cubic yard of dust thrown in the eyes of the public. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER:— And there is nobody that can blow the dust better than the Member for Maple Creek 

(Mr. Cameron). He stands up in here, Mr. Speaker, straightens out his toupee and puts forth with the greatest 

of gusto, laboring like the proverbial elephant that he brings in the gnat. The Member for Redberry (Mr. 

Michayluk) referred to what his municipal people had told him about the cost of highways and that they had 

not paid for overrun. Certainly there is some reason for some overrun. But, Mr. Speaker, never in the history 

of this province has there been such a great deal of overrun as there has been since this Government took 

office. Never has there been such a great increase of costs. Never before has a Government been so lax in 

protecting the public purse. 

 

It is all very well for the Member for Prince Albert (Mr. Steuart) to talk about bumpy roads. Well we know 

about bumpy roads in Saskatchewan. There are more bumps per mile and more Thatcher holes per mile in 

this province today than there has ever been in our highway system for the last 15 years. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KRAMER:— Anybody travelling in Saskatchewan or through Saskatchewan knows about it and they 

know it well. He talks about coming into Saskatchewan. Have you ever come in recently, Mr. Treasurer? 

Have you come in from Alberta? Did you come in during the past four years? Have you come in on No. 40 

from Alberta? It would jar the head off a woodpecker on either one. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— You are the woodpecker that ought to know. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1263 

MR. KRAMER:— The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) is so used to walking up to his hips in the 

backyard of his barn that he doesn’t know a good hardtop highway from a poor one, and anything looks good 

to him. We have heard nothing in the last three or four years except about money spent, money spent but we 

never hear much about miles built, do we? We hear about how wide they are but we never hear about any of 

them getting finished. People of Saskatchewan have never suffered so many unfinished miles. Well, we 

don’t all travel all over the province. All I know is the area that I have had the unhappy privilege of 

travelling over. Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you this that they are pretty unhappy miles when you travel over 

many of the miles of north western Saskatchewan. True, some of the roads have been completed. No. 26 has 

been improved a great deal up to St. Walburg. But while they are improving certain sections of roads, they 

have allowed other roads that were erstwhile good roads, as the Member for Redberry said, to go to pot. And 

this all started, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier in 1964 went on his so-called saving binge. A 20 per cent cut 

in maintenance and the roof fell in on the highway system, because the water started running in. It started to 

crack up, and the maintenance dropped, and they have never caught up. They have never caught up on the 

maintenance yet. This Government has failed absolutely in providing Saskatchewan with new highways and 

it has failed completely in taking care of the highways that it has had. 

 

MR. L. P. CODERRE (Gravelbourg):— Open your eyes, man! 

 

MR. KRAMER:— Well maybe they have improved in some of the Liberal constituencies. We have about 

13 miles in and around North Battleford. That’s 13 miles! We need several more. A few miles of super-

highway built at too great and wasteful a cost. 

 

MR. W. R. THATCHER (Premier):— We go into Estimates tomorrow night if you want to know . . . 

 

MR. KRAMER:— All right. Maybe you will go on high with Estimates, but you have asked for a debate on 

this by refusing to answer the question of costs. Mr. Speaker, I think that we have every right to tell them and 

answer the debate from that side of the House. 

 

The Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) talks about the clover-leafs that it has built and how it is saving 

lives. Well I know about a couple of clover-leafs you didn’t build at North Battleford where you could have 

saved some lives. You built one on the other side of the River where there is far less traffic, but right on top 

of the hill at North Battleford in between the city and the Saskatchewan Hospital, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

hazard that the Chamber of Commerce has raised with the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt). He absolutely 

refused 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1264 

to even put in an ordinary stop sign there let alone build an overpass. The overpass would have been much 

better there where there is traffic than on the south side of the river and even that wasn’t marked well enough 

and there was a death there. So don’t tell us, Mr. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), about the lives that you 

saved. I can tell you about some lives that have been lost, because the stop signs weren’t there. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Member would like me to rise on a point of order? 

 

MR. KRAMER:— Certainly. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— I wonder if it wouldn’t be in order if we kept this debate on Highway No. 3 from 

Kinistino to Birch Hills. We do plan to go on Highways estimates, the first item of Estimates, and I would 

suggest to the Hon. Members that they could raise these points on that occasion. We have had a two-hour 

debate on this now. Really couldn’t we get on with the House business now? 

 

MR. KRAMER:— Mr. Speaker, I would be quite happy to get on with the rest of the business, but the point 

is this, that certain things were said by the other side of the House. And if they were said in a certain debate, 

I think that it is proper to answer them. I am simply answering some of the things that were said. The 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) said that these people over here, the people on this side of the House, 

smeared the Highway program before the election. I want to tell you this, that the waste on the Highway 

program was the issue in the last election at The Battlefords. I have a statement here and this is the North 

Battleford News Optimist, September 29, 1967, which reports the Premier’s mass rally. Mind you, it is a 

little over-stated as to 700 people being there. There might have been 500. That was the night that the kids 

were all out there having a good time, and they were served free cokes and a lot of the bottles had loose tops 

and so on. This was a wonderful evening when the Premier was there. But the candidate who has gone to his 

reward right on the front page Sparrow asks, "Give me a chance", says the headlines. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Mr. Speaker, I must ask you to rule. Surely this has nothing to do with the Resolution 

that we are debating. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— It is my personal opinion that the debate must relate to the cost and the comparative 

costs of construction, reconstruction cost of surfacing and mileage involved. One group is asking for one 

type of information in regard to costs and an amendment in regard to the other, or further, or different types 

of information has been moved. Now we are on the amendment, "What was the cost of reconstruction 

including surfacing?" That is the basis of the amendment. Members will have to relate 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1265 

themselves to the cost of construction and reconstruction of the highway system. I doubt very much if a rally 

in North Battleford and cokes, etc. has much to do with this. 

 

MR. C. G. WILLIS (Melfort-Tisdale):— Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. Earlier this afternoon you may 

remember, I rose on a point of order to bring the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) back to the point, back to 

the motion which we were discussing. It was then at that point that he started roaming away off the motion 

entirely. If he can do it, I don’t see why our Members can’t answer him. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The motion before the House involves the costs of construction or reconstruction of a 

particular section of highway, and the cost of the surfacing of that particular section of highway, also the 

mileage involved. That is just the one mile and you can’t discuss much on that. However, the motion does 

bring up the comparative and relative cost of construction and reconstruction in the province, including 

surfacing and the amendment also brings that up. It is the cost of construction, reconstruction, including 

surfacing of highways that we are debating and its relation to that particular area and particular section 

mentioned in the main motion. 

 

MR. KRAMER:— Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that this ruling hadn’t been brought down somewhat 

sooner. Everyone in the House knows that the debate has ranged pretty freely. The reply here was to 

statements made on the other side of the House suggesting that we had been making improper statements on 

election platforms and that we had lost the election because of these improper statements. I was only 

replying. If the Premier is sensitive about the statements of his candidate and of the statements that he made, 

fine, I’ll be glad to drop this. We’ll continue on. I want very briefly to suggest that when it comes to costs, 

that costs are the things that we are after. I would like somebody who is able to understand the difference 

between a yard of dirt in place and a mile of highway to reply somewhere along the line on the measurement 

of cost. I would like someone on the other side of the House to get up and explain this to the Provincial 

Treasurer because apparently he doesn’t know. Apparently the Provincial Treasurer doesn’t know. No 

wonder the Treasury is in such tough condition. 

 

MR. STEUART:— I know the difference between a square yard and a cubic yard and that’s more than you 

know. 

 

MR. KRAMER:— Well, that may be true. But I know the difference between a square over there and the 

ones on this side of the House, too. And, boy, they sure are looking pretty square this session. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1266 

MR. KRAMER:— Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say that this particular amendment and motion are 

something that should have been answered. The question that we have tried to have answered has been in the 

public interest. Certainly we are entitled to this information, and I think that the Minister and the 

Government should have a second look. It’s all very well for them to talk about money and miles. We are 

interested in the money spent and we are interested in the miles built. Mr. Speaker, what we want them to do 

is to spend a little less money and get a few more miles built and stop wasting the money on capricious little 

deals over the entire province, on things that the Government should not be concerning itself with. We are 

sick and tired of seeing Russian thistle patches growing on highways that were built three years ago. We are 

sick and tired at North Battleford of going out of our way around Bolts Bend at Langham. After spending 

millions of dollars there you still haven’t finished it and you are still inconveniencing the public. Had you 

built that highway where it should have been built, it would have been finished now and at a great deal less 

cost. 

 

Cost, waste, Mr. Speaker, no matter where you look. And these people stand up and try to defend this 

program. Then to make matters worse they refuse to give an accounting to the public when they are asked 

simple questions in this Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C. P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare):— Mr. Speaker, I just can’t refrain from making a 

couple of comments. First of all we have sat here for the last two and one-half hours and listened to the 

Opposition talk about unit prices, but not once in the debate have they compared the cost of highway 

construction in the rest of Canada. It is very easy, Mr. Speaker, to compare the increase in unit prices from 0 

to 10 as compared to 5 to 10, because if there is one thing that is obvious as everyone in the Province of 

Saskatchewan knows, it is that in 1954 to 1964 they spent less per mile, less per vehicle and less per car than 

any other Province in Canada. There is no question that they built the cheapest roads, but they also built the 

poorest roads in Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they are going to talk about the cost of highway construction, there is only one valid 

argument and that is, the cost of highway construction in the Province of Saskatchewan is superior to that of 

the Province of Manitoba and Alberta. From what I understand the unit prices in Alberta are higher. Unit 

prices in Manitoba are comparable. So if this is true it merely means that the cost of highway construction in 

Saskatchewan has been created by the improved standards. 

 

We heard the Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) say that there was no difference in the standard of 

highways. We heard the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) say the same thing. 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1267 

Well let’s be realistic. It costs a lot more to haul dirt from a burrowed pit than it does from a ditch. If you are 

going to build a good, first-class highway, and you are going to haul dirt and clay from a burrowed pit within 

a half mile from the highway or more, it is going to cost a lot more money than it is to dig it out of the ditch. 

The standard of highway is definitely related to the cost per unit. There is no question about it. Mr. Speaker, 

the cost of highway construction in the Province of Saskatchewan is no higher than in the rest of Canada. It 

is the type and caliber of the roads that they built. 

 

A good illustration, Mr. Speaker, is the amount of highway construction. I took some figures from 1966 and 

1963-64. For example, the number of cubic yards moved in 1963 as compared to 1966 - 11,636,000 cubic 

yards to 32,249,000 in 1966; miles of grading - 345 in 1963 as compared to 677 in 1966; paving - 128.4 

miles compared to 242 miles; tons of gravel - 309,000 as compared to 1,565,000. How much money did we 

spend? Those are all two and three and four times as much, whereas the amount of money is $47,520,000 in 

1966-67, as compared to $22,865,930 in 1963. If these are, Mr. Speaker, the increased costs that they are 

referring to, this is the production, this is the kind of roads that the people of Saskatchewan want. They can 

go anywhere in the province and see the improvement and the people of Saskatchewan recognize it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BROCKELBANK:— Mr. Speaker, could I question the Minister before he takes his seat? Is that 

really true that you were a teacher of logic? 

 

MR. MacDONALD:— You would never have reached that class. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! The question was a very poor one and the answer was just about as bad. 

 

MR. THIBAULT:— On a point of order. Do I close the debate? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— No. The question before the House is on the amendment. Now the Member for 

Kinistino hasn’t spoken to the amendment and until the amendment is cleared away he can’t close the debate 

either. 

 

MR. THIBAULT:— Mr. Speaker, what I was asking was who has the right to close the debate? 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Nobody closes the debate on an amendment. The debate can only be closed on the main 

motion. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1268 

MR. THIBAULT:— Just so I don’t lose my final turn. Mr. Speaker, I never thought that I would start 

something like this in this House on a very simple question. Had the question been answered - and I don’t 

think that it was an unusual one - we would have saved two or three hours time of the House. This is almost 

as bad as getting some of the other information on liquor. I didn’t think that this one was as bad. 

 

I want to say that in the remarks that I have made, I don’t cast any doubt on the honesty of the Deputy 

Ministers. I want that cleared up right now. I think that it is all the fault of the Minister who does not want to 

give the information that he has. It is not that difficult to get that information, and I’ve said that before. It is 

the people in my constituency who have been asking time and time again. They are going to be disappointed 

when they cannot get the answers that they want to know. I am sure that even the Liberals in my constituency 

are going to have a pretty red face when they find out what took place here tonight. Oh, there are still a few 

and I respect them all in my constituency. 

 

When we talk about a cubic yard, whether it is a Liberal cubic yard or a CCF cubic yard, I think that they 

should weigh the same and measure the same. It is amazing when you look at the increased cost for 

Saskatchewan, 63 per cent for the cubic yard - oh, this is the cost of highways - higher than last year. I am 

quite sure that, if the figures for the stretch of highway that we are talking about had been the one that they 

used for the Dominion Bureau of Statistics figures and left the rest of the province out, that 63 per cent 

would look like fly specks. This is the reason why we are not going to get this information. 

 

As I said a moment ago, it is the decision of the Minister and I don’t blame the Deputy at all. I think you 

have some fine men back there. I am not going to be accused of casting doubt on them. It just boils down to 

a plain refusal and I don’t see any reason for it. But when the costs turn up that way, I think there is a 

deterrent fee needed on the Minister to hold him down. I didn’t know that this question was so potent, but it 

sure smoked out a few things here this afternoon. With this, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Minister will 

reconsider the question as it is straightforward. Unless he has something to hide, he is going to stick to his 

guns. This is the only reason for this being done. There is something to hide. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

The amendment was agreed to. 

 

The motion as amended was agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 - GUARANTEED PRICES FOR FARMERS 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1269 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): 

 

That this Legislature urge the Provincial Government to immediately request the Federal 

Government to adopt an agricultural policy that would ensure financial return to provide an adequate 

standard of living to farmers by guaranteeing prices of farm commodities based on the cost of 

production and subject to yearly review; such prices to be announced early enough each year to allow 

farmers to plan their current operations. 

 

MR. J. MESSER (Kelsey):— Mr. Speaker, when adjourning debate on this Resolution, I said that this 

Province relies heavily on agriculture for a stable economic position, and that at present the farmers’ 

conditions and the agricultural economy of Saskatchewan are poor, and all prospects point toward no 

improvement or in fact toward possibilities of getting worse, unless the Federal Government adopts an 

agricultural policy that would ensure financial returns to provide an adequate standard of living to farmers, 

by guaranteeing prices of farm commodities based on cost of production, as outlined in the Resolution 

moved by the Hon. Member for Touchwood. 

 

I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that all Members must agree with me in saying that within the last year a complete 

reversal has overtaken the international wheat market, revealing a pattern of declining prices and falling 

world trade which developed in the first few months of 1967 and 1968 crop year. The major factor of several 

contributing to this change was that of abundant crops in most wheat-growing areas during 1966 and 1967. 

This surplus of wheat and the reduction of international wheat prices show us how unstable the international 

wheat market can be. It also shows us that it is of utmost necessity to maintain an International Wheat 

Agreement which sets out reasonable boundaries within which the price of wheat can fluctuate. I might say 

here that it is indeed unfortunate that the Federal Liberal Government did not foresee the seriousness of this 

situation during the negotiations of the last International Wheat Agreement, because of their shortsightedness 

in thinking that the price of wheat would not drop below the old floor price of $1.95½ per bushel, No. 1 

Northern at the Lakehead. When the price did drop below this floor, they were further overly optimistic in 

thinking that it would only be one or two cents below that old floor price. We now find that it is now four 

cents below the floor price which means that the Federal Government will have to subsidize somewhere in 

the neighborhood of $15 million to make up for this downward trend, in the price of wheat. Mr. Speaker, the 

only reason that the Federal Government agreed to subsidize this wheat to the floor price of the old 

International Wheat Agreement was because they were trying to get on the good side of the western farmer 

and also because the Provincial Liberal Government of this Province was in the midst of an election 

campaign when the price of wheat dropped. Because of this 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1270 

relationship between this Provincial party and the Federal party, the Federal Government was forced to 

subsidize. Mr. Speaker, I am not saying that subsidies were not in order, under the circumstances, but the 

reasons for them certainly were not in the best interests of the farmer. Also, Mr. Speaker, if the Federal 

Liberal Government had been aggressive in the world wheat negotiations it could very well be that 

agreement may not have terminated. It is also evident that this subsidy is not sufficient to give the farmer the 

fair return he deserves for his produce. It is evident from lack of grain sales and from poor crops grown in 

the Province of Saskatchewan last year that there are a great many farmers who are already in financial 

difficulty, and, if action is not taken by both Provincial and Federal Governments, this financial situation 

will compound itself to a magnitude whereby the farmer will not be able to continue to operate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture in Saskatchewan is an industry of small units. The family farm predominates with 

no single farm unit large enough to affect to any marked degree the overall output of any given farm product. 

In this respect agriculture stands in marked contrast to centralization of urban industries as we know them 

today. In most elemental sets agriculture is one of the few remaining examples of perfectly competitive 

economy, as described in the economic textbooks. For the great majority of farms the management function 

and most of all the labor are combined in the same person. This is in contrast to the situation in nearly all 

other large urban industries where management and labor are not combined in the same person. Here a 

management can reduce its labor force, thus cutting expenses and reducing the output of the firm, thereby 

helping to prevent disastrous declines in price. Then, too, there are enormous differences in the space 

requirements of agriculture and those of non-farm industries. This difference in area markedly affects the 

problems and interests of the two groups of the industries. Personal contact, exchange of ideas and unity of 

action are far more difficult in agriculture than in most urban industries, for important differences in 

emphasis in the publicly supported activity of the two groups. Because of the structure and the nature of its 

labor force agriculture in Saskatchewan is one of the most competitive industries in the national economy. 

Since no unit is large enough to dominate the market or to affect significantly the national output of a given 

type of product, the individual farmer does not find it to his advantage to restrict his production as a means 

of raising the price of his product. Neither is it feasible for him to establish a price for his product, nor in 

most cases to put a brand name on it. Now, Mr. Speaker, for the purposes of farm net income it is difficult to 

take a single year as being a representative, owing to the unusual large year to year fluctuations in the farm 

incomes. 

 

However, the average farm net income in Saskatchewan for a five-year period between 1944 and 1948, 

inclusive, amounted to $275 million a year. During the most recent five-year period 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1271 

we have available from 1954 to 1958, farm net income averaged somewhat lower than $265 million. But 

unlike other industries no allowance is made for the labor return of the farm operator himself. There were 

103,391 farm operators in 1956 and, if an allowance of even $2,500 per farm operator were made for the 

labor input of the farm operator and his family, the average return on capital investment in Saskatchewan 

during the past five years has been negligible. Accordingly it may be seen, with the farm capital increasing 

by 120 per cent in a period between 1946 and 1956, the Saskatchewan farmer, unlike his industrial 

counterpart, has not been obtaining a reasonable rate of return on his capital investment. Indeed because of 

some of these adverse trends cited above, a situation may be developed where the farmer sells his food on 

occasions below the cost of production. Where the farmer said he is selling food below the cost of 

production he is telling the truth. That was one thing the Royal Commission of Price Spreads learned during 

the hearings throughout the country. How does the farmer do this? He does it by sheer persistence and 

tightening his belt, forgetting about depreciation and living on his capital. Persistence is something that we 

don’t find in other fields. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Kelsey which I represent, and which is known to have some of the 

best land in Saskatchewan, there are farmers who do not have enough grain to fill a five-bushel quota, and 

there are others who have grain available but have only a three-bushel quota compared to six or seven-bushel 

quota at the same time last year. These are primary factors along with lower livestock prices, higher 

machinery and operating costs, higher taxes and ever spiralling interest rates that have recently reached 7 3/4 

per cent in many banks. In fact there are a great many farmers not only in northern Saskatchewan, but in the 

entire Province of Saskatchewan who are not able to borrow money from banks at this exorbitant interest 

rate. It’s not because they don’t have the assets for the necessary collateral, but it is because the banking 

industry’s long-range forecast for agriculture is poor, consequently making bankers think that farmer’s 

repayments of loans would be poor - which they would be. There are also farmers in the province who 

cannot borrow money through the Farm Improvement Loan Plan because the bankers consider this interest 

rate too low. Now, Mr. Speaker, how ridiculous can a situation be, the farmer who is caught in a cost-price 

squeeze that he can do nothing about himself personally, and when he needs operating capital, he can’t get 

money, because the interest rates on one hand are too high and on the other hand he can’t get money because 

the bank won’t lend it because the interest rate is too low and it is not a profitable enterprise for them. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, is the present Liberal Government either federally or provincially doing anything to correct 

this? At present they are not. 

 

Further indications that we need guaranteed farm prices for commodities is shown in a survey taken by the 

Economic Council of Canada, which shows that of the three prairie provinces, Saskatchewan has 52 per cent 

of its rural families classified as poor, which means that their total farm products sold is less 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1272 

less than $3,750. That is 52 per cent of its rural families. Our neighbour to the east, Manitoba, is nearly as 

bad, although not quite. It has 48 per cent of its rural families in the same circumstances. To the west, we 

find Alberta has 40 per cent of its rural families in the same circumstances. These statistics, Mr. Speaker, are 

indeed disappointing, I am sure not only to me, but to all Members of this Assembly, for they show that 

Saskatchewan has the highest percentage of poor rural families of the three prairie provinces. This is true in 

spite of the province offering the best opportunity for agricultural development and production of all three of 

these provinces. 

 

It is further disappointing to see livestock drastically decline in the last several years. Cattle on 

Saskatchewan farms as at December 1, 1964, were some 2,038,000 head. In December 1, 1967 this had 

dropped to 1,945,000 head, or reduction percentagewise of 4.6 per cent. In the case of the hog industry, 

although the present Government has increased its number of hogs, the farmer has increased the number of 

hogs, due to its program of diversification, which I do not criticize entirely, but the price of hogs has dropped 

drastically because it has done nothing in regard to stabilizing the price. There should have been a floor 

established here, so that the farmer can maintain this industry he goes into as a profit-making one. Sheep in 

Saskatchewan, in spite of all the Premier’s urging in his Government to encourage and expand, sheep 

production in this province has dropped. On December 1 of 1964 there were 105,000 sheep in this province. 

To December 1 of 1967 this had dropped to some 83,000, or percentagewise a drop of 21 per cent. As for 

egg production in the Province of Saskatchewan, 1963 there were 29,142,000 dozen eggs produced in the 

province. In 1967 this had dropped to 21,823,000 dozen, or down 25.1 per cent. Poultry on Saskatchewan 

farms as of June 1, 1964, were some 6,840,000. On June 1, 1967, this had dropped to 6,480,000, or a drop of 

5.3 per cent. Milk production has dropped some 26.8 per cent from 1.1 billion pounds to approximately 815 

million pounds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these decreases in livestock numbers and the slump in the production of agricultural 

productivity definitely show that this province, as other provinces, is in dire need of guaranteed agricultural 

prices that will keep in line with the cost of farm production. We have a trend, Mr. Speaker, of farms getting 

larger, but this doesn’t solve the problem, because it isn’t all farms that expand in size. It is getting so that 

only the larger, or the already large scale farms can increase their operations. Consequently there is a slow 

and steady disappearance of the average or below average farmer, and there is very little being done in regard 

to the replacement of this farmer. I believe there is something on the Statute Books of this Province in regard 

to educating farmers who no longer can make a profit-making enterprise out of their farm and putting them 

into some other field. This is something that there is nothing being done about at the present time. 

 

There are numerous other difficulties that Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers are confronted with. They 

show the urgent need 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1273 

for marketing subsidies related to production costs, or income supplements with a domestic price for wheat 

related to the price index of goods and services used by the Canadian farmer. Along with this, Mr. Speaker, 

we have to urge both the Wheat Board and Canada to seek expanding sales of Canadian commercial wheat 

for export. We must also urge the Government of Canada to acquire a new International Wheat Agreement 

under conditions and prices accepted by the International Wheat Council. We must further urge the Canadian 

Wheat Board to extend its jurisdiction to the marketing of rye, flax and rapeseed, even if it is necessary to 

have a producer plebiscite to assure the Government of the farmers’ support in this regard. We must urge 

extension of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Plan to enable all farmers to participate and allow more grain 

to be included for coverage and also bring up to date the average production yields. At present the 

production yields are taken over an average of the last 20 or 25 or 30 years, and I am sure the Minister of 

agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) will agree with me that in the last ten years the productivity in the province as 

was shown by last year has increased tremendously. So it is time that this comparison was updated to the 

times. 

 

There are other necessary needs for the farmer, such as co-ordinating farm management services to enable 

farmers to operate more efficiently, expanded research to improve the understanding of complex problems of 

farming and farmers and to find solutions to these farming problems. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, in its massive struggle for a greater share of the world’s wealth, mankind’s under-

privileged majority is embarked on a collision course with a most violent explosion of population in world 

history. World population is increasing currently at a rate of between 11/4 per cent per annum or nearly 30 

million people each year. This rate of growth is unparalleled in the history of mankind. In overall terms the 

world’s 2.7 billion population has almost doubled in the past 70 years and is rapidly approaching the level 

beyond which scientists believe the earth can no longer sustain all its inhabitants. Closer to home, within the 

next 10 years, according to the United States Census Bureau projections, the population of the United States 

will exceed the 250 million mark. It is increasing at a rate of 330 per hour. Within the next 20 years the 

United States will have a population of some 260 million, and by 40 or 50 years from now, the population 

will be well over 370 million people. This being the case there are strong grounds for considering Canadian 

agriculture not as a sick industry as many are prone to do, but as a vital bulwark in mankind’s destiny. 

 

In any event such stability in prairie agriculture continues to be the most depressing single question affecting 

the thought and attitude of the primary producer. No public policy which denies or obscures the basic 

requirements of this industry can hope to achieve ready response or lasting success. The inevitability of this 

search for stability has its roots in the physical and economic environment of the prairie region. To ignore 

this basic need by letting it drift means radicalism, then bitterness 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1274 

leading in turn to sectional strife and the eventual depopulation of much of our farming area contrary to 

anyone’s long-term interest. Now, Mr. Speaker, if we are going to avoid this we have to overcome the 

present cost-price squeeze that the farmer in Canada is in. The first step toward doing it is the adoption of the 

Resolution put forth by the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes), urging the Federal Government to 

incorporate guaranteed farm prices. I support this Resolution and I ask all Members in this Assembly to do 

likewise. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. A. PEPPER (Weyburn):— Mr. Speaker, I too rise in support of this Resolution, because in 

supporting it I feel that I am taking the necessary steps to try and assist our farmer friends in securing a 

square deal in the agricultural industry. I know that much of the success of our farmers depends on the 

agricultural policy that is formulated by our Federal Government at Ottawa, but it is only through pressure, 

Mr. Speaker, by us as Members from the Provincial Governments, urging the Federal Government to take 

action and to adopt policies based on the cost of production and subject to yearly review in producing farm 

commodities, that will in turn guarantee prices to provide an adequate standard of living. This, Mr. Speaker, 

is a must, if we hope to keep our agricultural industry in the forefront in our province. It is because no 

measures of protection to our farmers are being provided for them that we find so many of them in the 

dilemma that they are in today. 

 

The farmers’ costs in the last several years to produce grain or in the raising of livestock have soared as we 

all know to an all-time high. We all know that farm machinery today is getting more costlier each year. A 

tractor that could be bought for $3,700 ten years ago has now more than doubled in price. It now costs 

between $7,000 and $8,000 for the same tractor, the same size with the same accessories with it. And every 

other implement that a farmer requires to operate his farm has climbed the same proportion in price. This is 

just the initial price of the implement. Let’s just take a look at the price of repairs when these implements 

require them. Again the repairs have gone up in price in the same manner only in higher proportion. I don’t 

think I need to remind any of you Members who are farmers just how the prices have risen, when you take 

your truck to be repaired or your implement to be overhauled. Compare the cost of having this done now as 

compared to five or ten years ago. And, of course, the latest increase is the 2 cents per gallon on farm fuel. 

But the sad part, Mr. Speaker, is that the financial return to the farmer has not increased in that same period 

of time, thus we say he is caught in the cost-price squeeze. In many cases, he is being squeezed right out of 

production and is forced to fold up and try his fortunes elsewhere. 

 

Now we give industry incentives to establish within our boundaries. We guarantee prices and subsidize other 

industries. 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1275 

What is wrong with subsidizing or giving incentives to our farmers and our agricultural industry? I believe it 

is only by taking steps such as this that our farmers can plan their current operations. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, various areas of our province have had rail line abandonment, and we must face the 

facts that there are other rail lines that are certainly in great danger of being abandoned. Recently I received 

from the Board of Transport in Ottawa a letter stating that a hearing will take place regarding the closing of 

some stations. This means, Mr. Speaker, that a farmer also in these areas concerned will be faced with the 

very possible increase in delivering of his grain, because this is very often the first step, in abandonment of a 

rail line when the agent of a station is removed. So you see again, until we urge our Provincial Government 

to recommend to our Federal Government that immediate measures be taken to provide our farmers with 

prices for their commodity, and that they be increased and kept in balance with what they have to pay in 

order to produce these commodities, we as a Government are not carrying or displaying our full 

responsibilities to our farmers. 

 

If I may at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer to an article in the Weyburn Review, a weekly paper, 

of March 14th, which I think certainly is worth reading into the records here. It proves the necessity of action 

being taken to support a Resolution such as we have before us at this time. 

 

The Canadian farmer is the most efficient in the world. In the decade from 1957 to 1966, the 

Canadian farmer increased his food production by 44 per cent, Russia increased theirs by 30 per cent, 

United States increased theirs by 13 per cent. According to the 1961 census, 78 per cent of all 

commercial farms in Canada brought their owners less than $2,000 per year. Only 12 per cent have 

farm incomes of more than $3,000, while only 5.32 per cent make more than $5,000. 

 

Back in 1946, I think you can well remember, a young veteran starting out could hope to make a living on 

the farm with a capital investment of say $30,000. Today to realize a $5,000 per year income it takes 

between $100,000 and $150,000. According to C.W. Gibbings, President of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

farm index prices rose only 15 per cent in the years between 1946 and 1966, but the index of items entering 

into farm costs climbed 169 per cent. These costs now eat up about 80 per cent of a farmer’s gross sales. In 

order to earn the magic $5,000, he must sell $25,000 worth of produce. As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the 

farmer is caught in a vicious cost-price squeeze and it is only by fantastic gains in farm productivity has he 

been able to keep unit production cost within some reasonable range of selling prices. But the limit now has 

been reached. The farmer has gone about as far as he can in subsidizing the rest of the country. 

 

The question arises: should the country now start subsidizing 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1276 

the farmer? Many farmers say, No. They can see that although price supports supply some benefits to low-

income farmers, these will benefit much less than other farm groups. If we agree that subsidies are not the 

long-term solution we must bear in mind and remember that our farmers today in Saskatchewan are 

competing for world markets against farmers who are subsidized. In the United Kingdom 68 per cent of the 

net farm income is in the form of a Government subsidy. In the United States it is 39.6 per cent. Canadian 

farmers realize less than 3 per cent of income from Government subsidies. The other measure to relieve the 

squeeze might appear as higher food prices, but I would say this isn’t good. This would invite a greater flood 

of subsidized foodstuffs from abroad. One solution being advocated is to vacate the land, fewer farmers 

sharing more of the pie is the argument. This is an economic approach to a sociology problem. Most farmers 

don’t want to leave the land, especially for the uncertainties of urban life. Like it or not, Mr. Speaker, the 

farmer is being told by society today that his presence in the countryside is not wanted. The sad thing is that 

the forced migration of the farmers to the cities I think is a mistake for those without marketable skills, and 

this is 60 per cent of Canadian farmers. They have never attended high school. It is a case of transforming a 

rural poverty problem into urban unemployment problem. A sociologist, Paul Goodman, puts it: 

 

If the cheapest urban public housing costs $20,000 a unit to build, and every city has a housing 

shortage, would it not be better to give farmers $1,000 a year for 20 years, just for rent to stay at 

home and drink their own water? 

 

The growth of Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver and to bring it closer to home, Saskatoon, Regina, is not 

inevitable as we are led to believe. Our vaunted technology could as easily produce rural affluence or a co-

operative society of farmers and consumers. This, Mr. Speaker, is the tragedy of our present policy. We are 

denuding the farms to swell the city population. The problems of places like New York, Chicago, Los 

Angeles and other American stations should be a lesson to us but I am afraid that we completely ignore the 

facts. We need the countryside and the only people who can preserve the countryside for conservation, 

recreation and food for the cities are the people who already live there. By 1975, according to the United 

National Food and Agricultural Organization, the world will be in a grip of famine more terrible than a 

nuclear war. By then population growth will have exceeded the world’s agricultural abilities. There is no 

known scientific means of either increasing the world’s food supply or of decreasing the rate of population 

explosion soon enough to avoid this catastrophe. India in 1967 is the preview of Latin America, Africa and 

Asia in 1975. 

 

So I would say that in view of the foreseeable world needs for food, the Canadian Government would do 

better to encourage farmers to remain on the land and buy what they produce. This no doubt, Mr. Speaker, 

raises problems to be sure. But our chances of solving them are much better than our present aimless drift 

with no agriculture policy whatever. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to relate to you the condition many of 

our western farmers 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1277 

are in today, and why I think that action, both provincially and federally, must be taken in order for them to 

keep our agricultural industry in the forefront. 

 

Therefore, I urge all Members to support this Resolution, and in doing so I feel that we will be taking a 

positive action and a positive step to alleviate the agricultural crisis that is facing our farmers today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D. T. McFARLANE (Minister of Agriculture):— Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the Resolution I am 

going to confine my remarks this evening to the Resolution as such and leave it up to other speakers to 

review the whole field of agriculture. I am sure that every Member in this House is quite familiar with the 

problems not only on the provincial level but also on a national level. I am sure, too, that they are familiar 

with the facts that the policies set up by any national party, regardless of whether it be a Liberal party, 

Conservative party, or even a Socialist party, to come down with an overall agricultural policy designed to 

help agriculture all over Canada, would present a great many problems. 

 

The problems that they are experiencing in the Maritimes today in regard to potatoes and potato farmers, to 

milk shippers and those engaged in the dairy industry, and certainly to those many thousands of small 

farmers in the Province of Quebec engaged in the dairy industry and certainly to those many thousands of 

small farmers in Ontario engaged in those industries are examples. Any national policy designed to alleviate 

the situation in those areas of the nation could have detrimental effects for our own producers here in 

Saskatchewan. I think that one of the latest experiences has been the action of the National Dairy 

Commission in regard to the reduction of the subsidy on butterfat, where it may be designed to alleviate a 

situation in Eastern Canada, certainly is adding to a problem that we have here in Saskatchewan where we 

have no over-production of butterfat and certainly an under-production of butter. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, I am going to speak strictly to the substance of the Resolution and other Members, if 

they so wish, can deal in broader fields. The Resolution proposed by the Hon. Member for Touchwood (Mr. 

Meakes) as I said, is indeed very involved. It touches on just about every aspect of the lives of our primary 

producers here in Saskatchewan. Its scope is so wide that we cannot deal with it in adequate fashion until we 

define some guide lines. There is no question that one of the major problems that we are facing today is one 

of farm income. I am sure that’s recognized all over Canada, certainly here in our own province. 

 

We are aware that many farm families in the province do suffer from inadequate income, whose living 

standards are substantially below that which is considered adequate in these times. 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1278 

I am sure that it is one of the reasons why we have the rural development programs in this province and 

some Provincial programs directed to these people in these areas who have the lowest income in our 

province, on the basis of the 1961 census at least. 

 

However, we do not believe that the solution lies in the method proposed by the Resolution. The Resolution 

refers to the cost of production. So, Mr. Speaker, the first question then is: what is the cost of production? 

We all know perfectly well that the cost of production depends on the size of the unit. We all know that there 

are some farmers in Saskatchewan for whom present wheat prices are yielding an adequate return, and we 

know that there are many farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan to whom present wheat prices do not give 

an adequate return. I think that one of the most enlightening studies that has been done recently, was the 

Vulcan Report conducted by the firm of Hedlin and Menzies, management consultants, a study of the 

agriculture industry in the Vulcan county of Alberta. I may say, that the county of Vulcan, Alberta represents 

a good cross-section of the agricultural industry in that province. Some of the larger grain farmers and some 

of the smaller grain farmers, quite large-scale livestock enterprises, and a good cross-section of soil types 

provided material for the type of analysis that was done. And our own Farm Business Summary in 

Saskatchewan conducted by the Department of Agriculture had more or less pointed out many of the 

findings that were pointed out in the Vulcan Report. 

 

When we talk about standards of living we are recognizing that the cost of living for a farmer and his family 

is one of the factors in the cost of production. A little simple arithmetic will illustrate the effect of the size of 

unit on the cost of production. If we assume that the average farm family needs a minimum of $4,000 labor 

and management income - and this is not a very high figure today - then on a farm unit of 200 cultivated 

acres the cost then becomes $13 per cultivated acre. But on a farm of 800 cultivated acres this is a cost of $5 

per cultivated acre. Remember this is cost per cultivated acre. It means that even in a three-year rotation with 

two crops and summer-fallow, the cost of labor and management against every acre of crop is $30 per acre 

for a 200-acre farm, $20 per acre for a 300-acre farm and $7.50 for the 800-acre farm. And the same kind of 

economics applies to livestock production. To use the data in the 1967 Outlook produced by our Economics 

and Statistic Branch, it would take 200 beef cows in a cow-calf enterprise, 400 hogs, 24 dairy cows, 600 

sheep and so on for a return of about $4,000 to labor. So that is one problem. What is the cost of production? 

Whose cost of production would be used? If it is the cost of production of a modern, efficient, reasonably 

sized unit such a subsidy would mean very little, perhaps nothing to the farmer who does not have this kind 

of a unit. 

 

On the other hand it could mean a lot of added income to the larger producers. Assume that the cost in the 

case of wheat was based on 800 cultivated acres or 600, then it means that the man with 1,000 or 1,500 

cultivated acres is in even a stronger 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1279 

position than he is now. He would be in a position to bid still higher for the land to push the price of land 

still higher and put the man who is just starting or the man who is trying to expand in an even worse position 

than he is now. I think that I would like to give you some indication of how this applies in the country of 

Vulcan when I read one or two paragraphs from the study. They are related to the cost of producing a bushel 

of wheat. 

 

The cost of producing a bushel of wheat varies widely within the county. Largely on the basis of the 

size of the farm operation, as farm size grew larger, the cost of production declined. 

 

It is very interesting that large farms defined in the study as being more than 1,280 acres had an average cost 

of $1.47 a bushel in order to produce a bushel of wheat, a full 10 cents below the average for the county. On 

the other extreme farms with one section (640 acres) or less in size had a cost of $1.90 a bushel, 33 cents 

above the average of the county and 30 cents above the estimated average price realized in the low or 

medium farms. 

 

In the study, farms of 641 acres or less than 1,280 acres, the price was $1.63. While the average cost per 

bushel for the total sample was $1.57 - I think an even more impressive analysis - there was a good deal of 

variations between different groups and farms. In one classification of farms it showed that the highest cost 

per bushel to produce was $2.64 for farms in the smaller-sized category. The lowest average cost was $1.19 

per bushel for farms with 1,400 to 1,499 acres. The cost per bushel of wheat on individual farms ranged from 

a high over $3.50 to a low of $1.00. So I think this points up the fact that, when you are going to determine 

the cost of production, what size of unit are you going to select? That is one problem. What is the cost of 

production and whose cost of production would be used in the Resolution? If it is the cost of production of a 

modern, efficient reasonably sized unit, such a subsidy would mean very little, perhaps nothing to the farmer 

who had that kind of unit. On the other hand it could mean a lot of added income to the larger producer. 

Assuming the cost in a case where wheat was based on 800 cultivated acres or 600, as I said before, then it 

means that the man with 1,000 to 1,500 cultivated acres is even in a stronger position to acquire land at the 

expense of the smaller operator. 

 

The same of course holds true to the larger ranchers bidding for ranch lands as against the smaller ranchers 

in our province. The effect is somewhat different in the case of such products as eggs and pork. Again, 

however, it is obvious that a subsidy will mean much more to the larger producer than it would to the small 

producer. And often the larger producers is in a position to expand quickly and to take advantage of higher 

prices and subsidies that might be in existence. When this happens it means lower prices and then higher 

subsidy as well as surplus problems depending of course on the product. There 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1280 

would be only one way to beat the inevitable effect of subsidies, and that would be through strict production 

and controls. I am sure that all Members realize that this is what is being done in the United States. Subsidies 

or guaranteed prices are offered for wheat, for example, but the acreage that can be planted is rigidly 

controlled. And our producers have not ever in the past indicated nor do they at the moment indicate that 

they wish to get involved in this type of government regulation. 

 

The Resolution before us goes on to say that these subsidies, these prices should be announced early enough 

each year to allow farmers to plan their current operations. Well, Mr. Speaker, what does the cattleman 

whether he is in beef or dairy, do if the price next year looks too low after sitting down and reviewing these 

prices each year? Would he not breed his cows because the prices look insufficient, or would he sell them all 

and go into hogs? The grain grower can make quicker shifts. He can make them each year because he can go 

out of wheat production into barley, coarse grains or oil seeds. However, so far as our economists are 

concerned, they just haven’t been able to come up with an accurate prediction of next year’s grain market. Of 

course, this applies each and every year. We think that while farmers should have the best annual 

information available, farm planning has to be done on a longer term basis than from year to year. It is true 

that during the war years the Federal Government called the Provincial Governments into conference at 

Ottawa and at that time, plans for production could be made, because we knew that we had the contracts 

with Great Britain to supply bacon products. We knew that because of the lack of shipping facilities that 

controls had to be placed on production of wheat and so more lands were put into summer-fallow. That was 

done in years of national emergency, but I don’t think that this would be acceptable or practical to the 

farmers of Canada in peace-time. 

 

Finally I would emphasize that I am speaking of subsidy payments, based on a supposed cost of production. 

Support payments, we believe, are necessarily based on a concept of stop-loss during the trough in a price 

cycle. I may point out that at the present time there are support prices under eggs, pork and various other 

products. These are basically in effect under The Agricultural Stabilization Act. They could be improved as 

to their application in Western Canada with regard to the size of unit. These are probably outdated because 

these prices were set some years ago. The problem of farm income has always been a difficult problem and 

is not less difficult in this period of rapid change and adjustment. In Saskatchewan we have been 

emphasizing the need of farmers with limited acreage expanding their enterprise to beef cattle, sheep and 

hog enterprises and have set up programs accordingly. We have attempted to assist through providing 

community grazing and by various incentive grants. This is probably not the appropriate time to deal at 

length with the question of farm income, but we are convinced that the concept of guaranteed prices as 

envisioned by the Resolution or subsidies, will not cure the problem. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1281 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that the future of our agricultural industry in Western Canada, certainly here in 

Saskatchewan, is based on exports, exports of the products that we are producing at the present time and 

certainly will be able to produce in the future. It is true that here in Canada our population is such that we 

over-produce and that our home markets can’t consume all the goods that the agricultural industry can 

provide. And so in my thinking at least, the main emphasis for the future of our agricultural industry should 

be placed on having a trade policy whereby representatives of the industry will be travelling through all the 

developed countries of the world, the countries that have been our traditional markets in the past and the 

present and certainly to break into the newer developing countries where we have a tremendous market 

waiting to be tapped. 

 

It is true that at the present time the Federal Government has set up a task force to look into the present 

policies that are enforced today in the agricultural industry and to look to the future and see what policies can 

be developed for the expansion for the years ahead. 

 

With these brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, and having outlined the effect of the Resolution and having indicated 

to this House that I don’t think that it serves the purpose as was intended, I would therefore introduce an 

amendment to the Resolution by deleting all the words after "agriculture" in the second line and substitute 

the following therefor: 

 

and trade policy establishing a trade commission under the Department of Trade and Commerce to 

negotiate with the various importing countries of the world and establish markets for Canadian 

agricultural products that would ensure favorable financial returns to our farmer producers. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt). 

 

MR. G. R. BOWERMAN (Shellbrook):— Mr. Speaker, I am somewhat disappointed in the presentation of 

the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) for a number of reasons, and when I read the amendment 

to the Resolution I am certainly more disappointed . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BOWERMAN:— . . . in that I was certain at least that the Minister should be aware that we do have an 

International Wheat Agreement or at least we hope we have one and we also have an International Cereal 

Agreement which is not very stable at the present, but at least we have these two bodies which indicate to me 

that what he is proposing in the amendment really doesn’t suggest anything more than what we have at the 

moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can do little more this evening than repeat 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1282 

what has already been said by the Members on this side of the House, but I must raise my voice in support of 

the Resolution by the Hon. Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). There is in fact, and agriculture is in fact 

reaching, a crisis in the province. No wonder the situation of agriculture is as depressed as it is after listening 

to the Hon. Minister of Agriculture in his rather depressing outlook on the future of agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. Certainly the great void of no ideas for a solution can only serve to depress the Saskatchewan 

agriculture that much more. 

 

We really don’t look to the Hon. Minister to tell us what the problems are in agriculture, but we look to him 

for some solutions. We were hoping that in the speech which he presented that he might offer to 

Saskatchewan farmers a solution or a proposal for a solution at least to some of the problems which we face. 

 

While there is a certain amount of political lip service being offered to farmers, no real long-term programs 

have yet been suggested by either the Provincial Government or the Federal Government at Ottawa. This 

Government here in Saskatchewan has received a submission from the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, as 

recent as January 25, 1968, and I notice that no direct action has been taken by the Government to address 

itself to this problem by any formal action of this House since we have commenced our deliberations here. 

 

The report that I refer to outlines very well the position of Saskatchewan farmers. The picture is by no means 

optimistic about the well-being of agriculture in 1968 and the future, indeed, appears even worse. I want to 

draw a few quotations from this brief and to impress upon the Government again the necessity to do 

something absolute and something more positive about today’s farm problems. There is no one in 

Saskatchewan today including the Government who will deny that farming is the mainstay of 

Saskatchewan’s economy and is also one of the greater contributors to the gross national product of our 

Federal Government in Canada. In view of the importance of agriculture in Saskatchewan and Canada, 

farmers, I think, should expect and I believe that Governments must produce a more reasonable and 

acceptable economic structure within which farming may continue to make is vital and important 

contribution for our society. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that the economic outlook of farming today is not good. I 

suggest that if the Governments are not going to assume a more responsible attitude than mere lip service, 

they will again experience the farmer-labor unrest of the 1930s, which indeed left an undesirable historic 

mark on this province and on this city in particular. 

 

The Farmers’ Union brief suggests that the sharp decline in the 1967-68 export grain sales will of course 

adversely affect the 1968 farm-cash income to farmers. This may be offset somewhat by the higher initial 

payments we will be receiving on grain deliveries, and it may be somewhat offset by the expected high final 

payments in our 1966-67 grain deliveries whenever we get them. However, Mr. Speaker, such conditions in 

1968 can only 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1283 

serve to aggravate and to increase the critical year of 1969. 

 

Let’s look at some of the uncertainties facing farmers in 1968 and 1969. Export sales are uncertain. Indeed, 

they are down something over 100 million bushels. The future of the International Cereal Agreement is in 

doubt. The 1969 final grain payments will be smaller. The future market in feed grain prices is declining. 

Hog prices are down almost 50 per cent from February 1966. Beef prices are down $4 to $5 per hundred. 

Farm production costs are at an all-time high. The situation in farming has been more recently aggravated by 

the Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) who has placed a two cent per gallon tax on farm fuels. The 

present soil moisture conditions indicate another 1967 crop year. Indeed some forecasting has already been 

done by those in that field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the immediate problems is that maximum grain quotas may only rate six to seven 

bushels in the year 1968. I wonder, and I am sure there are many who wonder why the Provincial 

Government has not moved in this area to bring about some solution. I know that they may not be able to 

finalize an agreement but I know also that they ought to have communication with their Federal counterparts 

at Ottawa and in that regard ought to be able to make some submission to that Government in order to bring 

about a solution to this rather vital and important problem. According to the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union 

brief to this Government, cash operating expenses and the operator-family labor costs require a minimum of 

a 10-bushel quota. This quota would still not provide for depreciation, it wouldn’t provide for the investment 

or machinery costs, and all of these costs of course are part of the farming expenses of today. Mr. Speaker, 

this year’s expected quota will not cover cash operating expenses. This means no living income for the 

operator from grain sales; and because the farmer must have living expenses, he will be unable to pay his 

bills and therefore he will have cash operating debts as he enters the 1969 year. Cash operating debts in 1968 

and facing the expected critical year of 1969 I’m sure there are many who will agree and there are many who 

will find this will be the last straw for many small farmers of our province to put them off the land 

completely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a Government who claims great interest in the economic development of our agricultural 

province, and ends up budgeting as much for public works as it does for the development of agriculture, is 

not worthy of the farm support of this province. I must urge some positive steps by the Government to 

alleviate the current and future farm problems of our country. Because I can find no such action by the 

Government in any of its many Bills and orders of this Legislature, I must urge that Members of this House 

support the Resolution on the guaranteed farm income that has been presented by the Hon. Member from 

Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). I would urge that they look seriously at the proposed amendment and that, as it 

provides really no solution to the problems of the farmer, we forego the amendment and support the 

Resolution as presented. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1284 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E. I. WOOD (Swift Current):— Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 69 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Prince 

Albert East-Cumberland) for Return No. 69 and the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Steuart: 

 

MR. W. J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East-Cumberland):— Mr. Speaker, I am surprised that the 

Hon. Minister had to bring in an amendment because I asked a simple question. I don’t know what he is 

hiding. As a matter of fact I was trying to be helpful to the Minister, because as he pointed out there are 

rumors and I want to assure him that I don’t start these rumors, the rumors in the district that this box factory 

was subleased to a firm that I am told partly belongs to Mr. Steuart. 

 

HON. D. G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer):— Just big lies. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— Well maybe it is, you had a chance to answer and correct the rumors. That’s why 

I don’t see why you had to bring in an amendment. You could have told the facts of the case as to just what 

happened . . . who had an option and who had the sublease and this wouldn’t have happened. Now I don’t 

know if I can get the information after what you put in there in the amendment. I can’t see how it could be 

amended very well to get the information I want. The Minister did say, Mr. Speaker, that I would get more 

information and maybe that will clear his name . . . 

 

MR. STEUART:— My name doesn’t need to be cleared by the likes of you, Bill. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— Mr. Speaker, I resent that. The Hon. Minister is always charging me with rumors 

and everything else. This is not true. 

 

MR. STEUART:— It is, Bill, but that’s all right. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— Steuart Electric is supposed to be, according to certain people, subleasing this 

property and they got it at the same time as the man who got it by lease option. So we should get an 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1285 

answer in black and white so you can clear the Government and clear all of us. 

 

MR. STEUART:— On a point of privilege, the Hon. Member makes a statement that my firm, the firm I’m 

connected with, is supposed to be doing something. Then he says he is going to clear my name. Who starts 

the rumor? Well, I can tell you that the firm of Steuart Electric is not renting this and never has rented it and 

never will rent it and had nothing to do with the buying of it. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 70 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Prince 

Albert East-Cumberland) for Return No. 70 and the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. Mr. Steuart: 

 

MR. W. J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East-Cumberland):— Mr. Speaker, the Minister said he’d 

give more information that I asked for and I appreciate his kindness and generosity. But I thought since he is 

so generous that he could give a little more information on top of what he has in this amendment so I’d like 

to bring in a sub-amendment as follows: Moved by my seatmate, Mr. Meakes and seconded by Mr. Davies, 

that the amendment be amended as follows: 

 

That the words "and the name of the person who did the appraising" be added after the figures 

"1967" in part (3); that the words "Whether the property was tendered, the date and" be inserted 

before the first word "The" in part (4); and that the following words be added to the motion "(7) A 

copy of all correspondence between the vendor and purchaser concerning the transaction." 

 

MR. STEUART:— Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the copy of the amendment that I got reads: That the 

amendment be amended as follows: 

 

In (3) after "1967" - add the words, "Who did the appraising?" 

 

The next line simply says: 

 

In (4) after the first word "The", was the property tendered, date and . . ." 

 

and it doesn’t make any sense. That was the amendment that was proposed. And I’ve tried to make some 

sense out of it here by putting the words in and I think the Motion is out of order. It doesn’t make any sense. 

It doesn’t say in the proposed Motion 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1286 

and in (4), add the words after the first word, it doesn’t say that at all, it just says, in (4) after the word "The" 

was the property tendered. I suggest that the Motion as presented is out of order. It doesn’t make any sense. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The Motion as presented is out of order. The Motion as I’ve tried to tinker it up I think 

was. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— On a point of order, after all, the Motion says very simply that you add these 

words after the word "The." It doesn’t say to cut off the whole of the Section 4 and therefore it is only natural 

and common sense - and if the Hon. Member who spoke had any common sense he would know that - it 

would fall in between that and the next word which has not been cut out and that would be the first "The." 

 

MR. WOOD:— Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, it appears to me that the amendment as ready by the 

Speaker was in order. I do believe it is the Speaker’s prerogative to adjust a motion or an amendment to 

make it presentable to the House. I believe the Speaker has done this in this case and I believe the 

amendment was presented by the Speaker is in order. 

 

MR. STEUART:— I agree. It certainly didn’t make any sense the way it was, but the Speaker has added a 

few words to make it make sense in spite of the efforts of the Member. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— There’s no doubt about it that I did and I said that I did change the Motion in order to 

try and put the meaning into the subamendment. 

 

Subamendment negatived. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 3 - ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Motion by Mr. J. E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon 

Mayfair): 

 

MR. A. MATSALLA (Canora):— Mr. Speaker, in taking part in this debate I do so with political 

impartiality. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA:— Thank you very much. My 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1287 

colleague, the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) on Thursday last, invited Members of 

this House to give serious consideration to taking steps in adopting legislation to provide for the 

establishment of an independent commission for the purpose of drawing up electoral boundaries for the 

Province of Saskatchewan. My contribution shall be in support of the Resolution from a position of 

nonpartisanship and from the point of view of advisability and fairness to the people of Saskatchewan. I feel, 

Mr. Speaker, that being a young Member of the Legislature and not having had anything to do with 

redistribution in the past, I shall speak with sincerity and from the point of an observer of the entire structure. 

 

May I point out however, Mr. Speaker, that if one views the basis upon which electoral boundaries were 

drawn in the past by this Government and other Governments, his conclusion would be, needless to say, that 

in most of the cases there was no rhyme nor reason for the boundaries. The pattern followed was not one of 

population, not one of area, not one of urban, nor one of rural population. Evidently the prime purpose for 

redistribution in nearly all cases was for political advantage to the Government of that day. To help illustrate 

my point, Sir, and to add to the discussion, let us take five rural constituencies to the south and five rural 

constituencies to the north. I made these selections because the area size of each of these constituencies is 

quite similar; the constituencies to the south; Gravelbourg, number of voters, 6,081; Notukeu-Willowbunch, 

5,955; Bengough, 6,410; Milestone, 6,005; Cannington, 9,747; the rural constituencies to the north; 

Cutknife, 8,640; Redberry, 6,815; Rosthern, 7,436; Kinistino, 7,426; and Melfort-Tisdale, with 10,200. The 

total of the five constituencies to the south is 34,198. The total of the voters in the constituencies to the north 

is 40,517. Now this illustration means that there are 6,319 more constituents in the north than there are in the 

south. The average per constituency to the south is 6,840 constituents, while the average to the north is 8,103 

or an average of 1,263 more constituents per MLA to the north. As pointed out by the Hon. Member for 

Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) similar differences occur from city to city. I agree that an MLA in the 

city is in a position to represent a greater number of people than one in the rural areas because of the 

concentrated population. 

 

What the ratio should be, I cannot accurately state. I feel, however, that with limited information on hand, if 

the Member is to represent his constituents in a fair and efficient manner, the constituent population should 

perhaps be not more than about 12,000 in a city riding and about 8,000 in a rural riding. It is obvious that 

population should be the primary criterion in establishing electoral boundaries because a Member represents 

people and not area. However, the area-size factor would have to be considered in the case of rural 

constituencies and particularly for areas with sparse population. Mr. Speaker, our sister province of 

Manitoba has moved ahead in this direction by appointing an Independent Commission in 1956 to review the 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1288 

electoral boundaries of the province. 

 

May I inform this House, Mr. Speaker, of the governing factors under the statutes of Manitoba in 

determining and fixing the boundaries of any electoral division: 1) the community or diversity of interests of 

the population; 2) the means of communication between various parts; 3) the physical features; and 4) all 

other similar and relevant factors. I might inform further that the commission performs the task of 

redistribution every 10 years. A periodic review is necessary mainly due to the population shift from rural 

areas. The factor of the population shift due to normal course of events has become an apparent problem in 

Manitoba. In the March 16, 1968 issue of the Leader-Post it is noted and I quote: 

 

Opposition Leader Gil Molgat, Thursday advocated a representation by population policy for 

electoral divisions which would eliminate the existing ratio that favors rural Manitoba. 

 

The article further states and I quote: 

 

At the same time, Mr. Molgat cautioned the Administration not to tamper with a nonpartisan 

composition of the electoral boundaries commission. 

 

I submit, Sir, that now, since we have just gone through a provincial election, this would perhaps be the time 

for Saskatchewan to follow Manitoba and our Federal Government is setting up an Independent Commission 

to examine our electoral boundaries. Partisan considerations would be cast aside. The objective of the 

Commission would be to neutrally assess the electoral boundaries situation in the best interests of the voters 

and the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier):— Mr. Speaker, I have listened to the arguments of the speakers in 

this debate so far. I must say with respect, that in moving this Resolution, the NDP is running true to its 

traditional practice of advocating a policy in Opposition, which it completely ignored when it was the 

Government. I would remind you, Sir, that from 1944 to 1964, and I looked up the records, the NDP on five 

different occasions amended The Legislative Assembly Act. Each time they manipulated constituency 

boundaries to their own political advantage. Yet now rather anxiously, in my opinion, they suggest that an 

Independent Commission should be set up on redistribution. They intimate that this method would be the 

fair, impartial way to proceed with any boundary changes. Mr. Speaker, if the NDP sincerely believe that an 

Independent Commission is the fair impartial way to proceed today, why during their 20 years of office did 

they not appoint such a commission? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1289 

MR. THATCHER:— When the Hon. Members recall the Socialists’ record on this particular matter, the 

words of the Hon. Junior Member for Saskatoon looked rather hollow. The Member who just took his seat 

from Canora (Mr. Matsalla) suggested that there were disparities in population throughout many ridings, and 

this is so. I think those disparities can be changed without this proposed commission. 

 

Tonight I ask Members in this House, and I ask people of Saskatchewan, to remember some of the electoral 

anomalies which existed under the Socialists. In Saskatoon for instance where the Hon. Member who 

introduced this Resolution comes from, until this Government took office, every single citizen was forced to 

vote for five different candidates. And in the city of Regina, for a long time every voter had to vote for four 

candidates. Later it was changed to two double seats and two single seats. Over in the city of Moose Jaw, a 

Socialist stronghold, every voter had to vote for two candidates. In these cities of course the boundaries were 

so drawn that the Socialist labor votes would carry the weight in the whole of the cities. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THATCHER:— This Government has taken action to reform those situations. We have removed the 

multi-seat constituencies in Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose Jaw. Today every voter votes for one candidate. 

Surely that is the fair way to proceed. 

 

I have heard some complaints this session about the constituency of Hanley. Somebody said, "Oh, look at 

what the Liberals did to poor Bob Walker." May I remind this House that in one of the Socialists’ 

redistributions, a good part of the city of Saskatoon was put into Hanley for just one reason, to save Walker! 

May I also remind the House and the people of Saskatchewan that when they were in office the Socialists 

took the vote away from hundreds of members of the Armed Forces in this Province. That vote was restored 

by the Liberals. It is quite true that probably it will be necessary in the next year or two years or three years, 

to have another redistribution Bill. This Government will be prepared to bring in such a Bill. Perhaps the 

cities of Regina, the city of Saskatoon, the city of Prince Albert may have to be given additional 

representations. Perhaps some rural boundaries will have to be changed, some reduced, some enlarged, some 

perhaps even eliminated. But the Government will use the same mechanism in the redistribution Bill as has 

been used in this Province since 1905. I can assure Hon. Members opposite unequivocally that we will be 

just as fair and impartial in making any boundary changes as they were from 1944 to 1964. That is a 

commitment. The decision with respect to electoral boundaries is the responsibility of the Legislature. Even 

if we had such an Independent Commission it would have to come back to the Legislature for a final 

decision. Thus I suggest in all probability, the same results would be forthcoming as under the present 

system. For the reasons I have given, Mr. 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1290 

Speaker, the Government will vote against this Resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale):— Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might beg leave to adjourn 

this debate. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— No, we’re not prepared to let you adjourn this debate tonight. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale has asked leave to adjourn the debate. Is 

leave granted? 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— No. 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— The question before the House is: shall the debate be adjourned? All those in favor of 

the Motion say, Aye; opposed to the Motion say, No. I think the No’s have it. 

 

Leave to adjourn negatived. 

 

MR. W. G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw South):— Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a very brief word in response 

to the remarks of the Hon. Premier on this Resolution. I think almost everything he said here this evening 

succeed in avoiding the import of the Resolution itself. Of course what the Resolution called for is 

something fair, something reasonable, something I think that is overdue. 

 

MR. THATCHER:— Just the same as you had! 

 

MR. DAVIES:— There is no use, the Premier has had his chance to make his remarks and I think he should 

subside and listen a little bit and perhaps learn something; perhaps not. It doesn’t signify that over a period 

of 40 or 50 years in the judgment of some people all constituency boundaries have not been as they should 

have been. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that there is a great deal of good reason to believe that 

boundaries have not always been drawn as fairly as they should because the people that draw boundaries for 

constituencies are not the best and this is left to ruling Government in power alone, and not with others that 

have some reason to be more impartial. This is what is proposed in the Resolution before us this evening. 

When I hear the Premier talk about the manipulation of constituency boundaries and that the Government 

will go the fair way - as I think he put it - "We use action to reform", another trite little phrase, I think of my 

constituency in Moose Jaw and the constituency of Moose Jaw North. I can only tell him that what they’ve 

done to the constituency boundary there is to make the 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1291 

boundary look like the CNR trademark. It wanders through the city like a twisted snake and there was no 

effort whatsoever to try and put an equality of voters in the two constituencies. About 7,500 voters in the one 

constituency and about 12,300 in the other. There is no doubt whatsoever that the most blatant attempt was 

used by this Liberal Government to try and carve out a constituency in Moose Jaw North that would for once 

give them an opportunity to slide someone in to represent Moose Jaw North as a Liberal. Of course they 

failed and as I told the Premier two years ago, the action of the Government in distorting the constituency 

boundaries in Moose Jaw at that time would be properly resented by the voters. It was, and the results tell the 

tale. We again elected two New Democratic Members in Moose Jaw, and I can tell him that no matter how 

he carves out that constituency, the same results will be seen the next time he does it. Part of this is not only 

because they don’t like the boundaries that are drawn by the Hon. Premier, but they have some reason to 

remember the Premier for other reasons, in that constituency in bygone days. 

 

I just want to bring the House back to the point which I think the Premier has done his best to get the House 

to ignore, and that is, this does call for an impartial means of drawing constituency boundaries. It seems to 

me we’ve got to a point in this province where we can look upon this proposal and take it as a reasonable 

one. I don’t think that any commission of good citizens is likely to fail very much to do that which is right 

and proper. As the Premier has pointed out to this House, the Legislature is in any case the final arbiter and 

decider of what those boundaries shall be. But I think it fair to say that some of the boundaries that have 

been drawn in the years before the last four years were perhaps not all that they should have been. But I 

honestly do not believe that in the history of the province there has been such a bare-faced distortion of 

boundary lines that there has been during the last four years of office of this Government. That makes all the 

more reasonable the request that we have before us this evening. I regret that the Premier has not seen fit to 

permit this debate to continue, so that my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale could participate at some 

later time. But I think that in any case there is no doubt what this Resolution calls for, and though the 

Premier, say what he may, he cannot ignore the purpose of it. I suggest that that is what we should be 

discussing here tonight. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. J. CHARLEBOIS (Saskatoon City Park-University):— Mr. Speaker, might I remind the Hon. 

Gentleman on the other side of the House that has just spoken that, if we are to get back to remind each other 

of principles, I think that he and his party should again be reminded of the principles that they have followed. 

 

I don’t happen to be from Moose Jaw, I happen to be from Saskatoon and if you want to look at the 

principles that were 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1292 

followed by the NDP over the years, let’s take a look at those. If anybody abused the privileges of the voters 

it was certainly shown in Saskatoon. The Hon. Member (Mr. Matsalla) that spoke a short while ago 

mentioned that cities should have constituencies in which we would have 12,000 voters represented by a 

single Member, but the principle of his own party was to have 120,000 represented by members. I think here 

of all the abuses we have ever seen in constituency boundaries by the NDP, CCF or whatever they want to 

call themselves. We had enough of that in Saskatoon for 20 years. If you want to look at boundaries that are 

fairly drawn, come up to Saskatoon and the people there now have three representatives on this side of the 

House, a thing that they should have had, but they were gerrymandered or whatever you want to call it. They 

were pushed right out of it by the NDP party for those 20 years. It is really high time we have proper 

representation. Now that we have it, I think the principles that are followed are shown to be quite fair. Thank 

you. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER:— Order, order! Now the Member who moved the adjournment of the debate lost his 

adjournment motion. I draw your attention to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 165, 

subsection (8). "A Member who has moved or seconded the adjournment of the debate which has been 

negatived cannot speak to the original motion." 

 

The debate continues on the Motion. 

 

MR. F. A. DEWHURST (Wadena):— I agree with the citation that you have just read. I agree, Mr. 

Speaker, that the ruling which you have just read out to us here is the correct ruling, but what happens in a 

case like this is that the majority of the House are able to use their numbers to prevent the minority from 

having any leeway. I feel the rules of the House should be to protect the minority. 

 

MR. STEUART:— Is he speaking on a point of order or on the debate? 

 

MR. DEWHURST:— I am speaking on this debate . . . 

 

MR. STEUART:— Well then you had better get back to the point. 

 

MR. DEWHURST:— I’m getting there. After 20 years, I can maybe show you something about the rules 

too. 

 

MR. STEUART:— Well I wish you would, I’ve been waiting and you haven’t yet! 

 

MR. DEWHURST:— Check the records, you show 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1293 

me the records. I feel that when a rule like this cuts a person off it creates a hardship on him. The majority 

can protect themselves. Now on this Motion we have before us, I feel it is a timely Motion, and I felt that it 

deserves some consideration of this Legislature rather than the type of speech we got from the Premier. In 

my own constituency what was added to it by the last redistribution gives me a considerably larger area than 

my neighboring constituencies. Had that not been changed there are certain Members on that side of the 

House that would not have been back now. We saw in the last redistribution a constituency like Weyburn 

added to from Bengough and from Souris-Estevan. In each case it was taken from the smaller one and given 

to the larger ones. In the last redistribution we saw five townships of land taken off Kelsey and put into 

Melfort-Tisdale, which once again took from the smaller ones by population and gave to the larger ones. 

Kelsey is a larger constituency than Melfort-Tisdale by area, because it has forest reserves and other areas in 

it. We also saw about 22 different constituencies changed and in pretty well every case they took from the 

small one and gave to the large one. This is what the Premier says is a fair distribution. They say that, over 

the previous number of years when those of us who on this side of the House sat on the right of Mr. Speaker, 

there were five distributions in whole or in part redistributions and they hadn’t agreed with what was done at 

that time. But now they are telling us in this House that, because they disagreed with us then, it justifies them 

doing it now and making much more of a fiasco of redistribution than was ever made in this province before. 

There has never been a time in the history of this province that the gerrymander took place as it did here 

during the last Legislature. This Government had three regular sessions in their last term of office and three 

redistributions in the Hanley constituency. Then they say that they were fair and impartial. They made a 

redistribution, took a look at it and say by gosh that won’t get us what we want, so they did it all over again 

the second year. Then the third year they took a look at it and found out that it wasn’t right, so they did it 

again. When it came to the elections, the boundaries had to be settled by the judge because they still hadn’t 

done it right. If the election had been carried on the basis of the boundaries at Hanley which were set down 

by this Legislature, then the former Member of Hanley would have been back here, because the judge had to 

straighten the mess for them. On the one redistribution that they had, they had the boundaries of Humboldt 

extending on the basis of 12 miles wide with another 60 miles east. People in my constituency, people in the 

Kelvington constituency would have had a right to vote twice under redistribution of that day. Then they say 

that this was a good redistribution that had been done in a very prudent manner. Our Premier gets up and 

says, "You can take my word for it categorically that there will be a fair redistribution." We have seen him 

categorically give his word before, and as one of the Indian fellows on one of my reserves says to me, "If our 

Premier doesn’t put it in writing, don’t believe it." That’s what he said, that’s what he said, Dave. He hasn’t 

got words to express what happens with the Provincial Treasurer yet. 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1294 

Now I think this Resolution is not telling the Government just how it has to be done. It is asking them to give 

consideration to this proposal. Consequently they are giving no consideration to it whatsoever. They just say 

that we will use our majority to turn it down, and I feel that, when we look at the shifting of the population 

of this Province and the gerrymander that is going on, we need a commission set up to do a job of taking the 

whole into consideration and make a redistribution on behalf of people, not on behalf of the Liberal party. In 

spite of their gerrymander, if all the votes had been counted which should have been, there would have been 

two more on this side. So I will ask the House to vote for this Resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. G. G. LEITH (Elrose):— Mr. Speaker, I enter this debate with some reluctance because I wasn’t in 

the House before 1964, but as a private citizen I was witness, as was everybody else in the province to five 

exercises in cartography that dazzled the imagination in the 20 years that the Socialists were in power. And 

by the way, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw attention to the Members of the House, and especially to the 

Member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) that he has been mispronouncing the word that he bandies about so 

carelessly, it is not "jerrymander", it is gerrymander." As a matter of interest the phrase rose from the artful 

drawing of electoral lines in New York state by a Socialist in 1894 and he is long since dead, but the 

Socialists persist in pronouncing it "jerrymander" instead of "gerrymander", so I recommend this to the 

attention of the Member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) who perhaps may take some instruction from 

this and call it gerrymander in the future. 

 

I want to speak to the Resolution as it is presented to the House. It is based primarily on the wishes of the 

Opposition to have an Independent Commission given the responsibility of drawing Saskatchewan’s 

electoral boundaries based primarily on the principle of representation by population. Now each of us here 

and in fact every student of history or politics in this country gives lip service to the principle of 

representation by population. We learn in school that this is the proper way for representation to be based, 

but in a country like Canada, far flung, far from centres of government, it is often not practical to base 

electoral boundaries on the bare principle of representation by population. I want to remind Members 

opposite that in the last redistribution carried on in the Federal seats in Saskatchewan the number of 

constituencies was lowered from 17 to 13. The basis of the re-drawing of the lines was in fact representation 

by population. There was an ideal population figure that each constituency in the country was to attain. Then 

there was a margin of over-population or under-population that was allowed. In fact, there was an 

Independent Commission set up to do the work. The constituency of Rosetown-Biggar suffered a very 

awkward fate on account of this, I happen to live in Township 28, Range 13, West of the 3rd. The area 

around me for a space 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1295 

of 40 or 50 miles all lay in the Rosetown-Biggar seat before redistribution. Now I find that I’m in the last 

township in the last range of the Kindersley-Battleford seat. My neighbors who live a mile and half south of 

me are in the Swift Current seat. My neighbours that live two miles east of me are in the Moose Jaw seat. 

This is awkward but this can happen and will happen on every boundary. The unfortunate part of the whole 

situation is that the Kindersley-Battleford seat is cut off not at the South Saskatchewan River on the west, 

but on the south side of Township 28. There is a small corner of the west country north of the South 

Saskatchewan River that is now in the Swift Current seat. It’s there because of the principle of representation 

by population. There is no bridge in that area and these people are cut off from the centre of the new Federal 

seat. They really belong in the Kindersley-Battleford seat. They ought to be in the Kindersley-Battleford seat. 

They ought to be in the Kindersley-Battleford seat, but because of the strictness of adherence to the principle 

of representation by population, and, I submit, because of the independence of the commission there was no 

change made when representation was made to the commission, asking that this little corner should be put in 

the Kindersley-Battleford seat. 

 

All across this province as in other parts of the country the problems of geographic location occur. Some 

parts of the country are cut off by hills and by rivers, as my example illustrates, and I submit to you, Sir, and 

to Members of the House that an Electoral Boundary Commission which would base its findings strictly on 

representation by population may in fact suit the ideal but it doesn’t fit the facts. So I don’t think I could 

support this Resolution. Further to that I want to remind Members opposite, as they have been reminded 

tonight, that for 20 years they did as they wished with the electoral boundaries. It wasn’t hard to see the 

principles of "Gerry" reincarnated in the Socialists’ ranks. I’m not saying that this principle should continue 

and I am surprised at the sanctimonious expressions of horror that appear on the faces of Members opposite 

when they are speaking on this problem. They act in one way when they’re in the Government and they talk 

a different way when they’re in Opposition. So, Mr. Speaker, I will vote against the Resolution. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. W. J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East-Cumberland):— In listening to the Member opposite, 

the last one, the Hon. Member for Saskatoon City-University (Mr. Charlebois) it struck me that he believes 

in the theory of partisanship, and also in the theory of retribution. The reason this Resolution was brought in 

was that this is being done in other provinces and it’s been done in the Dominion of Canada, so we brought 

in a Resolution suggesting to the Government that maybe we could take partisanship out of the business of 

boundaries of constituencies. I don’t know why the Government should oppose it unless it is, as I say, scared 

and only trying to do it . . . 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1296 

MR. THATCHER:— 20 years, Bill. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— Well, Mr. Premier, you had four years’ time to correct some of the injustices that 

you say existed previously; you had four years’ time. You had suggestions from the press. For example, in 

1966 there was an editorial in connection with what the present Minister of Finance did at that time. He 

brought in a redistribution Bill, Sir, and the editorial in the Star Phoenix at that time had an article called, 

"The Equity of Partisanship." I’m going to read it to you; maybe you’ll learn some sense. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— You can’t pronounce some of those words . . . 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— If I can’t pronounce them I don’t want you to insult me because I happen to be 

Ukrainian born, I’m doing the best I can. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— When I speak, I’m quite proud of the way I speak English. You don’t have to 

insult me. If you didn’t understand then you might have a right to say so but I’m sure you understand what 

I’m trying to tell you, and insults are not in place in Parliament. Anyway I’m going to quote . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— . . . I’ve had enough of this nonsense. May I quote from this editorial. 

 

Redistribution of constituencies whether in the Federal or in the Provincial arena is a difficult task. In 

Saskatchewan’s case it is made difficult mainly because the Government is suspected of trying to 

improve its electoral chances in the next election through the method of redistributing and 

gerrymandering (if I have that correct). A gerrymander means the dividing of a voting area in such a 

way as to give an unfair advantage to one political party. 

 

It is interesting to see a further comment in this editorial, because it says here, "Mr. Steuart’s belief is that the 

present Bill (that’s the one that you brought in, Sir, two or three years ago) is a fair and equitable as the one 

he considered the worst in our history." 

 

AN HON. MEMBER:— Same old speech . . . 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— And it goes on to say in this editorial and this is something we could learn from - 

 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1297 

It is time that the Saskatchewan Government followed the Manitoba Government’s lead or if it 

prefers the Federal Government’s course in taking the structure of constituencies out of partisan 

hands. 

 

I agree. 

 

Saskatchewan’s ridings should be mapped by an Independent Commission similar in personnel to the 

Federal Commission in Saskatchewan, of Mr. Justice R. L. Brownridge and Professor Norman Ward 

of the University’s Political Science Department here. There would be no political considerations 

here, but there would be the objective assessment of the best interests of the voters in the province. 

 

I hope my enunciation is clear enough that the Hon. Member who insulted me a little while ago can 

understand what I have read. It goes on to say: 

 

This would be an ideal time, 

 

And I say today is an ideal time too. 

 

for the introduction of non-partisan mapping of Saskatchewan’s ridings. In membership the House is 

fairly evenly divided, 

 

As it is now. 

 

and in terms of the popular vote only a few percentage points separate the Government and the 

Opposition side. Perhaps after 20 years in the wilderness of opposition the young Liberal 

Government has not reached that mature magnanimity which would permit it to embrace non-

partisan redistribution in the name of fairness and equity. 

 

And as to the concluding paragraph, and please, Mr. Premier, take note of this, it says at a future time, I had 

hoped that now would be the future time. 

 

At some future, happier time perhaps when the blood of partisanship has cooled and, if and when the 

Thatcher Government has marshalled a side with a good working majority, 

 

And you have it now. 

 

changes may be made. In the meantime it seems we must be content with the equity of partisanship 

just as we’ve had for 60 odd years. 

 

I wasn’t going to speak to this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, but I have to speak because if anybody was insulted 

by the redistribution of boundaries it was the people of my constituency. If there ever was a butcher that 

butchered up a community like 



 

March 21, 1968 

 

1298 

Prince Albert, it was the Hon. Members opposite, the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) and the 

Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY:— Instead of giving the city of Prince Albert two members, as it should have had, 

they took 22 polls in Prince Albert East and all of the area north of the river, all CCF polls, and they added 

this to Cumberland constituency. Because they couldn’t defeat me in Cumberland constituency they gave me 

an additional 500 majority, hoping all the time that they would secure themselves in Prince Albert West and 

in Shellbrook, two against one. The way they wanted to do it, they took all the Liberal votes out of the 

National Park, out of Cumberland and added the polls to Shellbrook, making it certain that Shellbrook would 

be a Liberal seat. But were they surprised? Mr. Speaker, we now have the honor of having a Member sitting 

on our side today for Shellbrook. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 o’clock p.m. 


