



















































Hansard: February 23, 1968


157 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Sixteenth Legislature 

7th Day 

 

Friday, February 23, 1968. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. D.A. McPherson (Regina South West): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce to 

you and to the Members of the Legislature, 216 students from Sheldon Williams collegiate. Sheldon 

Williams collegiate is in the constituency of Regina South West and I‘m indeed pleased to have them 

here today. I might say a word about Sheldon Williams collegiate, Mr. Speaker. They are the great 

sports institution and Sheldon Williams is one team that is unbeaten in the senior basketball. The city of 

Regina is indeed proud of them. The students are here today with Mr. Heshka and four other teachers, 

Mr. McKague, Mr. Kehoe, Mr. McAra and Mr. Nordhagen. Some are sitting in the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and some are in the east gallery. On behalf of the Legislature I would like to wish them a good 

tour through the buildings and I hope that they enjoy their visit here with us today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I join with my Member in 

extending a welcome to the students from Sheldon Williams collegiate who are here this afternoon. I do 

so, not that I think he didn‘t do it adequately but it does happen to be the collegiate which several 

members of my own family have attended and one of them is still attending. I‘m very happy to see them 

here and join with the Member for Regina South West in extending our best wishes to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to also echo what has been 

stated by the Leader of the Opposition and by the Member from Regina South West. Again I would like 

to welcome this group as well as their teachers. I have a niece in the audience in the group with the 

school here today. Most of my relatives live out there. I don‘t know how the Member for South West 

ever got in, but we do welcome you all most sincerely. We hope that their stay will be most fruitful and 

that they will keep coming to watch this democratic institution in operation. 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

158 

Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the Members of this Assembly, a group of students from Our Lady of Fatima school in 

Mankota. These students are accompanied by Sister Gerard and Mrs. Herbach. They are situated in the 

top two rows of the Speaker‘s gallery. They have come a distance of approximately 180 miles to be with 

us today. I‘m sure you will join with me in welcoming them here and wishing them a very informative 

and educational afternoon and a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome and introduce to 

you and on behalf of all Members of the Assembly, a group of students from the town of Nokomis, 

accompanied by their teacher, I believe, Mr. Warkentine. I know all Members of this House wish them a 

most enjoyable visit to our capital city and a most interesting afternoon in this building. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

QUESTIONS 

COPY OF ECONOMIC REVIEW DISTRIBUTION 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are called I think the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) 

may have misunderstood the full import of the question I asked yesterday with respect to the Economic 

Review and he was good enough to send me a copy almost immediately afterwards – that‘s last year‘s 

Economic Review. However this book which is being withheld from the market for so long has created a 

lot of curiosity. What I did ask was whether or not it was going to be tabled in the House and 

consequently copies distributed to all of the Members. Many of the Members are interested in it. It has 

been the usual practice to send this to all the Members of the Legislature and I want to ask him if he 

would be good enough to have copies sent to all of the Members. 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — I‘d be very pleased to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

SASKATOON MAPLE LEAF MILLING AND QUAKER OATS 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, several days ago one of the Saskatoon Members, or two of them, asked 

me about certain operations in Saskatoon having to do with Quaker Oats and the Maple Leaf Milling. I 

believe there is a newspaper report that one of these might close down. Our Department of Industry has 

made inquiries and I‘m informed as follows: 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

159 

Quaker Oats has sold its Agricultural and Animal Feed Division to Maple Leaf Milling. This sale 

is not related to flour milling operations. The operation at Saskatoon includes a feed mill. 

However, this will be operated on a custom basis to supply Maple Leaf and others. The manager 

advises that this feed mill may be phased out after a period of two years, but there has been no 

firm decision made. Quaker Oats plans to continue to operate its flour mill, so do Robin Hood 

and the Wheat Pool. 

 

SELLING OF POTASH TO ANY COUNTRY 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the depressed state of our potash 

industry, I‘d like to direct a question to the Premier. Since certain markets are denied the Saskatchewan 

potash industry because of foreign domination of the industry, has the Premier urged Ottawa to ask the 

country involved to withdraw its legal control and allow the Saskatchewan potash companies to sell to 

any country in the world? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, my information from the potash industry is that so far they have not 

rejected any sales to the Communist countries. Even at this moment we are negotiating with one 

company to establish here, which would sell nowhere else but behind the Iron Curtain. Thus all I can say 

is that I think that the premise the Hon. Members has made before posing his question is simply not 

correct. 

 

WALTER GORDON REPORT 
 

Mr. Whelan: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, does the Premier plan to make vigorous 

representations in view of the Walter Gordon Report on foreign domination tabled in the Commons 

recently? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Walter Gordon Report did not appear to Members of this side of the House to be 

very sensible. We will continue to press for American capital, or any other kind of capital, to provide 

jobs for our people now. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. D.A. McPherson (Regina 

South West) for an Address-in-Reply and the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. W.S. Lloyd 

(Leader of the Opposition). 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when I concluded my remarks 

on 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

160 

the motion, I had spoken on the development of education as it related to elementary school enrolment 

in the province, the levelling off trend that was indicated there, the implications insofar as elementary 

school construction were concerned. I made some comments on the recommendation to school boards 

for the use of portable facilities in certain small centres, particularly where expansion was required, and 

also dealt with some of our thoughts with respect to provisions and regulations pertaining to the 

adoption of the use of French as a language of instruction in some of the schools in the province. 

 

Now today I would like to continue on several other aspects of the broad field of education. I would like 

to deal for a few moments with the enrolment figures in the secondary school systems in the province, 

the vocational and technical training aspect of that, and the other vocational and technical training 

courses that are available. The enrolment in our high schools shows a fairly level growth also from 

64,000 in 1966 to 65,000 plus in 1967 with a projected enrolment next year of 67,400 and some 

students. The significant change here is not so much in the total numbers but in the number of these high 

school students who are taking one or more classes in technical and vocational training. In 1964, for 

example, there were approximately 13,700 students taking such courses in our composite high schools. 

In 1966, the figure was 16,000 some odd. In 1967, it was over 20,000 and the enrolment in 1968 is 

23,000 rural students alone. These figures, I think, Mr. Speaker, clearly indicate the very rapid increase 

in the availability of such vocational training facilities in Saskatchewan schools under the Liberal 

Government in the past four years. 

 

Now as well as the Government‘s direct involvement in the locally administered school systems, the 

Department of Education through its Technical and Vocational Training Branch, operates a number of 

other major programs, and practically all of them incidentally are cost-shared to one degree or another 

with the Federal Department of Manpower. I refer here to the Saskatchewan Technical Institute at 

Moose Jaw, the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences at Saskatoon, the Weyburn 

Vocational Centre, Prince Albert Vocational Centre, a Management Training Program, a Training in 

Industry Program, a Nursing Education Program, as well as upgrading classes, including special classes 

for Indians and Metis, and basic literacy programs for our Indians and Metis. 

 

The upgrading class enrolment in the past three years again shows a fairly substantial increase under this 

Government. In 1965-66, 800 students were enrolled in such classes. In 1966-67, 2,200 were enrolled 

and this past year, 1967-68, were down somewhat to 1,975. The demand for upgrading training certainly 

continues to expand under the Federal Department of Manpower and Immigration. These Manpower 

Programs up until last year were previously administered by the Federal Department of Labour. 

Enrolment in our upgrading and basic literacy courses has increased from about 800 to 2,000 in the 

space of two years. In the light of the withdrawal of the Department of Manpower and 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

161 

Immigration from some of these courses, Mr. Speaker, this past year the Department of Education 

entered into an agreement with ARDA to sponsor basic literacy upgrading courses for people of Indian 

and Metis ancestry in this province. And this, I am told, was the first time that a Provincial Government 

in this province has assumed such concrete measures of responsibility for the education of adults in our 

Indian communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Enrolments in the trade and technologies and the apprentice training courses in Moose 

Jaw and Saskatoon as well as at Prince Albert and Weyburn show a continuing increase under this 

Government, Mr. Speaker. Training programs as a matter of fact in Prince Albert and in Weyburn were 

initiated during this term of office. Now our totals for trade and technology enrolments were in 1965-66, 

2,714; and in 1966-67, 3,348 in such vocational courses. In 1967-68, this figure was up to 4,367 

students. These figures, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, show a very rapid increase in the availability of such 

courses under this Government. As a matter of fact they have about doubled. This year saw the 

completion of phase one of an extension to the Institute at Saskatoon in the amount of $1,750,000. An 

additional contract for $6¼ million was awarded last June, which, when competed later on in this 

current year, will provide space for an additional 1,000 students at the school in Saskatoon. Existing 

courses will be expanded both in technologies and in the trades. Space and facilities will be provided at 

the same time for several new courses to meet the needs in a variety of fields, such as paramedical 

sciences, industrial chemistry, dental assistants, welfare technicians and several others. These of course 

will be phased in as the building has been completed and as soon as can reasonably be accommodated. 

And this expansion of floor space and the programs offered in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, will make that 

Institute one of the finest schools of its kind in this country, an asset and a credit not only to 

Saskatchewan but as well of course to the city of Saskatoon itself. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that you and other Members of the House will recall the study and 

recommendations resulting from the Ad Hoc Committee Report on Nursing Education in Saskatchewan. 

The basic recommendations there were that the training of nurses in hospitals be gradually phased out, 

beginning in the northern part of the province and that a two-year course in nursing education be 

instituted under the operation and the direction of the Department of Education. I‘m happy to report that 

the Department under the very able guidance of a Superintendent of Nursing Education, assisted by a 

curriculum committee, developed a new curriculum, assembled a new staff and is now operating a new 

school at the Saskatoon Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences for courses leading to diplomas in 

nursing. Last September, 1967, 250 students were enrolled in that program. The clinical resources for 

this year of St. Paul‘s and City Hospital are being used to round out the clinical side of the instruction. 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

162 

Other hospitals and health agencies will be involved in the clinical component of the second year of the 

course. In September of 1968, an additional 250 students will begin the two-year course bringing the 

total trainees up to the 500 capacity for that school. And as I said, I‘m sure the House will be pleased to 

hear that the new school is off to an excellent start with an excellent spirit and real good enthusiasm 

being demonstrated by the student body. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Full credit is certainly due to the many people responsible for the initiation and 

development of this entire program, but I just want to remind you today, Mr. Speaker, that this is another 

first in education for the Liberal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Early in 1967, the Department of Education initiated steps to assume the responsibility 

for the High School Driver Education Program in the fall term. Under the direction of the supervisor of 

Driver Education several courses to train instructors have been held at the Technical Institute in Moose 

Jaw. At the present time, no less than 48 units and 24 of the other school systems have instituted driver 

training programs. The initial target of 6,000 students for this year, which is almost double the previous 

year, has already been exceeded, and we expect to see 7,000 to 8,000 students trained under this 

program this year. And this is another program which has not only exceeded our expectations, but it has 

been implemented with the excellent co-operation of the school boards and other public and private 

agencies involved. 

 

I‘d like to, Mr. Speaker, to deal a little bit more extensively with the whole question in the whole broad 

field of comprehensive high schools. I‘d like to take a few minutes to examine the history of the 

development of these schools in the Province of Saskatchewan. What are they? Where are they? And 

why they are there? 

 

I suppose this story really begins almost 20 years ago or post-World War II, when at that time the 

genuine need for a technical and vocational aspect of the secondary school program was recognized. In 

the past ten years, of course, this need has become that much more urgent because of the greater 

determination of Governments, trustees and parents to improve and to upgrade the quality of education 

available to high school students, because after all it is estimated that less than half of our high school 

students are suited to the traditional academic program. Business and industry, economists and, as I say, 

Governments are well aware of the economic implication of this fact. In other words, the rate of 

productivity increase is directly tied to the availability of education, so that the need for this type of 

training is not a new need that has developed 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

163 

since we‘ve taken office by any means. It was certainly here when our friends opposite were in office; it 

was here when the present Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) was the Premier; in fact when he was 

Minister of Education. 

 

In 1961, a Federal financial cost-sharing offer was made to the Provinces to help build and develop 

vocational facilities. The former Government did improve and extend technical facilities in Moose Jaw, 

Prince Albert and at Saskatoon and a couple of high schools in Regina received some assistance under 

this program. However, Mr. Speaker, they didn‘t really talk to school boards or attempt to do any great 

selling job, and this, at a time when our neighboring Provinces were involving their school boards in 

taking action in this field. Instead, the Socialists here were evolving a Provincial scheme of their own. 

And prior to the 1964 election in this province, a separate network of Provincially operated, purely 

technical and vocational high schools was promised for this province. In other words, they planned to 

extend such training facilities for high school students by making this training a completely separate part 

of the traditional academic program, and I say proposed or promised because that seems to be about as 

far as that idea went, because there were no building plans – I‘m sure we‘ve all heard the former 

Minister of Education (Mr. Lloyd) stand here and talk about this – there was no curriculum, there was no 

concrete evidence of any kind of any plans that they had. 

 

I think this concept never really got off the ground for two reasons. Firstly, of course, our Socialist 

friends were not returned to power, and secondly, the people of the province and our own local school 

authorities basically rejected this particular approach. The idea of two separate classes or two separate 

types of high schools was considered undesirable from the educational viewpoint as well as from the 

economic viewpoint. 

 

In 1964 and 1965, the present concept of comprehensive high schools was evolved by departmental 

officials in close and full consultation with educators and with school trustees in the province. And these 

are high schools, Mr. Speaker, or division IV schools as they have now come to be known where the 

students of grades 10, 11 and 12, running in age from 14 to 18 year are able to take vocational courses 

and work and study alongside of students taking the academic course in preparation for university 

entrance, so that you have a wider variation of the courses that are open to students, and courses that are 

designed to meet their needs and to meet their interests and their abilities. 

 

Since the evolution of that policy, a dozen such schools have been completed and others are in various 

stages of construction and planning. Thousands of our high school students today, as I pointed out in the 

enrolment figures at the beginning of my remarks, are today enjoying such facilities, facilities complete 

with quality programs, quality equipment and quality instruction. And of course, I draw to your attention 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

164 

that one of the reasons why we as a Government have been faced with such pressures for these facilities 

is that the former Government made very little effort to involve the local school boards at the beginning 

of this program. Our neighboring Province of Alberta got their program underway immediately 

following 1961. The result is that today they have almost completed their Federal-Provincial program in 

this regard. The situation in Manitoba, as near as I can understand, is somewhat similar to that in our 

Province here. 

 

We realize there are pressures in certain areas of the province for construction of these facilities, 

particularly in the urban centres where they need the space to meet the growing demands of the 

increased enrolments they are faced with. We are confident, Mr. Speaker, that with time we can meet 

these needs despite the difficulties that it will present. Certainly costs will be greater today to both the 

local and the Provincial taxpayer, because the Members opposite when they were the Government did 

not face fully up to their responsibilities in this regard. Construction costs are a good deal higher today, 

the cost of money is higher, and as well, it is in short supply. 

 

The Federal Government shares the capital costs of the schools, Mr. Speaker, and when the program 

began, this Province was slated to receive $35 million on a 75-25 basis. Under more recent Federal 

legislation, an additional $23 million was made available to Saskatchewan, provided it is matched on a 

dollar per dollar basis by the Province. While there have been changes in the original proposal, a total of 

$58 million will be available to this Province for use in the construction of vocational facilities. And as 

of now, all of these funds have been either committed or at least temporarily allocated. 

 

I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that our friends opposite will be urging us to hurry and get the money 

spent. We make no apology for the fact that this Government doesn‘t spend public money fast enough to 

suit our friends opposite. I think we on this side have a little more respect for the tax dollar than they 

have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Since we‘ve taken office, however, we have spent $20 million of these funds provided 

for construction grants in a dozen such schools in the province. I can think of the major projects, 

Yorkton, Lloydminster, Melfort, O‘Neill High, Saskatoon Mt. Royal vocational wing there and the 

Walter Murray collegiate institute. Final approval was given by the Department for a comprehensive 

school at Estevan just recently, and I wish to announce today, Mr. Speaker, that final approval of the 

plans and the total program or project of the North Battleford collegiate board for a similar school up in 

North Battleford has gone out to that board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

165 

Mr. McIsaac: — Both of these schools, of course, have been in the planning and development stage for 

some time. Original approval was given by the Government prior to today for that matter. We believe 

that this school in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, will provide a first class secondary program in that 

area second to none in the province. And I might point out that existing facilities up there, which will 

become available on the completion of the new school, will continue to be used to serve other grades 

and reduce the substantial construction requirements which would otherwise be necessary to meet 

growing enrolments in North Battleford. I only wish to bring to your attention, Sir, this one aspect of the 

broad field of education and of some of the actions taken by this Government. 

 

Currently a special Advisory Committee to the Minister, which I mentioned briefly yesterday, is 

studying other requests from a number of other centres for division IV schools. And we are also 

studying such factors as the equipment costs of these institutions as well as the operational costs. The 

Federal Government in this regard advised us in December of last year that they were putting a ration on 

the remainder of the funds that are slated for all of the Provinces for this program. While this step was 

necessitated by their efforts in Ottawa to balance their budget, it certainly did disrupt the forward 

planning of this Department in this regard. We registered our objections with Federal authorities against 

such a development, coming as it did in the middle of the period for which the limits were set, namely 

for the fiscal year we are now in, 1967-68, and the forthcoming fiscal year, 1968-69. We realize, Mr. 

Speaker, that such a move not only disrupted our own planning, but that it also necessitated some 

changes in the planning of several of the local boards in the province. In some cases it will mean having 

to get by with existing buildings for another year or making interim arrangements. All of the board 

involved, however, I think are fully appreciative of the economic reasons responsible for the adoption of 

this temporary measure by Ottawa, because after all the same reasons apply equally to the Province and 

to many of our local governments. I am satisfied that within the next month or two, we will be able to 

advise the boards of definite future starting dates of projects, many of which are now well along in the 

planning stages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday, in the course of my remarks, I dealt with some of the curriculum changes that 

have been instituted in the past two or three years; instituted along with a change of course or program, 

new course materials must be accompanied by a similar development and improvement in our teaching 

profession. It is encouraging to find that the teaching profession in the province are both willing and able 

to accept the challenge of these changes. 

 

Members will be interested to know that over 30 per cent of Saskatchewan‘s 11,000 teachers now hold a 

professional certificate. In the last two years, the number of teachers with two or more years training 

increased from 65 to 75 per cent. And 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

166 

at the same time, progress is being made in training more of the specialized teachers that are required by 

many of the new courses being implemented at the upper levels particularly. Last year new training 

programs were approved for the preparation of teachers of kindergarten, of commercial courses, and of 

vocational technology courses. Of course, a full supply of fully qualified teachers in the province 

continues to be a problem, as it is in many other provinces and many other parts of the world. The 

provincial net increase of fully certificated teachers does continue to remain constant. Last year 

recruitment in the United Kingdom and the United States has added about 325 teachers to our teaching 

force. Recruiting is again going on this year through Saskatchewan House in London. 

 

Mr. Speaker, legislation will be introduced during this session dealing with the bargaining process 

between teachers and trustees. It will provide for regional or area bargaining for salaries. It will also 

ensure that all rights presently enjoyed by teachers are guaranteed, rights, Mr. Speaker, which are not 

presently guaranteed in law, legislation, which, in my firm opinion, will certainly do much to improve 

teacher-trustee relationships in this province. However, I am sure that Members from both sides of the 

House will have their own opinions on this question when the legislation is put forward for 

consideration in second reading. 

 

I should like to deal briefly, Mr. Speaker, with library development in this province, under this 

Government. The extension of library service to more and more of our people has been a goal of this 

Government since taking office. To this end, we established a Library Inquiry Committee in 1966. That 

Committee reported back in August of last year with many detailed recommendations for the furthering 

of library service to residents of this province. I would like to just quote a few sentences from one 

paragraph of their summary: 

 

Much is heard these days of the problems of retraining, adult education, enrichment, adequate 

use of leisure and of recreation. While some institutions might cover one or two or such problem 

areas, the public library embraces them all. One does not have to pay to get in, one does not have 

to dress a certain way, one does not have to be at a certain age to use it, or at a certain stage of 

training, or have certain qualifications, for the library covers everyone from one to 91. The 

library is indeed the citizens‘ university. 

 

Then the report goes on to point out some reasons why further financial assistance should be 

forthcoming from the Province to support library development in Saskatchewan. 

 

The chief recommendation, and the first, deals with the Provincial Library itself. And the basic 

recommendation here is that the Provincial Library be strengthened. This has already been done and is 

being done. In the current fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Library was voted an additional 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

167 

$250,000 for this and other purposes. Funds were provided to begin the Wheatland Regional Library. I 

was pleased to be able to take part in the official opening ceremonies of that library not very long ago in 

Saskatoon. Now the other day, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition was making his address 

in this debate, he made light of the fact that the Speech from The Throne made reference to only one 

new regional library to be set up next year. And he rather implied that this typified our lack of 

enthusiasm for extending educational services generally. I will be the first to give our Hon. friends 

opposite full credit for originating the idea of regional libraries, but, as in many of the other programs 

they originated, it took a Liberal Government to act on the suggestion and do something about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — In 1950, I believe it was, they established the first one, the North Central Regional 

Library up in the Prince Albert area. 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — What happened to the second one? 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — The second one, they never got around to. The rest of their term in office they never 

moved any further. This Government has established, since taking office, the South Eastern Regional 

Library in 1966, which now serves about 70,000 people. We have extended the area served by the North 

Central Library. Last year the Wheatland Regional Library was set up to serve the west-central portion 

of the province, and this year we will provide books, personnel, and funds to initiate the Parkland 

Library centred in Yorkton. Now this is three regional libraries established since we have taken office, 

Mr. Speaker, compared to one under the former Administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now libraries take a little bit of time to build and develop. For example, the ordering, 

cataloguing and the distribution of the books are in themselves a major task. I can certainly ay that the 

facts clearly testify that we have moved in this field at as fast a rate as has been possible. Under the 

Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Provincial Library is carrying out the most 

ambitious program of any provincial library in this country. Now you may say, not a big program, in 

terms of overall Government spending and maybe not, but I think a significant indication of our sincere 

and our basic interest in furthering educational opportunities and facilities. And it is just one more of the 

many examples that can be cited to show that the self-styled people-loving party opposite has no 

particular corner on programs for people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

168 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now there are many other examples of such programs, not only in the Department of 

Education, but in other Government departments as well, that clearly indicate this Government‘s interest 

in putting forward the best policies, good, sound policies, in line with good, sound Liberal philosophy, 

policies dedicated to the best interest of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I listened to the 

Hon. Member from Hanley (Mr. Heggie) describe the great feeling of humility that befalls a new 

Member as he stands for the first time to speak in this House, and I might tell you that today I have a 

real appreciation for the remarks he made. I can tell you, too, that after my many years in the rough 

construction business, it is really a great thrill for me to be able to stand here in this Assembly as one of 

its Members. I think of the many times, as a poor sub-contractor, I have had to face these hard-boiled, 

growly-looking general contractors, and I can tell you, Sir, that because of that experience these Hon. 

Gentlemen on the other side of the House look like a bunch of Babes in the Woods to me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Then, Mr. Speaker, I am reminded of the many prayers that I have said to the Good 

Lord, when I have asked Him to please be kind enough that when I die I should have the privilege of 

going to Heaven. And I have asked Him, and I‘ll still ask Him, ―Please give me this privilege even if I 

have to be in the last seat.‖ 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Don‘t blame the Lord. 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — And so when I look around in the House, now guess who‘s in the last seat? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — But I can tell you that as I look behind me, at least I can see that I am inside the 

door. I can promise you, Mr. Speaker, and the Members of this Assembly that, for the years ahead for 

this present Government, I will devote all of my abilities, as simple as they are, to do the best job I 

possibly can to see that the people of my constituency and the people of the whole of Saskatchewan get 

real honest-to-God, good government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

169 

Mr. Charlebois: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to add my congratulations to 

those already extended to you on your election as Speaker of this Assembly. As a new Member, I would 

like to thank you, Sir, for the very courteous manner in which you have helped me in answering my 

many questions. I must say that I am looking forward to serving in this House with a Speaker who has 

such a great respect for the position he holds. And certainly I am very happy and very proud to be here 

as a firm supporter of our free enterprise Liberal Government under the Hon. Premier, Ross Thatcher. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — As you know, Sir, I am the first one to have the honor of representing the new 

constituency of Saskatoon City Park-University. This is the largest of the Saskatoon constituencies and 

it includes Sutherland, Greystone, North Nutana, downtown Saskatoon, then north through City Park 

and North Park and as well it includes the University of Saskatchewan. Quite obviously, Mr. Speaker, I 

am representing a very diverse, a very interesting, and a very important constituency. The Saskatoon 

campus of the University of Saskatchewan has the largest unit in the economy of Saskatoon, and is in 

itself a major challenge to me as a representative, and I would like at this time to speak about our 

University. 

 

There are many things about this institution and the many people involved that have had my deepest 

respect, but I must say there are times when I am utterly bewildered. And in this regard I must say how 

completely disgusted and saddened many of us have been to see such deplorable filth appearing on the 

campus in the Sheaf and the Carillon, in such articles like ―The Student is a Nigger.‖ 

 

I would like to speak about the University of Saskatchewan as much as possible in a constructive 

manner, because this Government has expressed concern about the increasingly large amounts of money 

involved and its responsibility to the taxpayers, to set up the closest possible scrutiny, and because 

concern has been expressed by some for the autonomy and the academic freedom of the University. I 

would like to review briefly the history of this great institution in order that we may better understand 

the concern of this Government for a continued and uninterrupted unfolding of the university program. 

 

I would like to set this review into four periods: the first period being the establishment of the Saskatoon 

campus; then the 1920s and 1930s; and thirdly, the post-World War II period; and finally, the present 

era beginning with the establishment of the Regina campus and certain new colleges at Saskatoon and 

specifically, the Veterinary College and the College of Dentistry. Each one of these phases has made its 

own contribution to the development of our University, and quite important now is the fact that each 

period has a lesson for us. 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

170 

At each stage in time certain outside influences have affected the university program and it is incumbent 

on us at this time to profit from these experiences in order to avoid as much as possible any serious 

interruptions in the accomplishment of any forward planning. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon of course, has always been blessed with a community spirit than which 

nothing finer can be found in Saskatchewan, and so it was completely fitting that the University was 

established in Saskatchewan‘s most beautiful city. I think particular credit should go to those who chose 

the tract of land for the campus – it has proven to be adequate in every respect – and to Mr. Brown, the 

architect, for his concept of the campus plan, with the greystone and slate overlooking the river, and the 

less elaborate redbrick of the engineering and agriculture buildings toward the rear. With the laying of 

the cornerstone of Convocation Hall, by the great Sir Wilfred Laurier in 1910, the enthusiasm for a 

complete university was unbounded, as the residences and the buildings to accommodate engineering 

and agriculture followed this fine structure. But then the disaster of the First World War struck and the 

whole University program came to a standstill. The new College of Engineering was wiped out 

completely when Dean MacKenzie and his students enlisted in a body. Then came the Golden ‗20s – the 

beautiful chemistry building, the physics building, the new engineering building, the field husbandry 

building. The future seemed unquestionable, the achievement of the planning assured, when with a 

terrible suddenness, we were right into the great depression of the ‗30s. Tenders had been called and the 

contract documents had been actually prepared for the new arts building, but this building was never 

built. And to the great disappointment of all concerned, our University program again came to a very 

dismal halt. And it remained that way until after World War II. 

 

Then it was as if a dam had burst, and the campus was suddenly flooded with mature young people who 

had returned from the Armed Forces, with an appreciation and desire for a higher education. But all the 

goodwill and planning in the world between Government and University could not provide suitable and 

permanent college accommodation under such short notice, with the result that many of our students 

were educated in accommodations that would be completely unacceptable under today‘s standards. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we are in the fourth period. I would like to give credit to Dr. Spinks and his 

colleagues, for the arrangement of two campuses under the one Board of Governors which gives us a 

very simple design of administration to a very large and complex institution. Now we have had time to 

see in advance the very large impeding increase in student enrolment. Very comprehensive requirement 

studies have been made, and the present program is designed to meet these requirements. But along with 

this, we are looking at expenditure requirements which are fantastic when they are compared with those 

of a few short years ago. In the years of 1945 and 1946, we were considering 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

171 

sums of just over a half million dollars, whereas now we are looking at an annual $30 million and this is 

to go on to $40 million. We begin to realize what a huge project our University actually is and how 

much of a disaster it would be if we should again experience a sudden halt. We should examine our 

spending as carefully as possible and try, to the best of our ability, to see that the program of our 

University reaches its fulfilment without affecting the autonomy or the academic freedom of this 

institution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Experience has proven that circumstances beyond our control can have a direct 

effect on our planning. But our experience also indicates that we should use moderation in our spending 

in order to conserve our means to a degree that will ensure the continuation of a reasonable program. 

Mr. Speaker, while the amounts involved for maintaining our University are very large, this Government 

certainly recognizes the very substantial contribution it has made to our economy. We are most fortunate 

that, at the time our University was established, research had come to be recognized as a part of the 

function of a university and the results have been most impressive. In the field of agriculture, there is not 

a successful farm operation in Saskatchewan that does not credit the university research for a measure of 

this success. When we think of men like Dean Kirk, Professor Gregg, Evan Hardy, Pavlychenko, and 

presently active men like Dr. Bill White, Doug Knott and Oliver Symes, automatically we think of 

rust-resistant wheat, of Royal flax, of crested wheat grass, of chemical weed control, and many, many 

other developments that have meant millions of dollars to our economy. And I am pleased to see today, 

Mr. Speaker, that Professor Oliver Symes and his good wife are here as spectators in the Speaker‘s 

gallery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — And I would like to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that one of the recent developments of 

note is the grain-loss monitors for combines, developed by Professor Oliver Symes. This monitors the 

amount of grain being lost over the straw walkers of a combine. A meter on the operator‘s platform, or 

on the tractor in the case of a pull type combine, indicates the rate in bushels per hour at which grain is 

being lost. The device enables the operator to maintain a forward speed or feed rate so the loss of grain 

will be at whatever level of loss that he feels is justified by the circumstances of the harvest. The 

monitor has been used successfully in wheat, oats and barley. As well, an automatic speed control unit 

has been designed and built to regulate the combine forward speed so that grain loss over the walkers 

will not exceed a predetermined quantity. By modest calculation when related to the wheat crop of 1966, 

this development will effect savings of $34½ million in wheat alone in one year. And 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

172 

I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, to Premier Thatcher, what if he can find a way to get this money 

back from the farmers the university problem is solved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — In the field of construction and medicine, we are very much aware of the 

outstanding contributions of Dean MacKenzie and Dr. Throvaldson and their development of Kalicrete 

cement, of Neil Hutcheon and Gus Handegord, for their findings regarding insulations and vapor 

barriers. Teams guided by such men as Professors Bill Staples and Howard Douglas are carrying on the 

search allowing more adequate construction of highways; pollution research; investigating the effect of 

potash dust on foliage of yield crops and on soil; investigations for improved sewage lagoon systems; 

the pilot testings for bridges and other concrete structures. 

 

Through the Colleges of Engineering and Medicine, while Dr. Begg was Dean, we had the unique 

arrangement whereby Blain Holmlund had a seat on both colleges for research in bio-medical 

engineering and the resulting development of such things as the heart-lung machine, the kidney 

transplant machine, and the laser beam. You can be sure, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has a full 

appreciation of our University, not only for its contribution to the scholastic refinement of our people, 

but for the very practical impact it has on our economy. You can be sure, too, that this appreciation 

includes the academic freedom of the University. And so it is proper too that this Government must be 

completely aware and knowledgeable of the monies required. It must act in a responsible manner on 

behalf of the taxpayers in this regard, so that we can be sure that the work of this great institution will 

continue in the smoothest manner possible. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to compliment the mover and the seconder of the motion. The 

Hon. Member of Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) in his business career has shown the initiative, 

the drive and the integrity that makes him one of the most respected entrepreneurs in our province. His 

contribution of service to his community has been most outstanding. The Hon. Member from Saskatoon 

Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) is a most highly regarded man in his profession, and his contribution of time 

toward the betterment of the community of Saskatoon is indeed an outstanding one. These men, Mr. 

Speaker, believe in the free enterprise system, and their concern about people and about their fellow man 

can certainly be stacked up against the record of any man in this Assembly. You can be sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that I will be voting against the amendment and for the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, in this my first speech in this 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

173 

Legislative Assembly, I would like first of all, to thank my constituents for their loyalty and support. I 

am very pleased to be here on their behalf to represent the progressively-minded citizens and people of 

Cutknife constituency. 

 

I feel humble and proud to succeed Mr. Nollet who held the seat for some 20 years. Mr. Nollet was a 

man admired by all regardless of one‘s political beliefs, a man whose impeccable character and 

reputation held the complete respect and adoration of his constituents and of the people of our province, 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — . . . the Minister of Agriculture for 18 years who initiated many important and 

worthwhile projects such as: (1) the South Saskatchewan River Dam and River Water Project; (2) water 

conservation and development schemes; (3) forage and pasture development, community pastures; (4) 

extension of water and sewage services to farms and towns; (5) clearing, breaking and acquisition of 

lands for utilization; (6) crop insurance, and (7) the Agricultural Machinery Testing Program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Nollet was a man guided by the principle that we must all be guided by if our 

civilization of today is to survive, the principle of humanity first or people before dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — My only hope, Mr. Speaker, is that I will fulfil the duties and obligations of an 

elected Members of this House of the calibre of Mr. Toby Nollet. I hope I can give my constituents the 

high standard of service that he has given in the past. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all Members who have been re-elected or who have been 

elected for the first time. I must congratulate the new Cabinet Ministers also, in their new venture. I 

would also like to thank the Government for the things they have done for Cutknife constituency, and I 

hope they will continue to look after all constituencies, whether they be represented by New Democrats 

or Liberals. I want also, Mr. Speaker, to thank the Government for calling back to Regina its tax 

collectors from our fair city of Lloydminster and for integrating the citizens of Lloydminster with the 

rest of Saskatchewan, and making it possible for them to receive the Homeowner Grants. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — By the way, Mr. Speaker, we‘re expecting $150 from 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

174 

this Government in 1968 to make up for the two years that we were denied the grants. Seriously though, 

I wonder if this money could not be redistributed more fairly to all the people of Saskatchewan in some 

other manner. 

 

As I make my first speech in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I cannot help thinking of the many different 

people that I represent. I am thinking of the many farmers who are sitting back at home, worrying about 

their small grain quotas. I think of my students back home contemplating a university career without a 

scholarship and with increased tuition fees, of the mothers who are trying to make their grocery budgets 

go further and achieving little success because of the rising cost of living. I am thinking of the business 

men who are all now in a slump because the farmer is short of cash and because the working man isn‘t 

making ends meet and cannot buy those household furnishings, TVs, cars and accessories. I am also 

thinking of the teachers back home who are wondering what kind of Government this is that would 

suggest a salary freeze, a separation of principals from the teacher bargaining unit, and who would use 

compulsion to implement area bargaining against the advice of the Moore Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — The people of Cutknife constituency are extremely interested in the new north-south 

highway from Kindersley to Unity, Maidstone and north to the parks area. This idea has been talked 

about a lot but that is about all. This highway would give a good system from the United States border 

north to the parks and would increase tourist traffic. I also urge this Government to rebuild Highway No. 

40, from North Battleford to the Alberta border and oil it immediately afterwards to prevent its surface 

from eroding. I would like to remind the Government, Mr. Speaker, that this was in our program in 

1964, and that the Liberal candidate in Cutknife promised it in 1964 and 1967. It is now four years 

overdue. My constituents would also appreciate the oiling of No. 17 north of Lloydminster and No. 3 to 

Deer Creek. 

 

Above all, Mr. Speaker, I urge this Government to get more value for our highway dollar. My 

constituents have been very annoyed with the way the construction of Highway No. 5, east of 

Lloydminster, has been going. There have been several accidents, one life lost, in the three and a half 

years it took to build 20 miles of road, Mr. Speaker. And it‘s still not finished – seven miles to go! No 

one can tell me that the Government isn‘t paying far too much for such construction work, especially if 

this contract is let on a cost-plus basis. 

 

The Lloydminster school unit is probably the most under-equipped unit in the province. There is not one 

auditorium or gymnasium at any of the six centralized schools in the unit. Applications have been made 

by at least two school boards, but the reply has been that Government policy is to curtail any further 

grants for the building of auditoriums. 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

175 

Now since the constituency of Cutknife is predominantly a rural one, the needs of the farmer must be 

looked at, and here new and vigorous policies are needed. The high costs of machinery must be 

examined, the prices paid for farm produce must also be looked at, but the biggest problem is that we are 

not selling our wheat! This Assembly must urge the Federal Government and the Canadian Wheat Board 

to negotiate a new world wheat agreement, to push sales to other new countries, and if necessary press 

for a two-price system of wheat and sell what it can at the going world prices and subsidize the farmer 

for the difference. 

 

Now, the election last fall, Mr. Speaker, was my first campaign and I listened with extreme interest to 

the propaganda spewed out constantly by the present Government. It hammered away at our brains 

constantly of the new Saskatchewan the Liberals were building, the land of plenty where millions of 

dollars were available for highways, education and health and of high wages for all. Then, all of a 

sudden after October 11th and the election of this Government, not a word about the new Saskatchewan 

of plenty, but an announced austerity program for all with attempted controls of certain selected 

institutions, the University and teachers, who were made the scapegoats of the Government‘s 

misallocation of the Provincial Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — It must be difficult for Liberals in our fair province, Mr. Speaker, to hold up their 

heads and restrain themselves from blushing, when the Ministers of this Government propose such 

weird teacher salary legislation. Then after the teachers have voiced strong opposition to it, they 

attacked them with terms of ―gross exaggerations‖ and ―breaking faith‖. This Government has lost the 

confidence of Saskatchewan teachers, school boards and taxpayers because of this hastily drawn-up 

legislation, which was constructed without the co-operative consent of all parties concerned, and I stress 

all parties concerned. The proposed teacher salary legislation was unfair to the teaching profession. It 

was not in the Liberal party‘s platform of the 1967 election. This underhanded legislation proves beyond 

a doubt that the Liberal party is not worthy of the trust given it by Saskatchewan voters. I can assure the 

Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) that I will have more to say about compulsory area bargaining 

when that legislation is brought before this House. 

 

Just a word about the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac). In listening to his address this 

afternoon, I have one genuine comment to make, I am completely disappointed that he cannot show any 

more enthusiasm for education than that in this province at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

176 

Mr. Kwasnica: — What can you expect, Mr. Speaker, from a party with no philosophy except that of 

worshipping the almighty dollar, with no philosophy except that of putting dollars before people, profits 

before services? What can you expect of a party governed by the cruel arm of its leader who is still 

wallowing in old, hackneyed 18th century philosophy, who is still in the state of stunned reaction . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — . . . a reaction to anything that was set up for the common good of Saskatchewan 

citizens by the previous CCF Government? What can you expect of a Premier who has deliberately 

wrecked many programs and institutions worthy of support by all regardless of their political beliefs? 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to give you some examples. By this I mean the closing down of Embury 

House, the home for the mentally disturbed; the obliteration of the AMA, set up by our beloved Toby 

Nollet and so valued by the Saskatchewan farmers; raising medicare premiums and refusing to 

implement a drug plan; robbing the Provincial Student Loan Fund of some $2 million; reducing 

Government scholarships to worthy grade 12 graduates; and using the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, a Government-owned corporation, to make huge profits so the Government can balance its 

Budget. 

 

This philosophy is completely contrary to the real aims of a Crown corporation which is to provide 

services at cost or slightly above cost, to the people of Saskatchewan. This is the Government, Mr. 

Speaker, of a Premier who is scuttling Saskatchewan Government Insurance which is the envy of all of 

North America, by playing politics with its agents, and cancelling agencies across the province simply 

because they are not Liberal supporters . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — . . . and by raising insurance rates to almost match those of private companies, 

making excessive profits while doing so, so that the Government can say to the people, ―See, 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance cannot give you the cheaper insurance, therefore we must sell it to 

the private sector.‖ This is a Premier who has extended the royalty-free period for potash companies to 

1981 so that few royalties will be forthcoming to Saskatchewan residents until then. Therefore, there 

will be higher taxes on the people of Saskatchewan in the meantime. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who started it? 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, in my speech today I have given constructive criticism of the 

Government‘s actions and policies 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

177 

and at the same time I have been trying to show the basic philosophy of our party. I said earlier in my 

speech that Mr. Nollet believed in humanity first, which means that the needs of people come before 

dollars. I will never be so boorish and vain as to say that our party will be ruled by the dollar; I do not 

believe that profits must come by gouging the people who are quite defenceless in regard to prices 

charged. I do not believe that profits must come by gouging them, that Government corporations must 

make excessive profits or else they must be sold to the private sector. This is where the Liberals have 

missed the basic purpose of publicly-owned corporations like the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance and the Saskatchewan Telephone Company. 

 

The New Democrats are also concerned about who owns our natural resources and how our resources 

are managed. Everybody well knows that over 65 per cent of our oil industry is owned by foreign capital 

and that our three potash companies now producing in Saskatchewan are controlled by foreign interests. 

Our concern here has been borne out. Since the United States owns our three potash companies – that‘s 

something that somebody else can own, three potash companies – these companies must follow 

American policy which is stated in the American Enemy Act of 1917. If an American subsidiary sold 

potash to a country such as China or Cuba, it would be liable to a $10,000 fine and/or ten years 

imprisonment of its management. We heard the answer from the Hon. Premier today regarding potash 

that he doesn‘t know of any sales that have not been let. Well how can they be let under these 

conditions? They will not be let with this Enemy Act in force. It is a sad day, Mr. Speaker, when 

Canadians cannot sell Canadian potash because of foreign domination. This is what both the old-line 

parties have done to most of Canada. This is a perfect example of uncontrolled private enterprise that 

our Premier so proudly boasted about on Wednesday. I am not complaining about private competitive 

enterprise. I would like to see control in this regard. I am very disillusioned and sad because I had great 

hopes that potash in Saskatchewan would make Saskatchewan a better province to live in. I am afraid, 

Mr. Speaker, that by the time 1981 rolls along, the potash industry will have fizzled out and that the 

people of Saskatchewan will have obtained meagre short-term benefits and our province will have been 

raped for the sake of immediate gain of a few. 

 

We in the New Democratic party will always keep the common worker and the farmer at heart, and we 

well know that the wheels of the nation will not keep turning unless the average guy has money in his 

pocket to buy the goods produced by the nation. We know that providing basic services like medicare, 

power and Government insurance at cost will leave more money in people‘s pockets. We know that our 

Premier was telling only a fraction of truth when he said that rising prices are caused only by high 

wages. Anybody knows that in manufacturing a fridge, for example, about 13 per cent of the cost goes 

to executive salaries and profits, 6 per cent of the cost to advertising, 13 per cent to transportation and 

distribution and 9 per cent to labor. The remaining 58 per cent goes to materials and other items. This 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

178 

means, Mr. Speaker, that if labor gets a 10 per cent raise, the price of the article should go up one per 

cent, not ten. 

 

These are some reasons why I am a New Democrat. Add to these, our capable Leader, who has had the 

courage to withstand the Medicare crisis and push on with North America‘s most progressive legislation 

to date . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — . . . the first comprehensive medicare plan. I admire Woodrow Lloyd for his 

steadiness and his kind leadership – the man who was named Canadian of the year by Maclean‘s 

magazine in 1963. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, because of our philosophy and our Leader, I take great pride in being a 

New Democrat. 

 

As you can gather by now, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the motion by the Member for Regina South 

West (Mr. McPherson) to accept the Speech from the Throne, but I will vote for the amendment put 

forward by the Hon. Woodrow Lloyd (Biggar). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, may I add my voice to those that have 

already been raised in this Legislature in congratulating you on your election as Speaker of this House 

once again. I can only echo what has been said time and time again that as a new Member of the 

Legislature I shall always do my best to abide by the rules of the House and to be guided by your 

Honour‘s decisions. 

 

As Members know, my constituency is Saskatoon Riversdale. Riversdale, respectfully, Mr. Speaker, 

mirrors the very image of Saskatchewan. Here, in Riversdale, we have Canadians of many and varied 

ethnic backgrounds, Ukrainian, German, French, Chinese, and Anglo-Saxon. It‘s a myriad of 

Canadianism. There are many types of workers, white collar workers, blue collar workers and the 

labourer. Yes, we even have some of the farming people who reside in the city during the winter 

months. We have the old and afflicted, the young and the impatient. It is as you can see, Sir, a riding that 

reflects the Canadian mosaic. Riversdale is very fortunate also to have many of the modern-day 

conveniences. We have a very fine hospital located on Avenue P and 20th Street, St. Paul‘s Hospital. It 

is operated by a charitable order of Sisters of the Catholic Church and is reputed to be one of the best 

hospitals in Saskatchewan. Of course, as in all ridings in Saskatchewan, Riversdale has its fair share of 

very fine churches. St. Thomas Wesley United, on Avenue H and 20th Street, has been a beacon for 

years of many of 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

179 

the residents of the west side of Saskatoon. There is St. Mary‘s Catholic Church, St. George‘s Anglican 

Church, Trinity United in Montgomery Place, and for those of Ukrainian background I am proud to say 

that there is a Ukrainian Greek Orthodox Church on Avenue J and 20th, and my church, the Greek 

Catholic Church on Avenue M and 20th Street. I know that there are certain inherent dangers in talking 

about churches and various organizations, but I feel also that it is important to mention the very fine 

work done by the Seventh Day Adventists. On Herman Avenue in Saskatoon the Seventh Day 

Adventists operate Sunnyside Nursing Home. There the workers and the very fine staff carry out the 

day-to-day tasks of caring for the sick and for the old. 

 

From the business standpoint the main artery of Riversdale is 20th Street, and if some Hon. Members 

should be in Saskatoon and have occasion to take a stroll down 20th Street, in my view they will find 

that 20th Street is one of the most progressive and finest business streets in Saskatoon. And we have 

industry as well, industry located for some length of time, the British American Oil Refinery on 11th 

Street and Quaker Oats Feed Mill located literally in the very heart of Riversdale. 

 

Now on that last point, Mr. Speaker, the announcement a few days ago that Maple Leaf Mills Limited 

had purchased a large parts of Quaker Oats caused some concern among some of the workers in 

Saskatoon at the feed mill. Newspaper reports indicated that the plant would be phased out when Maple 

Leaf had adequate feed-manufacturing facilities of its own. Now, as Hon. Members know, on 

Wednesday last, I asked the Hon. Premier a question regarding Government intentions and Government 

actions in order to prevent such a phasing out. I am very pleased that today the Hon. Premier has given 

us an answer, at least stating that from his information and knowledge the Company has no further plans 

for the next two years. But I would urge the Hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and the Government to do all 

that is possible to ensure that the phasing out process – if in fact it is going to take place, and I sincerely 

hope that it doesn‘t – takes into account the human needs and interests of the workers that are affected. I 

know, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier will do all that he can in attempting to stop the closure of the feed 

mill and will further keep this House informed as to what success he has had in that regard. 

 

Now, if I may be permitted a moment or two also to talk about my riding, culturally. Riversdale is the 

home of what some of the finest boasters and braggers of Riversdale recall and refer to as the finest 

summer show – Pion-era. Pion-era works in conjunction with the Western Development Museum, one 

of the most historical institutions of the West. It provides during the summer months education and 

entertainment for the residents of Saskatoon, and I hope that this Government will see fit to give every 

possible assistance to the organizations supporting Pion-era and to the Western Development Museum. I 

welcome the recent announcement by the Government that there are new plans 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

180 

presently under consideration for the expansion of the Western Development Museum. This type of 

activity in my mind, Mr. Speaker, is beneficial not only to the residents of Saskatoon but indeed to all of 

the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, I could go on at some length to describe the other important projects, other important activities of 

Riversdale residents, but time won‘t permit. I am going to make a pubic pledge to you, Sir, and to Hon. 

Members of this House as well as to the constituents of Riversdale, that I will do all that I can to serve 

them faithfully and properly as a Member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — However, it is in the context of this background of Riversdale that I must finally 

come to grips with the Speech from the Throne, and it is in this context, Mr. Speaker, that I must 

ultimately make a decision as to what the Speech from the Throne provides, is anything, for the 

members of my riding. Regretfully, I have concluded that the Speech from the Throne offers little 

solution to 20th century problems and little hope, worse yet, for the challenges of the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, nearly ten years ago in 1959, I was still a student at the University of Saskatchewan 

at Saskatoon campus, and as a young person during those years, I was very keenly interested in 

government and politics. You know, Mr. Speaker, in those days students could do that because their 

autonomy didn‘t preoccupy their time, and they didn‘t have to worry about what they wrote in the 

student newspapers because of the possibility of political interference. We listened during those days to 

the various political speeches given by the various political leaders. Therefore, when my constituents 

some years later after 1959, in fact last fall, saw fit to elect me as their representative to the Legislature 

(if I may be permitted to display some of my unbridled enthusiasm) I viewed the trust placed on me as 

my good fortune. Here was my opportunity, I thought, to tackle the type of problems of modern-day 

education, technology, finance, proper economic development, recreation, reform of laws and a myriad 

of other issues. However, Mr. Speaker, before hearing the Hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher) on Wednesday 

in his major speech in the debate on the Speech from the Throne, little did I expect that I would now 

almost ten years later from 1959 hear in person the very same speech, albeit with some changes, that I 

heard the then Hon. Leader of the Opposition deliver when I was a student on campus at University. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

181 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, it is sometimes stated, Sir, that time changes all things. I have to question the 

validity of that truism as it applies to the Hon. Premier in his speeches. If I might be permitted to quote 

from a very famous old song: ―That ol‘ Man River just keeps on rolling along.‖ 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Six out of seven. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Six out of seven. And if you read the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, you 

might as well add the rest of the words of that song: ―He don‘t plant taters, he don‘t plant cotton; and 

those that do are soon forgotten,‖ and that‘s what the Hon. Premier did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, he soon forgot the interests of those that do the work in Saskatchewan, but he 

just keeps rolling right along like ol‘ Man River making the same old speech. As you listen to the 

Members of the Government opposite, Sir, you feel that they are rolling along at a pace oblivious to the 

pace of the rocket age in Saskatchewan today. In fact, to hear the Hon. Member for Regina South West 

(Mr. McPherson), one concludes that he would move back time and move back the rapidity of the rocket 

age to exactly the snail‘s pace approach that he exhibited and talked about on Monday when talking on 

the Speech from the Throne. The Hon. Premier in his speech on Wednesday gave several new Members 

of this Legislature a very interesting and historical lesson about the 1930s. I presumed that he attempted 

to show somehow that this side of the House was caught up in the problems of the 1930s. Everything 

said by the Members opposite, Sir, since I‘ve been in this House, continually and repeatedly goes back 

to the 1930s, the 1940s and the 1950s, if they get modern. They set up comparisons and they view the 

problems in a period of Saskatchewan‘s history that many on this side of the House barely recall, and all 

the while they build doors of paper and arguments tissue-thin, so that the Hon. Premier can crash 

through them with the gusto of a latter-day member of the Knights of the Round Table. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now accordingly, Sir, it‘s crystal clear why the Speech from the Throne is silent 

about today‘s problems, why it offers as I said at the outset little hope and little solution. It is a 

reflection, Sir, of an old Government filled with old ideas, applying old solutions to brand new 

unparalleled problems of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my generation 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

182 

wanted to hear in the Speech bold new ideas. It wants a Government with imagination, aggressiveness 

and foresight. So the Speech from the Throne shows, Mr. Speaker, that we really have a pussycat 

Government. It is timid, and it is meek, and it‘s silent in coming to grips with the 20th century problems 

of Saskatchewan. Granted, from time to time it purrs . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — One exception. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . about some of the minor problems, but it fails to come to grips with the major 

issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, everyone in Riversdale is concerned about the seemingly never-ending 

spiral in the cost of living. For some time, my constituents have been looking to this Government for 

effective leadership in curbing the upward trend of living. Most asked: why is it that Government has 

not yet taken decisive steps to stop the rising costs in food and shelter and clothing? Regretfully for the 

nearly two years that I‘ve been nominated, I have had to tell the people that no consumer branch of 

Government or such similar agency for example is yet forthcoming. I have had to tell them that sooner 

or later a Royal Commission of some years‘ duration will report back to this Government and tell them 

what the people already know, that costs are going up. Does the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, 

indicate bold action in consumer protection? Regretfully it is silent. 

 

Now, there are hundreds of apartment dwellers in Saskatoon; young modern people live in them. These 

are couples who recently married, are probably both working and saving for the day when, hopefully, 

they‘ll be able to own their own homes. Day after day, someone is asking me: why do we have to have 

an income of about $8,000 a year before we can get assistance in building a house? Often when the 

money is found they then ask: why is the construction of homes lagging so far behind the needs and the 

demands? Mr. Speaker, these are young people, looking for a chance to start off their new careers and 

they‘re not going to be satisfied by repeated excuses as offered by this Government such as, tight 

money, high interest rates and the like. They want action. With all the prosperity around they ask: why is 

there no courage? Why is there no idealism by Government to start, for example, a project such as the 

Housing Corporation of Saskatchewan, in order to help these young people get the money for their 

homes? Well, does the Speech from the Throne indicate any bold action in this regard? Regretfully, Mr. 

Speaker, it is silent. 

 

Now regarding the senior citizens. They are anxious and confused about their future I would submit. To 

them, Mr. Speaker, $76.50 a month is just simply not enough on which to decently survive. They‘ve 

heard about the new prosperity. I 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

183 

cannot answer them, Mr. Speaker, when they ask: why has the new prosperity not improved our lot? 

What do you tell a 75-year-old man and his wife who, having no other means of support, have just 

barely enough money to pay for drug bills, medical assistance, food and clothing? They get such a 

meagre allowance. Well does the Speech from the Throne indicate bold action? Regretfully, Mr. 

Speaker, it‘s silent. 

 

Well, some citizens of Riversdale require full-time care and supervision in nursing homes. The relatives 

of these people are disillusioned from time to time when they‘re told that their parents, in most cases, or 

their friends cannot gain admittance to an old-age home because there is simply not enough 

accommodation. Once in the homes, the administrators and the staff are overworked. Conditions are 

often overcrowded. During the past few months I had occasion to visit a number of old-age homes in 

Saskatoon and most particularly the Geriatric Centre, located at the Sanatorium in the heart of 

Riversdale. The workers in all of these institutions deserve the commendation of all Members of this 

House for their tireless hours of work in giving the maximum amount of care and effort to the senior 

citizens. But it can be put no more simply, Mr. Speaker, than that they need more financial assistance. 

Personally, I was appalled with some of the conditions under which the staff labored at the Saskatoon 

Geriatric Centre. I am a layman in these matters to be sure, but I could observe three to four persons in a 

room, rooms filled with medical facilities, nurses working at a fever pitch. Some people have to be 

moved, because of their age and their infirmity, by two or three people. All of these people, the afflicted 

and the helpers and the workers, are looking to this Government for more assistance, looking for, if you 

will, bold action. What can you say to a person who has pioneered the development of his country, the 

type of pioneering spirit that the Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) talked about? What 

can you tell that person who has given the best years of his or her life in building Saskatchewan, but 

who has been shunted away in cramped facilities or who can only live in the hope that some day he or 

she may get access to the very facilities that are available? It is a shame. Does the Speech from the 

Throne indicate bold action for these people? Mr. Speaker, it is silent. 

 

I am proud to say that I am a Canadian of Ukrainian ancestry. All ethnic groups are watching carefully 

the developments of the recent Constitutional Conference in Ottawa. I feel that most ethnic people 

recognize the very unique role that Quebec has in Confederation. I am sure they will do all they can to 

facilitate proper and firm understanding between the two founding peoples. But these people are now 

looking for the Saskatchewan Government to expand its thinking so that their linguistic and cultural 

rights, hopes and aspirations may also be met. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Is there any reason, Mr. Speaker, why this Government 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

184 

cannot now embark on a multi-partisan approach to the cultural and language rights of the non-French 

speaking Canadians in Saskatchewan, as the Hon. Premier talked about in his speech on Wednesday? 

What can you tell a new Canadian when he asks you: what is my Government doing to protect my 

linguistic and cultural rights? I said Riversdale was a good example of the Canadian mosaic. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan is the best example in Canada of the Canadian mosaic. The task of finding a new 

understanding between the two founding people in Canada demands an adjustment to the legitimate 

interest and demands of these other ethnic peoples. It demands a multi-partisan approach to the 

Constitution. Now the Speech from the Throne made no mention of the interests of these people. One 

can ask why an Intersessional Committee of this Parliament or this Legislature has not been instituted 

yet for the purposes of hearing about the views of these people. Well we have a committee on the Flag, 

that‘s important sure enough, but more important is what kind of a land are these ethnic people going to 

live under with respect to the flag that it‘s going to represent? They want to know why this Committee 

of Intersessional status hasn‘t been set up, so we can closely work together with the Ottawa secretariat as 

the result of the recent Conference which the Premier and the Attorney General were at, a committee to 

explore and research the entire question in Saskatchewan, in order that all of the people of Saskatchewan 

can come to a consensus with respect to the Constitution. A Constitution is just too important to be 

wastefully drafted to make representation in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, without the legitimate consideration 

of the interests of all people, no matter what the political, religious or ethnic background may be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, does the Speech from the Throne talk about that type of a 

committee or some such new thinking? Regretfully, it is silent. Mr. Speaker, everything is silent about 

this Government except the Hon. Premier. It is as I said a pussycat Government! 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I call on this Government to launch, instead of investment in machines and business 

(very important granted), an investment in man, to reorientate its thinking to the 20th century. There are 

a number of vital areas. 

 

Firstly, in education, we can draw up a blueprint for this investment in man; there is no better place than 

to begin with education. Now today‘s youth know the import of the words, automation and technology. I 

haven‘t heard the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) or the Hon. Premier mention those words 

yet in this House. Rapid technology will probably mean, it‘s reported by some of the best writers on 

education, retraining of a graduate engineer from the University of Saskatchewan in the next ten to 

fifteen years as many as three times during his lifetime. Now the educational system today stresses the 

teaching of a particular technical skill. It is designed to 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

185 

educate a person so that he may find a job and a role in society – and that is important. But with rapid 

technology, students and workers will, I predict, soon find themselves in situations where a particular 

skill or training received will become obsolete. To compound matters, in order to acquire this particular 

skill, young people are taught by the rote method of learning. When the change comes to technology, 

they are unable to adjust the type of learning that they received at school for the technological age. That 

learning, Mr. Speaker, is not rote learning, but learning through discovery. Our educational system 

respectfully, Mr. Speaker, is geared to learning through the rote system. But it ought to be geared to 

learning through discovery. 

 

Now necessarily there must be a great deal of economic dislocation and social confusion when 

automation and technology have caught up with a person. In many areas of industry now, men are being 

laid off simply because they can‘t meet the demands of the job of the machine required that is imposed 

upon them. They lose their jobs. The Quaker Oats plant in the phasing out, I dare say, is probably an 

example of the effects of technology. Now when this problem is multiplied, the problems of society are 

also multiplied. One cannot argue that in the next five years this phenomenon of the rocket age will be 

the single largest, most important problem of Saskatchewan and Canada. To give you an example of the 

speed of technology, may I draw the attention of Hon. Members of this House to just one industry. It is 

the paper and pulp industry. One leading writer talked about technology in these terms: 

 

For example, when I came to Montreal in 1945, a modern newsprint machine would produce 

about 50,000 tons a year; today an efficient newsprint machine has an actual capacity of 150,000 

to 175,000 tons a year. One such machine would be nearly enough to provide the average 

long-term annual growth of newsprint demand in all of United States. Two such machines will 

easily supply the average increases in United States newsprint requirements in recent years. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we see it. Farms are getting larger. Farm machinery is getting more sophisticated. 

Less farmers are doing a better job and less machinery is required. 

 

It therefore stands to reason that our Government ought now to be preparing itself to meet this problem 

of technology. The first step would be a change in the approach in the attitude with respect to education. 

Government must be prepared to make what I have called, Mr. Speaker, an investment in man. To be 

really an educated man in today‘s context, preparation may be required for as much as one-half of one‘s 

adult years. If this is the case, I ask you, Sir, is it possible or even desirable economically or socially that 

a student or a worker who is being retrained should be dependent on other individuals for such a long 

time with training and education? If his job has been changed by technology, should he demean himself 

– and I use that word advisedly – during these periods of retraining, in order that he 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

186 

may catch up to get back to the mainstream of activity? Our generation, Mr. Speaker, is revolting against 

the idea of dependency on others for education. Although there is some small amount available through 

scholarships, bursaries and the like, it is, Sir, subterfuge. It does not really give students the wherewithal 

to live as a family if they are married, and in all cases it does not give social and economic 

independence. In effect it places education on a basis similar to charity or privilege. I believe that we 

must find economic ways to give students at all levels full and economic independence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And from a strictly economic viewpoint this argument has merit, because it stands to 

reason, Mr. Speaker, that this Government and the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) should 

bend every effort to produce more doctors, more engineers, more scientists and perhaps even more 

lawyers, more teachers, so that they can go out on the market place and be productive and useful 

members. It‘s insufficient, absolutely and utterly, to merely state that more money will be given to 

education, as the Speech from the Throne does, and in the same breath, as the Premier does, then state 

that society will be taxed. This type of economic argument for education has been discredited by all the 

recent writings on education. Hon. Members are all aware of the Bladen Committee and the Bladen 

Commission on Education. On this question of economics, just one quote, Mr. Speaker, I think that is 

relevant. It says this: 

 

More expenditure on education seems to mean no less expenditure on machines, but more total 

savings and more total investment. 

 

It is not going to tax society to provide a new and revised program for education; it‘s going to mean 

more total savings. In my mind the Bladen Report and all the recent authorities have now set forward the 

authority for the proposition that this Government ought to have at this session announced the beginning 

of free university education so that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . ultimately higher learning, indeed all learning, technical, vocational, all 

categories will be a matter of birthright and not privilege, where a person‘s access to schools will be 

dependent on what he‘s got in his head and not in his pocketbook. I am very sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that on Wednesday, and my generation will be sorry also, that the Hon. Premier debunked that attitude 

and that approach to education. He demeaned the role of the students in the future of educational 

developments and growth of this province. Regretfully, this Government is just not reading the beat of 

today. 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

187 

In fact, listening to the public statements of the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) today, the 

Hon. Member from Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth), the Hon. Member from Saskatoon City 

Park-University (Mr. Charlebois), all talking on various other minor aspects of education, I am 

convinced that not only is this Government not reading the beat, it‘s trying to stop it and hold it back. If 

our educational goal is to be attained, in the 20th century with technology and with full educational 

opportunities for all, it can‘t be done by creating an atmosphere of fear, mistrust and suspicion among 

the academics of Canada, as this Government has done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — It cannot embark upon the course of conduct that my colleague from Cutknife (Mr. 

Kwasnica) referred to before I rose to speak. I want only to re-emphasize the debilitating effect that such 

controversy as the university autonomy issue and the teacher salary negotiations issue has had on the 

future goals of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan‘s youth. 

 

In the field of economic growth, may I state briefly that the philosophies enunciated by this Government 

are so old that even most universities and most respected economists don‘t discuss them except in 

lecturing in a class in ancient history. Saskatchewan, I would venture to say, was amazed by the valiant 

effort by the Hon. Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) in his support for the so-called 

independent sector. The learned dissertation by the Member from Regina South West which, I might 

add, Mr. Speaker, was supported, aided and abetted and encouraged by this Government, went against 

the best thinking of modern industry. Mr. Speaker, both modern industry and modern government 

recognizes the need for governmental direction in economic growth. It is of advantage, of course, that 

everybody, businessmen, workers, professionals should know, for example, as a small area of concern, 

what interest rates are going to be and over what period they are going to be fixed; how market trends 

are analyzed; how technology is going to affect the demands on products. The Government is going to 

have to co-ordinate all this; it is going to be for the benefit of all. You are not going to let the market go 

on the spree and create the havoc that it did in the 1930s, if I may hark back to the era that the Hon. 

Premier discussed Wednesday. If you will put it another way with respect to education, economics must 

be marshalled to be a positive and progressive force for the benefit of the people of this province. And 

that means, Mr. Speaker, that the resources of Saskatchewan must be marshalled for the benefit of all the 

people, not just a few industries, through a coordinated Government leadership plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: And under this leadership plan Saskatchewan will have 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

188 

more money for education. Now the Hon. Premier asked where we are going to get $7 million for free 

universities, more schools, better health facilities, lower cost of living. May I give the Hon. Member an 

example to back up the proposition that I have been putting forward. Again since I began with the paper 

and pulp industry, I want to draw the Hon. Members‘ attention to part of a speech that I‘m sure most 

Members are familiar with. I received a copy – and I‘m the other Members did as well – of a speech 

delivered by no less an authority than the President of the Canadian Pulp and Paper Association, Mr. 

R.M. Fowler, at the annual meeting of the Association in Montreal, January 26, 1968. He states this: 

 

There is no evidence of any attempt to co-ordinate public policy in developing new capacity at 

the provincial level with national trading policy in relation to available world demand. In the 

result, there has been a misuse of both public and private capital at a time when capital is scarce. 

 

There is also a warning, in that very same speech, on foreign investments. This should be of interest to 

this Government, especially to the Hon. Premier, who only today talked about the necessity of foreign 

investment. Mr. Fowler says this: 

 

The particular objectives of a foreign paper producer in establishing a new pulp mill in Canada 

do not always coincide with Canadian economic interests. While I continue to believe in the 

value of foreign investment to speed our development, I think some steps may be needed to 

regulate the timing and the flow of foreign investment into this industry. I hate to see our 

increasingly valuable trees being given away at little or no profit to the Canadian economy, when 

they could be used four or five years later with much greater economic advantage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now this should be of particular interest to the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

and the Prince Albert pulp industry. Mr. Speaker, I fervently hope . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Better watch out! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . that the Prince Albert pulp mill project will be a successful venture. There are 

just too many families involved now for anything to go wrong. But, Sir, in the light of the foregoing 

comment delivered some three weeks ago only, by the President of the Canadian Pulp and Paper 

Association, I fear that already valuable trees and resources of Saskatchewan have been given away. I 

hope that this does not happen in the potash industry as alluded to by my Hon. colleague from Regina 

North West (Mr. Whelan) in his question earlier today to the Premier. 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

189 

I want to re-emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that one of the leading industrialists of Canada talks about the need 

to regulate and have regulations. Mr. Speaker, the modern generation is keenly disappointed by the 

continued advocacy of old economic ideas, of old economic bogeys. Today‘s graduates in commerce 

and law of our universities and other professions know that modern business attitudes generally 

acknowledge the need for directional growth, notwithstanding the Government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in the field of health, I regret to say that the Government has lacked 

dynamism to continue and to expand the developments of health services in Saskatchewan. As I said it 

was a pussycat Government, so what else do you expect? It is meek and it is silent. Now when Medicare 

was introduced one of its basic tenders was to ensure health services for all of Saskatchewan as a matter 

of birthright. It tried to abolish financial hardships on the sick. It was hailed everywhere in Canada as a 

progressive step. It was even adopted by the Hall Commission some years later. Now in the Throne 

Speech, six years, almost five years, after Medicare was introduced, there is the ominous warning that 

we‘ll be stepping back, retrograding to a point where we will once again place a financial burden on the 

sick and the ill. The very thing that Saskatchewan has fought for so long and so hard to eliminate, the 

Liberals are now going to re-introduce. There are going to be deterrent fees likely for health services. It 

appears to my generation, Mr. Speaker, that this is in progress. It appears to my generation, that 

Government has a monomania with balancing the budget and the finances. Nowhere can this best be 

shown than by the Frazier Report on Mental Health Services. Mr. Speaker, that Report has charged and 

convicted this Government of neglecting mental health care in Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . when, Dr. Frazier said as follows: 

 

Saskatchewan has for at least two decades been in the forefront of innovation in delivery of 

psychiatric care. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Have you read the whole Frazier Report? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I have read the whole Frazier Report. Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that Hon. Members 

find it difficult when they get a dose of truth. It seems to have a biological reaction against them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

190 

Mr. Romanow: — Some of those particularly can‘t stand it, but I‘ll continue anyway. I am going to 

quote again from Dr. Frazier, who says the following with respect to Saskatchewan‘s former leadership: 

 

It has accumulated experience in many of the programs and features which most States in the 

United States are just now trying to establish. 

 

It is what one of the leading journalists in Saskatchewan from one of the major newspapers has said and 

also the Frazier Report has said it, that this Government inherited a first rate system, but has now 

straight-jacketed it with a second rate monetary program. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Smarten up! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I am only going to conclude with one more final quotation. 

 

We consider, however, that the early discharge procedure at North Battleford and especially at 

Weyburn, is based on unrealistic criteria . . . 

 

I am not going to bother with the rest of the quote. Mr. Speaker, in the 20th century, in 1968, young 

people reject this type of attitude by Government. We want it to be in the field of all health services 

again, progressive, dynamic, forthright, and imaginative. This society can ill-afford this social and 

economic tragedy that the Frazier Report shows. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — However, I sincerely hope that the Government will look into suggestions in the 

Report and that special emphasis be placed on facilities for those who have been found criminally 

insane. I‘d hope that today‘s modern view of penology dictates that the prime aim is to rehabilitate the 

criminal. When a person has been convicted of a serious criminal offence because of mental illness, I 

feel a greater duty is imposed on society not only to rehabilitate that person to normal conduct and 

normal behavior, but to do all that is possible to medically treat that person in the best possible 

environment during that period of incarceration. 

 

There are two related areas which I would commend to the attention of the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) and the Hon. Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald). One is the area of juvenile 

delinquency and the other is in the field of jail reform at Prince Albert and Regina. On the matter of 

juvenile delinquency, I was personally pleased to hear recent Federal Government announcements of a 

new approach, a brand new approach 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

191 

to problems of juvenile delinquency. There is a far too high rate of juvenile delinquency in 

Saskatchewan‘s major cities. The most undesirable feature of present legislation in this area is the thesis 

that youthful offenders must of their own accord correct their behavior. Once having been found guilty, 

it seems to say, the legislation limits the youthful offender to probation or to some similar service. It is 

important that service, to be sure, but it is not enough. We need more probation officers who are better 

trained in the area of treating and assisting juvenile delinquents. We need something new – new for 

Saskatchewan at any rate. 

 

I feel that there should be halfway houses, so-called, for the care, the housing and the treatment of 

juvenile delinquents. One especially archaic aspect of the present approach is that children under 16 may 

be waived into adult court. The problem is particularly vexatious, as I am sure the Hon. Attorney 

General knows, when the juvenile court magistrate has to decide whether or not to make such a waiver, 

especially when the Crown argues vigorously that the juvenile is so delinquent that only facilities 

reserved for adults are adequate for the protection of society. I have personally seen cases where 

15-year-olds have been waived to adult court, and after due process of law, convicted and then 

sentenced to a period of long incarceration with adults. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why is society saying to 

these young people that we have no facilities for you at your age, that we must stamp you undeniably 

with a jail term. It says to the youthful offender that there are no adequate facilities in which to treat 

your emotional problems or your anti-social behavior, except by the old traditional prison terms of 

yesteryear. I refuse to accept that any person is ever beyond help or assistance from society. I will never 

be convinced that people under 18 years of age should be cast aside. Now a halfway house program with 

increased staff, fully trained and well paid, will pay dividends for society in the long run. 

 

In the United Kingdom, and I am sure the Attorney General is aware of the Borstal system and I need 

not elaborate on the principle of it, except to say that it provides halfway houses for young offenders 

where they can obtain care and treatment and guidance without the stultifying hand of necessarily being 

under direct court supervision or of having the disadvantage of being incarcerated with senior or older 

people. Although there are some shortcomings in the Borstal system I‘m sure, this Government 

respectfully would be well advised to undertake a study, perhaps bi-partisan, perhaps using the resources 

of the best lawyers in this province, in order to introduce or work towards the day when we will be able 

to write in Saskatchewan a new charter for the rights for juvenile delinquents. 

 

Now it is my hope that the Attorney general will take up the announced plan of the Federal Government 

with some vigor. Yesterday, or the day before, he was kind enough, out of the House, to inform me that 

in fact his Government is taking some steps in this area already. I welcome it. Again it is my 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

192 

fervent plea that Saskatchewan will be in the forefront of reform in this area. 

 

On the matter of jail reform I urge the Hon. Attorney General to institute a study into the present 

facilities, their adequacy, and their long-range purpose. It is my view that one long-lasting contribution 

would be a thorough re-evaluation of the philosophy of penal institutions. Institutionalization of any 

kind has serious drawbacks. Firstly, I am sure that most inmates soon begin to feel that their society is 

only the prison society. There must be, I am sure, a feeling of rejection and, as a result, a feeling that 

they must stay together in order to exist. First-time offenders thusly pick up the attitudes and 

characteristics of older inmates who may have already become confirmed criminals and have embarked 

on a lifetime of crime. The result is that a first-time offender often comes out of the present prison 

system, a confirmed criminal. I won‘t belabor Hon. Members with statistics on the high rate of returns 

for first-time offenders. Economically, society suffers, and I think the argument there is clear. My 

impression is that programs within the jail system are really intended only to keep the inmate occupied 

while he is incarcerated. It may not be intended, but I feel this is the effect. I believe that jail officials 

under the administration of this Government and the former Government sincerely want to instill 

knowledge, trades, proper attitude, and the likes, for such prisoners. However, somehow and somewhere 

I have a feeling, Mr. Speaker, that the program has failed. I feel inmates view the present programs as a 

mere matter of doing time. 

 

Frankly, I don‘t have any direct suggestions for the Attorney General. It is a complex and complicated 

problem. But I do know that the Hon. Attorney General is a lawyer of some considerable experience and 

one with good standing within the profession. I urge him to undertake a study of jail and the question of 

juvenile delinquency and to press for the Federal Government to take early action also in this matter at 

the very most opportune time. 

 

Perhaps someday we will be able to get closer to a system that segregates first-time offenders from the 

rest, gives certain inmates more freedom to circulate in the free society, and introduces a newer 

incentive course and a newer program. Money and men, it is true, will be needed, but it‘s an expenditure 

that will pay in the long run. Today‘s society must not settle for dark-age attitudes in the field of 

penology, and I am sure my generation will settle for nothing less than a new and revolutionary 

approach to this particular problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have discussed briefly some specific problems of Riversdale Riding. I have reviewed 

those areas where I feel the Government has been silent. I have talked about investment in man. In 

reviewing it all, Mr. Speaker, in the light of the Speech from the Throne, the Speech proves conclusively 

to me that we have in Saskatchewan a chug-chug Government in a go-go age. 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

193 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Saskatchewan wants action on today‘s problems and not old 1959 speeches 

delivered by old-idea men. Regrettably, the Hon. Premier and his colleagues have been left behind by 

today‘s generation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And therefore, in conscience to myself, and to those of my age group, I must vote 

for the amendment and against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Larochelle (Shaunavon): — First, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on your 

reappointment to the high office of Speaker of this House. I am very happy to see you in this position 

again, as I think you have tried to be fair and just in your decisions in the House. I would also like to 

take this opportunity to thank my constituents for giving me the privilege of representing them again in 

this Legislature, and I will certainly do the best I can to represent them well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the new Members on this side of the House, also the three 

new Cabinet Ministers and also the new Members on the other side of the House. For the new Members 

on the opposite side of the House, who I see are mostly young men, I certainly hope that they do not 

develop the bitter attitude that some of the older Members on the opposite side have. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — They will! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — But, Mr. Speaker, this speech was written a few days ago. Today I have reservations 

about this statement. I believe that all Socialists are born bitter and sour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — You mean the speech was written years ago! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — Mr. Speaker, in our democracy I believe that the Opposition has an important role 

to play in this Legislature, and I believe that the Members of the Opposition can make their rightful 

contribution in this respect and not advocate programs of pie-in-the-sky which would take a mint to 

supply the money to provide. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are sick and tired of governments 

putting their hands in their pockets and extracting more tax money. And if those people had been 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

194 

re-elected it would certainly have taken a mint to supply their programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Shaunavon constituency has been known through the years as one of the areas 

receiving a very low rate of precipitation, but again this year, although one of the driest in our history, 

we have been able to produce an average crop, thanks to our new methods of farming and chemicals 

used. I think for this we should be thankful to our Department of Agriculture, both Provincial and 

Federal, and also to the University and to the people involved in the research of new chemicals and 

fertilizers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was quite amused when I heard the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and others 

painting a picture of gloom on our cattle industry and of prices of cattle today. In my part of the country 

we have large ranch units and these people produce a lot of cattle. Although the price of cattle in the last 

month has showed some small decrease, on the average the people in the cattle industry are quite happy. 

I am sure we would all like to see higher prices, but again we must be realistic and think of the 

housewife who is buying this red meat. If our price on the hoof is too high, which in turn will bring the 

price up at the counter, she will refuse to buy at those prices and will buy white meat in larger quantities. 

This could have a bad effect on prices of cattle. I repeat again that I think that the average producer of 

cattle today is quite happy with our market prices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a few minutes again, on the trucking industry. Members will 

not be surprised at that. I am still very much interested in its problems and still very proud of its 

performance. While some may feel that I am a wee bit mature to ever get too excited about things, I 

must confess that I do get that way when I consider the part that trucking has played and is playing in 

our daily lives, and especially when I contemplate what the future holds. If I might just review for the 

House – just so we have the picture – in 1925 – and that‘s a long time ago – there were roughly 5,500 

trucks of all kinds registered in this province. This number had grown to 69,000 by 1950 and to 122,000 

by 1962. Today we have about 158,000 trucks, of all kinds, registered or will have when we finish this 

year‘s business at the end of April. That represents about a third of all motor vehicle registrations in the 

province for 1967-68. The overall figure is estimated at 452,000 units. That, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is 

something of a phenomenal growth, not only for cars, but trucks as well. And if there is anything 

significant about the sharp increase in truck use in this province, it can only be that our people recognize 

the value of trucks and the fact that they play an increasing role in the commerce of this province and 

country. I want to say some more about that point in a few minutes. 

 

Of the 158,000 trucks registered now, I am informed that about 1,500 of these are of the over-the-road 

type, that is the large semi-trailer type. These are in the Class A licence 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

195 

category, and the majority of those units in the power unit or tractor category are operating with gross 

weights approaching the maximum allowable which is 74,000 pounds. So owners of those units are 

paying the maximum licence fees or close to that maximum fee. We have estimated that these, for hire 

group of owners, paying very near the top licence fee for each unit they operate, make an annual 

contribution to our Provincial revenues, licence-wise, of about $1,250,000. The total revenue from 

licences for 1967-68, is estimated at about $10,500,000. Now may I just put that another way. The 

over-the-road units, comprising less than half of one per cent of the total motor vehicle registrations this 

year, paid over 12 per cent of the total licence fees collected. 

 

The fuel-tax picture is equally revealing. I have estimated that the same group of owners, the 

over-the-road truck operators, paid in 1967 about $1,750,000 in gas and diesel fuel taxes. The estimated 

revenue from fuel taxes for 1967-68 is some $34 million, which indicates again, the contribution these 

people make. They comprise less than one half of one per cent of registrations, yet pay over seven per 

cent of total taxes from fuels. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t want to leave the impression with the 

House that the trucking industry of this province is complaining. I have said before, and I repeat now, 

that no one knows better than the trucker the value of good roads. Being a practical business man he 

knows they have to be paid for. As one of those practical business men, I wish here to congratulate the 

Government and the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), for the network of fine roads we have in this 

province. You can travel any place in this province, with truck or car, with either minimum or maximum 

weight and enjoy it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — Our trunk systems are excellent, our grid road layout second to none. I want to 

stress this. We think a superb job of highway building is being done and we are pleased to have word 

from the Minister responsible that another major program is in the works again for 1968. We need to 

expand the system, and we are seeing it done, year after year. 

 

I said a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, that I would have some more to say about the role of trucking, and I 

will. But first, let me say to this House, as one who had some part in the highway safety study carried 

out a year or two ago, that our provincial trucking industry has not only demonstrated growth and 

maturity over the years, but has also assumed a responsible and very important role in the matter of 

improved traffic safety. The Saskatchewan Trucking Safety Council has the distinction of being the first 

such council in the province. It was formed in 1942. Its prime objective is the fostering of safer driving 

attitudes within our industry. Mr. Speaker, I submit it has succeeded in that objective. Commercial 

drivers, operating throughout the year, without accident, are eligible for an annual award from the 

Council. Since its inception 26 years ago, many 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

196 

thousands of these awards have been issued and the Council had the pleasure just this year of presenting 

a special 25-year award to one of our commercial truck drivers. That is a feat of some scope, Mr. 

Speaker, when you thin of 25 years of commercial truck driving without one chargeable accident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I‘ve been saying the past minute or two can be restated in just a half-dozen words – 

our trucking industry is important to our welfare especially at a time when we are faced with rail-line 

abandonment in certain areas of this province. I know that most people realize this. To them I say, good, 

but I hope that as time goes on, one year turns into another, that still more and more people will 

appreciate just what highway transport means, how essential it is that we maintain and sustain a healthy 

viable trucking industry here in Saskatchewan. Already there are 750 communities in Saskatchewan, 

cities, towns, villages and hamlets receiving highway services, and most of them on a regular basis. Mr. 

Speaker, in that connection this is important too. Almost 100 of those communities depend entirely on 

truck service for their day-to-day needs. I don‘t need to remind Members of this House that that number 

will grow, and many, many more of our citizens are going to appreciate the industry‘s slogan – ‗If 

you‘ve got it, a truck brought it‘. 

 

In bespeaking appreciation of the industry – and I submit, Mr. Speaker, that appreciation is wholly 

warranted – and consideration by our people of its worth, I would suggest too that we keep in mind that 

like every other industry it has its problems. Expenses must not exceed revenues, else services 

deteriorate and business failures result. Everyone is worthy of his hire, and this applies to the truck 

operator, whether he hauls gravel for our roads and industry, petroleum products for our agricultural and 

industrial needs, or the bread and meat we need each day. Like us, he has to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in finishing off this reference however brief, to the highway transport I wish to say just one 

more thing. The Federal Government has recognized the importance of the industry by the establishment 

of a separate motor vehicle section of the new Transport Commission. This is a big step forward. If 

trucking warrants that importance at the national level, surely we are justified in ensuring that, in the 

interests of the people in serves – which is you and me – it remains strong and healthy. Any other stance 

would be short sighted indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not want to use too much of the time of this House, but I would like to refer briefly to 

a situation which arose on the day on which the Legislature opened. The occasion on which the Hon. 

Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) had some views to offer to the students of the Regina 

campus of the University of Saskatchewan. I want to make it clear that I do not question the rights of the 

students to demonstrate in an orderly fashion, if they feel that they can put their views before the 

Government that way. I think it goes without saying, however, that the entire question of university 

financing is a difficult and thorny one, a problem that not only this 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

197 

Government faces, but virtually every Provincial Government in Canada. For this reason, it is clear that 

the question of financing education is one which has to be considered in a thoughtful and unbiased 

manner. It was disconcerting, therefore, to find the Member for Regina Centre entering into the fray 

with such gusto, at a time when some of the best minds in Canada cannot find simple solutions to the 

problem. According to the Regina Leader-Post of February 16, the Hon. Member had this to say: 

 

It is the job of the University to be a university and the job of the Government to be the 

Government, and the two don‘t mix. 

 

This is a curious statement for the Hon. Member to make, but it may explain the attitude of the party he 

represents towards university financing. During the 20 years that they were in office, they invested an 

average of over just $3 million a year in our University. This year alone, a Liberal Government is 

providing more than $28 million in assistance to the University. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — It is obvious that the Government of which he was a Member really never did mix 

with the University. However, Mr. Speaker, his encouragement of some of the more outlandish and 

inaccurate views expressed by the very few – and I say very few – of the students was unforgivable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — It is natural that our students would want the best facilities available for their 

education and so do we all. But those of us who are honest and responsible and know something of the 

difficult financial problem our taxpayers are facing will admit that we can‘t have everything that we 

want. If the dollars available for education are to be used to the best advantage of all, then we must be 

both responsible and efficient in investing them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — This fact is well recognized by the well educated and the less educated alike. Those 

of us who grew up at a time when higher education was a luxury, recognize only too well that future 

generations must be provided with more than was available to us. And by the same token, however, 

today, and here I disagree with the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) in what he said a while ago, 

what was my birthright is his birthright, and no one can responsibly say that education is a birthright to 

which all taxpayers of the province are compelled to contribute with no like contribution from those who 

are benefiting 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

198 

directly from that education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — I Believe most students at our University realize that higher education is a costly 

business and that only by the wise use of our financial resources can we hope to get the best that is 

reasonably available. Unfortunately, however, there is an extremist fringe on the campus – and I repeat a 

very few – which insists that it has no duty to contribute to education expenses through tuition fees. 

They, unfortunately, are the unfortunate victims of a disproven Socialist theory that the state has the 

obligation to pay for all things for all people. Mr. Speaker, I contend that by encouraging those students 

in that ridiculous philosophy, the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) did a great disservice 

to those young people. I believe that in time, when they have become responsible members of our work 

force, they will recognize that tax monies are hard won, they are the fruit of the hard work of 

individuals. I hope that they learn that lesson before it is too late. In the meantime, I think it was grossly 

unfair on the part of the Member for Regina Centre to attempt to make political capital of a very difficult 

situation which many people are honestly trying to solve. I also feel that our young people are not served 

by the inflammatory remarks which tend to lead the unwary even further astray than their lack of 

experience now leads them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Larochelle: — Now you can see by my remarks, Mr. Speaker, that I will support the motion but I 

certainly will not support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in this House after a leave of four 

years, I want to first direct my words to you, Sir, and to congratulate you, Sir, on your elevation to the 

role of Speaker of this Legislature. Having sat here before and known Speakers, I‘m convinced, Sir, that 

this isn‘t the easiest job in the world. I imagine it must be a lonely job at times to sit there and listen to 

the politicians wind up and expound their ideas and theories hour after hour. I really feel that although 

it‘s a high office it‘s an arduous office, and I, Sir, will try to make your role as easy a one as possible. 

I‘ll try to be a good boy in other words, although sometimes, Sir, it may be hard. 

 

I want to congratulate all Members new to the Legislature. As one who has spent eight years here, I 

think I should say to them that they will find it a satisfying role to represent their constituencies, I know 

I did. It‘s a role that happens to very few people, percentage-wise within our society, and I know I 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

199 

have had a deep sense of fulfilment and I‘m sure you will too. I want to especially congratulate the new 

Members on our side and especially those who have already taken part. I hate to rise this afternoon to 

speak after listening to the addresses of the Members for Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica), Saskatoon 

Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) and yesterday, the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer). These young men are 

equipped with something better than I was able to equip myself with when I was their age. I know that 

we on this side of the House are very proud of the young look of our Back Benchers. You know, when I 

sat here before in this House, I wasn‘t in the front benches and I always used to think that I was one of 

the young fellows. Looking around, I suddenly find that I‘m beginning to be one of the veterans, and I 

am happy to see these young men taking over the responsibilities of our party and of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there are a few remarks that I want to make. One remark I want to make to the gentleman who is 

the Member for Shaunavon (Mr. Larochelle) who just sat down, when he expounded on the impossible 

Socialist theories of university tuition fees. I understand that one of his cohorts from Newfoundland, the 

Premier no less, is talking about building a university and having no university fees. You will have to 

catch up. 

 

Coming to the debate that we‘re in, the traditional debate, the reply to the Speech from the Throne, I 

want to congratulate the mover and the seconder. I know, I‘ve had the job of moving and seconding both 

at different times, the Speech from the Throne; and this is, especially when you are a new Member, a 

tough task. Having said that, I agree with very little of what they said. The Member for Regina South 

West (Mr. McPherson) expounded a 1830 philosophy. The one thing that was very noticeable, he didn‘t 

mention, Mr. Speaker, anything that was in the Speech from the Throne. You know I don‘t really blame 

him, if I‘d have been in his position, I wouldn‘t want to have mentioned it either. I interpreted his 

thought that if government is big it is bad. I couldn‘t help but wonder whether he was against those 

terrible Socialist ideas of a society banding together to give schools or hospitals. He‘s the chairman, I 

believe, of the board of a public hospital, owned publicly by the people of the city of Regina. Does he 

not believe that this is a good idea? Really this is about all he said through his whole speech. It was an 

expounding of his philosophy and I really couldn‘t waste any time answering it. I must congratulate the 

seconder of the motion. I believe he did a good job of expounding what he believes and I believe that 

we‘ll hear more of him in Saskatchewan. 

 

I come to the Premier now and his ramblings on what he terms the CCF-NDP. Well I‘ve been in this 

House – I was in this House before him and ever since he came in here – and I listened to him giving the 

same speech every year since then. The Member for Hanley (Mr. Heggie) talked about a new pattern of 

voting in Saskatchewan. There was a new pattern that I can point out of voting in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. I point out that we re-won Melville, we re-won Touchwood, we re-won Canora, 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

200 

we re-won Shellbrook, and really if all the votes had been counted, we‘d have re-won Kelvington . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — . . . and Nipawin too. Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to you that all these were rural 

seats, basically rural seats. The great majority of these people are rural people. It just shows that the 

farmers at least in the east central part of Saskatchewan are completely fed up with this Government. He 

went on and he talked about the fiasco in Britain. You know it was a funny thing for him to be talking 

about this when there is such a greater fiasco of a Liberal Government in Ottawa at the same time. 

 

I want to get on and spend a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, before this House adjourns – I know that you all 

are hoping to get home on the weekend. I want to speak for a few moments on what I believe is the most 

important problem facing Saskatchewan today and that is agriculture. Eleven years ago, I spoke in this 

House for the first time. At that time I said that, unless something was done to stop the great farm 

expansion, that the family farm would vanish. I don‘t know whether this is right or not. But I do know 

that there has been a great change since I first became a Member for Touchwood. I stayed home for four 

years after I became what I often refer to as a victim of democracy. I went home, I went back to my 

farm, and I became a private citizen, and it was really only after I was nominated again that I started to 

move around the constituency. I was saddened – and I think this is the only word for it – at the empty 

houses along the way as I travelled. I‘m not laying all the blame on this Government, I‘m just saying 

that this is the trend. I think we have to face up to the fact that the number of farmers is going to become 

less, but I do say this, that what really makes me sad is that so many of our small farmers who are 

leaving our communities are not equipped to face some other environment, when they move into the 

city. They are not trained, many of these people who left the f arm are not really trained to face up to an 

industrial and an urbanized society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are in a hungry world, let‘s not forget this. I think – and I‘m not talking politics now – 

that al of us within this Chamber have to remember it‘s still a hungry world. We all have to face up to 

the fact of the great explosion of population in this world. I was very interested to read some remarks 

from the Financial Post of November 30, 1967. 

 

This was headed ‗Count-down to crisis‘. And it says this: 

 

10. Since 1960, per capita food production has steadily decreased in Africa, in the Near East, the 

Far East and Latin America. 

 

9. In 35 years food production in the development 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

201 

countries will have to be increased by 150 per cent, merely to maintain present levels. 

 

8. If the United States were to donate its entire 1965 food surplus to the world‘s hungry, it would 

mean only two teacups of food every 17 days per person. 

 

7. The world needs a 50 per cent increase in grain in the next 15 years, merely to hold the status 

quo. 

 

6. Every year 1,000 million people in the industrialized nations are increasing their population 1 

per cent and their food 2 per cent. Every year, 2,000 million people in the developing countries 

increase their population by 2.5 per cent and their food less than 1 per cent. 

 

5. If one couple were alive at the time of Christ, and their number had increased at an annual rate 

of 2 per cent, the present population would be almost 143 million billion – 1,025 people for 

every square foot in the earth‘s surface. Today‘s annual rate of population increase is 2 per cent. 

 

4. Merely to feed the extra population of the next 33 years at present levels, the less developed 

countries will require as much additional food as is currently being produced by all the farmers 

of the world. 

 

3. In the 1965-66 per-capita food, production in many less developed countries was below the 

pre-war ratio. World food production that year was no greater than the previous year, but there 

were 70 million more mouths to feed. 

 

2. Not long ago it was said that there were 15 to 20 years left to solve the world food problem; 

we have in fact much less time due to an underestimation of the increase in demand and an 

overestimation of the rate of increase in population. 

 

1. Large-scale famines are at present foreseen before 1980. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it is in the light of this that I look at what we in this Province are doing in agriculture. The 

Premier the other day got up and said, I believe, that the cattle population on Saskatchewan farms was 

up some one-quarter of a million under the Liberals. Looking at the records of the various statistics and 

the report which was just filed in this Legislature by the Department of Agriculture, the only way he 

could have arrived at this figure was by comparing June 1st estimates with December 1st estimates. 

 

I want to go on and I‘m now going to deal with figures that the Minister filed in this House on livestock 

production. I think it‘s a sad state of affairs. In 1964, the Liberal promise, 



 

February 23, 1968 

 

 

202 

one of their promises, was to work to aid in diversified farming by promoting expansion of the livestock 

industry. Now, I quoted the figures that the Premier gave the other day. I‘d like to now recommend to 

him the figures from the reports that the Department of Agriculture just filed. On December 1, 1964, 

there was 2,300,000 and on December 1, 1966, there was 2,253,000. Let us look at milk production, and 

I am now recording from page 25 of the report; in 1963 we had 1,112,903,000 pounds of milk and in 

1966 we had 880,000,000 – down 20 per cent. Is this promised diversified farming? Now let‘s look at 

hogs, recording from page 137 of the report; 1964, 505,000 and 1966, 428,000. This Government has 

made a lot of their endeavor to make hay on sheep pastures and maybe it was a good thing. But let‘s 

look at what happened to sheep under this new plan. Sheep reduced from 165,000 in 1964 to 138,000 in 

1966. Let us look at poultry, 1964 – 6,800,000 and 1966 – 5,500,000. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

the only thing that has gone up in this province is the barn rats and taxes. 

 

You know, the Minister (Mr. McFarlane) was shadow Minister of Agriculture prior to 1964 when I sat 

in this House. He always said, screamed – and I believe from just about the exact seat from where I 

stand now – and always said what a Liberal Government would do. Well, I‘ve tried to put on record a 

few figures to show what hasn‘t been done. Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on. After being away four 

years – a long time – there are so many things I‘d like to say, but I know Members will want to get 

home; and there is still some business of the House. There are many more remarks I‘d like to make, so 

may I move adjournment, Sir. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:22 o‘clock p.m. 


