



















































Hansard: March 08, 1968


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

17th Day 

 

Friday March 8, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A. Thibault: (Kinistino) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the House to join with me in 

welcoming a fine group of 59 students from Birch Hill high school. They are here with their teachers 

Mr. and Mrs. Vanzandbergen, Mr. John Kadler and Mr. L. Sidebottom, Mr. Tony Jiricka. Their bus 

drivers are Mr. Ernie Lowe, Mr. Bill Demeras and Mr. Terry Hegland. They left this morning quite early 

and drove 200 miles. They entered the city sometime around 9:30 this morning and they are going to 

have a long. day visiting the Legislature and parts of the city. I am sure that the House will make their 

stay here in the Legislature a pleasant one and I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.A. Heggie: (Hanley) — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly the teachers and students of the grade eleven and twelve classes of the Allan public school. 

There are 28 of these high school students here under the guidance of their principal, Sister Augustina 

and their teacher, Mr. Frank Flahr. These children came to Regina by school bus driven by Eddie 

Boehm, a grade twelve student in the class. Now Allan school consists of 16 rooms with 18 teachers and 

serves the town and farming areas surrounding the town of Allan. I want to say at this time that Allan 

has jumped into prominence as quite an important town not only in the Hanley seat, but in the Province 

of Saskatchewan, in as much as it is three miles from the Allan potash mine and has a burgeoning 

population which has doubled since 1964, from 400 to 800. You would agree with me that a town like 

this would have growing pains and will have school problems, because the enrolment is likely to go up 

very quickly in the next year or two. Mr. Speaker, I wish to welcome them again and hope that they 

have had an instructive time in the Capitol Building here in Regina. I was fortunate just to drop into the 

Speaker‟s Chamber when he was lecturing them on constitutional government, and it was very 

interesting. I hope that they will have time to see some of the other highlights of Regina. I believe that 

they have seen the Mounted Police Museum and the Museum of Natural History. I hope that they will 

have a safe journey home to Allan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman: (Shellbrook) — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for me to introduce to you 

and through you to this House, 23 grade eight students that are here in the east gallery from the Shell 

Lake school. It is a pleasure as well to introduce their teacher, Mr. Terrance Booker and I believe Mrs. 

Booker is with him. The drivers on this occasion are Mrs. Johnny Orin, Mr. Iver Vogan and Mr. Vernon 

Johnson. These people have driven some 300 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

707 

beginning at 6:00 o‟clock this morning. We appreciate their efforts in bringing the children here. We 

also want to express our appreciation to the Parkland school unit for sending the students here. We wish 

for them a very pleasant and enjoyable stay, as well as an informative stay in this Legislature. We as 

well, Mr. Speaker, wish them a speedy and safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East) — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased on behalf of my seatmate 

who asked me to welcome a group of grade eight students from Saskatoon Mayfair, the Henry Kelsey 

school. They are accompanied here by Mr. Russell their principal, and Mrs. Russell. I believe they are 

44 in number. I am sorry that Mr. Brockelbank, their Member, was not able to be in the Chamber this 

afternoon. They are sitting in the east gallery and I want to welcome them most sincerely to the 

Chamber here today. The Henry Kelsey school is named after one of our explorers, a man who did much 

for the history of this province in the west. I am sure that they are very proud to be able to be named 

after one so great in this country. I hope that their stay here will be a pleasant one and that they will visit 

the many fine sights in our community. I hope that their visit here this afternoon will give them a fine 

insight into the democratic process of our government here. May I also extend a warm welcome to all 

other students. I now wish the Henry Kelsey school a safe trip home as well as for the others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald: (Milestone) — Mr. Speaker, may I take this opportunity through you and to 

Members of the Assembly of introducing a group of students in the Speaker‟s gallery, from the 

community of Yellow Grass, the heart of the Soo Line. They are accompanied by two members of their 

staff, the principal Mr. Wagner and Mr. Neuman and their bus driver, Mr. Winters. There are 22 of 

them. I think that it might be of interest to the students as well as to the Members of the Assembly to 

know that our Sergeant at Arms was vice-principal of that school away back in 1915 and 1916, and it 

was from there that he joined the armed forces in the First World War. I hope that they enjoy their stay 

in the Assembly this afternoon and that they have a pleasant journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk: (Melville) — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to extend greetings 

to you and through you; Mr. Speaker, to a group of 46 grade seven and grade eight students from 

Goodeve school, a school where I received my high school education quite some years ago. They are 

seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and if you would take a glance over to your left, Sir, you will 

see among this group students of our native ancestry. These students came from the Little Black Bear 

reserve, some 10 miles south of Goodeve, five years ago, to complement a mosaic of many other ethnic 

groups. We, in Goodeve, feel very proud of the harmonious integration. The Indian Affairs officials say 

that it is one of the most successful integrated schools in the province. Among these students is my only 

daughter, Joanne, who is 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

708 

visiting these Chambers with her classmates. It is a pleasure to introduce the two teachers who organized 

and supervised this trip, Mr. Steve Chorney and Mr. Dave Pettak, as well as the bus drivers, under 

whose careful driving these students got here. Mr. Speaker, I want to extend to them good wishes and a 

very informative afternoon and a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

BIRTHDAY GREETINGS TO MR. SPEAKER 

 

Mr.·MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, today we want to wish you many happy returns of the day. I 

understand that once again your birthday has rolled around, and I am sure that all Hon. Members would 

want to wish you a happy birthday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I express my thanks and appreciation for the good wishes that have been 

extended to me on behalf of the House in the case of my anniversary. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Steuart (Provincial 

Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair. and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. 

Blakeney (Regina Centre). 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper: (Weyburn) — Mr. Speaker, when we adjourned last night, I was about to say that 

last Friday, the first day of March, Saskatchewan citizens received some of the most abusive blows that 

were ever delivered in the history of Provincial Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — I would say, Mr. Speaker, that even some of these blows were a little below the belt. If 

ever there was a Budget designed to add a burden of anxiety, worry and additional expense on those 

citizens of our province who are least able to stand this kind of treatment, and who certainly deserve it 

least, it was this Budget which was dropped in their lap, sent with the compliments of their Liberal 

Government in Saskatchewan, a Liberal Government which was elected in 1964 and again in 1967, and 

which campaigned strenuously from boundary to boundary with only one thought in mind — to alleviate 

the people of their great tax burden. Well, Mr. Speaker, last Friday they told the people how they were 

going to fulfil this promise and we got the answer, an answer that people won‟t forget. And the Hon. 

Premier from Morse who has been the Provincial Treasurer during the last four years, who has placed 

and guided the Province into this financial difficulty it is in today arranged things quite nicely with the 

last re-shuffle of Cabinet, so that he could sit back and watch the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West 

(Mr. Steuart), do his best to explain the inefficiency and the bungling mess that today we now find 

ourselves in, for which the Premier must take his full share of responsibility, and for which by now, the 

Hon. Minister from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart), being fully 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

709 

initiated, has no excuse and must take his full allotment of responsibility also. 

 

Let‟s take a look at what our Government has set aside in our Budget for the agricultural industry in our 

province. It has really gone all out and is prepared to Budget for 4.03 per cent to our agricultural areas, a 

pretty small share of consideration to these loyal workers who pioneered. and made Saskatchewan what 

it is today. Being a Member from a constituency which has some very good agricultural land and being a 

farmer myself, I watched quite closely what the Budget contained that would benefit these people. We 

are told that in this session money will be set aside and we will be asked to provide and approve 

measures designed to expand Saskatchewan‟s livestock industry. Might I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if 

Liberal Members opposite and the Members at Ottawa would endeavor to establish a realistic and secure 

price for our livestock marketings, our farmers will look after the expansion of the industry in very short 

order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — Money is to be budgeted to continue a program of assistance in the construction of 

swine facilities. This, Mr. Speaker, is all well and good, if you happen to live within the area which is to 

receive this assistance. I have had more complaints on this one particular item during the last year than 

on any other agricultural problem. Farmers are asking why can‟t they get assistance as well as their 

farmer friends to the north and northeast. It can only be successful when the whole area of the province 

is used in the same manner. The same applies to the crop insurance program, which is a very necessary 

step, but can only reach its fullest results when all farmers can have the same privileges to insure by it. I 

am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the recent announcement of the two cent increase on farm fuel for all farm 

machinery requiring it will certainly be another blow to our agricultural industry and to those in many 

cases least able to pay. We are told that there will be a new policy for the sale of Crown land. This, I am 

afraid, will only help those farmers who are in the position to purchase and the young farmer trying to 

get established, will be outbid by the corporate farmer because of his financial circumstances. We in the 

Province of Saskatchewan fully recognize that the agricultural industry is the backbone of our province 

and here we are asked to support an agricultural program and a Budget which does not have one 

complete measure of protection or assistance to all our farm people who are so worthy of our 

consideration. The Hon. Premier has stated many times that their mineral incentive program was so 

great that numerous mining companies were exploring in our northern area. Might I suggest to him, Mr. 

Speaker, give our farmers the same incentive, and he will find that he will not only have agricultural 

commodities in abundance; but of more importance still, the money made from the sale of these 

products will remain here within the boundaries of our province, building a province which you and I 

can be very proud of. 

 

Then we take a look at the health program, the money that is budgeted and the measures they will take 

to control the costs. We are told that a deterrent fee will be imposed to secure sufficient money to 

operate. Again, as we have stated in the past it is those who are less fortunate and in many cases least 

able to pay, that will have to be again asked to carry the heavy burden. Now that we are to receive 

somewhere in the vicinity 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

710 

of from $10 to $14 million from the Federal Government earmarked for Medicare, I certainly can‟t see 

the necessity of an increase in tax or deterrent fee or whatever form it might be. This, Mr. Speaker, is 

another example of the Liberal Government‟s method of tax reduction. It is only natural that being the 

Member from the constituency of Weyburn, I have been watching the Mental Health or Psychiatric Care 

Program and its progress quite closely, and the portion of the Budget set aside for this. Now having 

received the report that Dr. Frazier presented, I would say that what some of our Members on this side 

of the House have been stating during the last two sessions is proving to be correct . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — . . . and that what could have proven to be a good program had it been administered in 

the manner originally planned, has almost gotten out of hand. and the public in many cases are left to 

take the consequences. It seems very unfortunate that many of our top psychiatrists or doctors, who were 

stationed in Weyburn, have for some reason found it necessary to go elsewhere, where they are 

apparently making very worthwhile contributions to this very vital work in New York and other areas. 

In checking through the report on psychiatric services in Saskatchewan by Dr. Frazier, it is interesting to 

note some of the comments in it, and I quote, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Frazier said that many of the questions 

and criticisms of Weyburn discharges are directed to the period 1965 and later. This is seen as the time 

when the „Big Push‟ started. Prior to this the releases from the hospital appeared to be well received. Dr. 

Frazier went on to say that another common theme was that the Weyburn Hospital main building had 

adopted a policy of discharging patients no matter what the situation of the patient‟s condition, etc. 

seemed to be. He said that several mentioned that a statistical approach had replaced an individual 

psychiatric evaluation of cases. It was implied that social workers had a quota of discharges to fill at all 

costs. There were also statements that patients were being discharged from Weyburn for home 

placement, who were totally inappropriate for this at the time and who would have much more 

appropriately been retained in the hospital. So, Mr. Speaker, I can only say, after reading Dr. Frazier‟s 

findings or comments, that what we have been trying to tell the Hon. Members opposite for the last two 

or three years is now being proven to be more truth than fiction. It is too bad that it is the poor, innocent 

and unfortunate patients and their families that have to take the brunt of the very unnecessary mistake. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that a greater share of our Budget should be set aside for expansion on our social 

welfare legislation, an area which certainly should have further action. I will mention just one branch 

that I believe should have immediate steps taken to correct. We have Correctional Institutions for our 

young boys, but to date we seem to have made no provisions for adolescent girl offenders. As recently 

as February 7, 1968, in the Leader Post, there is an article on this very subject, where a young girl 15 

years of age had been forced to spend some time in Prince Albert jail for adult females, awaiting the 

final outcome of her case. It went on to say that the Court did not know what to do with her because in 

Saskatchewan there are no institutional treatment facilities for adolescent girls. I must commend the 

Regina Welfare Council for presenting their brief to the Minister of Social Welfare in 1966 and again in 

1967, according to this article in the paper, asking that some 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

711 

action be taken on this very serious situation. 

 

Since the election on October 11th, Mr. Speaker, much of the buoyant conditions of our province seems 

to have changed suddenly according to the Members opposite. Along with this there seems to have been 

nothing but turmoil and disunity in our educational department, our universities, our teachers, and our 

trustees. I feel that this could have certainly been avoided had our Government taken the position that a 

responsible Government should call all groups or professions concerned into bargaining collectively 

together. This was to a large measure the cause of all this dissension. Now that the Government has 

retracted some of the. measures that we were informed would be passed at this Legislature in 

controversy between trustees and teachers, we are finding that there is much less disagreement now 

between them. So I ask, Mr. Speaker, what has been gained? I say nothing has been gained, but I say a 

lot of people have lost what little confidence they might have had in our Liberal Government‟s ability to 

administer their educational affairs and other affairs. It has certainly driven a wedge into the relationship 

between these groups participating, which at one time worked harmoniously together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that much of our legislation today was pioneered 

and brought in under the former CCF Government and was operating well. for some 20 years, such as 

Health Programs including Hospitalization and Medicare, Government Insurance, Grid Road Programs, 

centralization of schools, etc. And it seems apparent that after four years of Liberal Administration, they, 

the Liberals, have proven their inability to govern and are losing the confidence of the people who were 

swayed and wooed into giving them the opportunity to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have watched closely and studied this Budget and listened to the Hon. Members opposite 

to see just what we in the constituency of Weyburn may expect to gain in assistance from the 

Government in this year that lies ahead. So far I must admit I feel rather disappointed. I noticed the Hon. 

Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) announced a comprehensive high school for North Battleford, and 

one, according to a recent issue of the Leader Post, has been granted to Estevan. But the last I heard in 

regard to Weyburn securing one, was this. It has been postponed to at least 1969. I am only hoping that 

much of the needed highway program in Weyburn constituency hasn‟t been postponed too. Highway 

No.6 from the junction of No. 13 south to the border and Highway No. 35 south to the border from 

Weyburn are in deplorable condition, also Highway No. 18 from Oungre west to No.6 at Minton. You 

would think, Mr. Speaker, from the recent announcements of oil discovered in this area that these 

highways would be given early recognition and perhaps priority. I was also disappointed to not see a 

greater interest shown in the area of social aid, in some manner that would assist our pioneers or senior 

citizens of our province who are living on a mere pension. This, we know, is insufficient. In the Budget 

the Liberals have shown no encouragement of an increase coming from any source. Their housing 

problem apparently will remain a major problem, and there is no mention of any assistance on 

purchasing of drugs which is very costly to many of them. This group of people certainly, in my mind, 

would appreciate and are very worthy of a free pass on bus lines to travel within 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

712 

the boundaries of the province during the sunset days of their lives. Anything of this nature would be 

nothing more than what this group of citizens deserves to have. But what has this Government got to 

offer to this group of people, whom we like to refer to as our senior citizens? They offer them no 

increase in their pension to help them meet their daily cost of living. They offer them no assistance in 

meeting the heavy cost of drugs that many of them require. They offer them no assistance to travel to see 

some of this New Saskatchewan that we hear so much about. But they do assure them that, if they 

become sick and need hospital care, they will have the privilege of paying $2.50 per day for the first 30 

days and then they will let them off easy and only charge them $1.50 per day for the balance of their 

stay in the hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, our senior citizens can lie flat on their back in hospital and figure out 

just how they can stretch that monthly cheque of $76.50 to pay all their necessary needs, plus their stay 

in the hospital. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Members opposite should hang their heads in shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — Not only has the deterrent fee been added on to the hospitalization, but if our senior 

citizens, as many of them do, enjoy a smoke to wile away some of their relaxing hours, now that tobacco 

tax has been added on also. These people are hit again. I‟m afraid that the Members opposite have a lot 

to answer for and should be held responsible for it, the tax on the sick, those people least able to pay, 

with very little strength left in their bodies to fight back. 

 

I would like to commend the Government, Mr. Speaker, for bringing forth legislation and setting aside 

money in the Budget which will establish an Alcoholism Commission in Saskatchewan. This is a 

positive step towards assisting this very real and serious problem of today. One only needs to listen to 

the news on radio and television or in your local paper, sometimes unfortunately in the obituary column, 

to realize the great need for measures and steps to be taken to assist these unfortunate people. But I feel 

the Liberal Government ruined all their efforts to make this a truly successful venture by setting aside 

money also in their Budget to open up more liquor outlets and bringing in legislation to advertise and 

publicize the drinking of it. This certainly doesn‟t make sense to me, Mr. Speaker, and from the letters 

that I have received recently, there are a lot more people within the province that feel the same way. I 

only hope, Mr. Speaker, that there are enough Members within this Assembly that will have the courage 

to stand up and be counted when this vote is taken and will let their conscience be their guide. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to again be constructive as well as critical. I realize I haven‟t touched on 

many very important topics due to insufficient time. I feel I have certainly touched on a few of the 

controversial issues in the Legislature today. And by now, Mr. Speaker, you will know that I am not 

supporting the motion but I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

713 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk: (Melville) — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I want first of all to 

congratulate you once again assuming the position of Speaker. I also want to congratulate all the new 

Members on both sides of the House, but particularly my five young colleagues sitting on this side of the 

House. All five have already spoken and all five have done an excellent job in their presentations. Their 

great potential, Mr. Speaker, will be recognized and acknowledged when the New Democratic party of 

Saskatchewan will once again take on the job of governing this province, four years from now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I recall at the very beginning of the Legislature one of the Hon. 

Members to your right said something to the effect that he felt sorry for those backbenchers on the 

Opposition side. Babes-in-the-Woods he called them. Well all I can say, Mr, Speaker, is this. What 

healthy vigorous babies they turned out to be: Their performance and the presentation on the problems 

and probable solutions in this modern and technical world of their generation, Mr. Speaker, made all of 

us very proud of them, indeed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I also want to congratulate the senior Members on this side of the House who were 

re-elected, including Mr. Lloyd our Leader on his re-election and, also my Hon. Friend from 

Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) who assisted me in doing a bit of housecleaning of Liberal Cabinet Ministers 

in the northeast area of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the Members on the Government side of 

the House on being appointed to the Cabinet, including the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) 

who is ill. We wish him a speedy recovery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank the many people of Melville constituency who 

through their diligent work, financial sacrifice and their adherence to the new Democratic philosophy of 

people first elected me as a representative of the Melville constituency of this Legislature. At one time in 

this House, Mr. Speaker, Melville constituency was represented for the CCF by a railroad man, Mr. Jim 

Arthurs, and later on by a small businessman, Mr. Percy Brown. Contrary to what the people to your 

right say, Mr. Speaker, that laboring people tend to overlook the farmer, the Melville constituency, 

farmers and laborers, sent a farmer to this Legislature on October 11. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I am very proud of the people of Melville for repudiating that old Liberal 

philosophy of divide and rule, pitting labor against farmer and vice-versa. I think that the Budget that the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) brought down last Friday, Mr. Speaker, proves beyond a shadow of a 

doubt that the Liberal 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

714 

party doesn‟t care whom they skin, farmer or laborer, white-collar worker or blue-collar worker, young 

or old, sick or poor as long as their corporate friends of the independent sector are excluded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, people of the New Democratic party not only in the Melville 

constituency, but clear across Saskatchewan have demonstrated that they are a people fully in the belief 

and in the actual practice of true and real democracy. If you look across the composition of the 24 

Members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, you will see a true representation of the Saskatchewan 

population mosaic: Anglo-Saxon, Polish, Ukrainian, French, German and so on. What better democratic 

expression of culture and divergence of opinion than from a cosmopolitan democratically elected group 

like this, Mr. Speaker? In the Melville constituency, Mr. Speaker, we have this population mosaic 

extended to many others, native Indians, Scandinavians, Hungarians, Jews, Russians, Chinese, Welsh 

and many, many more. These people, Mr. Speaker, elected me to serve them, and serve them I shall . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — . . . all the people of Melville constituency in every capacity I am able. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after listening to the Provincial Treasurer‟s report last Friday, I have to admit that I along 

with the rest of us on this side of the House were shocked, but, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

should have seen the looks on the faces of the Liberal backbenchers. You never saw a more dejected, 

discouraged and downcast bunch in your whole life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — They just couldn‟t have been in on that great secret Budget, Mr. Speaker, and of 

course I can readily understand the terrible dilemma they were in. They were probably thinking as to 

how they could face their constituents back home. How could they explain the abrupt change from boom 

to bust? How could they wash away the betrayal of their supporters who had believed them? Mr. 

Speaker, never in the history of Saskatchewan have the people been betrayed as they were by that 

Budget presented by the Provincial Treasurer on that black Friday of March 1. Mr. Speaker, from the 

pre-election days of October 11, from the big, new shiny Saskatchewan to utter decay, ruin and grim 

austerity, is a lie that the people of Saskatchewan will never forget, not even in four years‟ time, Mr. 

Speaker. They will not forget, not because they don‟t realize that the more services they get, the more 

taxes they must pay — not that, but because they were lied to, because the basis of many of these taxes 

in the main is a tax on the poor and on the needy instead of the more equitable income tax and a higher 

tax on corporations, the so-called “independent sector” who could and should pay more. 

 

During the past seven days, Mr. Speaker, we have heard of the enormous tax burden that is to be 

imposed on the people of Saskatchewan. In fact, most of these taxes have already been imposed, taxes 

on everything, Mr. Speaker, taxes which will 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

715 

cost every man, woman and child a yearly tax burden of $34 each. This means, Mr. Speaker, that for a 

family of four, the extra yearly tax will amount to $136; for a family of eight, the extra tax increase will 

amount to $272. And that, Mr. Speaker, does not include the direct municipal and school tax increases 

that will have to be levied because of insufficient grants. This total increase, so says the Provincial 

Treasurer, amounts to some $30 million more taxes, plus another $6.5 million that will be realized 

because of normal growth increase, making a total of some $36.5 million. I challenge the Provincial 

Treasurer on the validity of the so-called increase of only $30 million. If you scrutinize the Estimates 

closely, Mr. Speaker, you will readily see that these are deliberately low, so inaccurately low, Mr. 

Speaker, that I predict that, when the actual revenue increase will be realized, the total net amount of 

revenue will more likely be $39 to $40 million. Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Treasurer, in giving us these 

deceptive figures, is deliberately doing so, for one reason and one main reason only, that reason being 

that the yearly surplus will be stashed away, year by year and four years from now, when an election is 

called, that excess revenue will be trotted out as a Liberal bag of goodies, Mr. Speaker, to the electors of 

Saskatchewan in the form of increased homeowner grants or some other juicy plum. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan will not forget: Prairie people have long memories, Mr. Speaker. They will not 

forget that they had been betrayed by false Liberal promises of tax reductions in direct property taxes 

and tax reductions in general. 

 

Let us turn to schools, Mr. Speaker. In this Budget, operational grants for schools were increased by 

some $2.7 million which, as one of the Hon. Members from across the way said the other day, would 

cover about half of the costs of operations. What about the other half? What about the rest of the general 

increases in costs, increases in the number of teachers, increases in the number of classrooms, the 

increase in the teachers‟ salaries, Mr; Speaker, what about all these? Because of a similar amount given 

in operational grants in 1967, many school units and school districts had deficit budgets last year. Where 

does it leave them this year, Mr. Speaker? It leaves them with no other solution but to levy many more 

mills on the local property taxpayer. This is what has happened, Mr. Speaker. When year after year the 

Trustees‟ Convention has sent resolution after resolution asking the Provincial Government to have the 

operational grant structure payable to all schools tied to the actual operational costs on a year to year 

basis, this Government chooses to ignore this entirely. Mr. Speaker, I want to sound a note of warning to 

all municipal people and to all school boards in the Melville constituency and throughout Saskatchewan, 

to prepare themselves for the levying of much more school taxes this spring, anywhere from four to ten 

mills, or more, Mr. Speaker. There was a time when operational grants were large enough to take care of 

nearly all general increases. Prior to 1964, the CCF Government adjusted the grant formula for 

operational grants for teachers‟ salaries, for bussing, and for operational grants, on a year to year basis. 

In the Melville school unit, this was done each year and for a ten-year period, from 1954 to 1964, the 

last year of the CCF Administration, grants were large enough so that there was only a one mill increase 

and that was in 1958. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — In the Canora school unit, in the same ten-year period, 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

716 

there was no increase. I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that in the last five years of that ten-year 

period, the Melville unit managed to put away a surplus of over $100,000 for a deferred building 

program. Ever since the Liberals took office, Mr. Speaker, the picture has been different and has been 

dismal: In 1965, Melville school unit tax levy, up two mills; in 1966, two mills; in 1967 four mills, a 

total. of eight mills for a period of three years of Liberal Administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Except for a small percentage increase on the overall grants paid to schools, Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberals in the past four years have never adjusted the grant formula for teachers‟ salaries. 

The only adjustment on bussing was a two-cent per mile increase last year to 29.5 cents per mile and 

grant per pupil mile from $105 to $109, but they put a lid on any cost over that amount. And, as for the 

operational grants, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think I need to tell you about the famous Incentive Grant 

Program of 1965, which no one understood then and no one understands now. However, Mr. Speaker, it 

was useful to the Liberals for political manoeuvring and political patronage. It was stretchable as Liberal 

election promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I want to suggest to the Provincial Treasurer that he slash the 

Provincial Highway Program by $20 million. Yes, Mr. Speaker, by $20 million and that he use part of 

this $20 million in this order of priority; first, to remove all vestiges of the utilization fees or deterrent 

fees as they are now placed against the old, the sick and the poor, so that this idea of deterrent fees be 

totally and completely abandoned; secondly, that the remaining portion of the, $20 million be used to 

alleviate the burden of direct school taxation by substantially increased grants to all schools across the 

whole of Saskatchewan; and thirdly, to assist the local taxpayer in other areas where the need is the 

greatest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should say something about the need of more diligence in highway construction in the 

Melville constituency where money has been squandered in some instances in construction, like the re-

oiling and re-building of Highway 15 from Fenwood to Goodeve, while other places like Highway No. 

22 from, Killaly to Lemberg, the highway is still a dust bowl. I would, if I had the time, like to see we 

deal more about the farm access road program where council members are having difficulties because of 

the rigid standards demanded by the Government, thus costing far more than most municipalities can 

afford per mile. It is my understanding that Melville is finally getting a Provincial public building. If 

events prove this to be true, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it is greatly needed to centralize the many 

public service groups in the Melville region. I assure the Government that it will be much appreciated. 

But, Mr. Speaker, much more needed than even the Provincial building is the comprehensive school. I 

will be dealing more extensively about this great venture of the three school boards in the Melville area 

further on in the session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say something about the laborer, unorganized labourer particularly, who already is very hard 

pressed to make ends meet and who, after last Friday, is going to be in very 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

717 

grave and dire straits indeed. Many in Melville and other small villages and farms will feel the effect of 

the taxes deeply, the old age pensioners, the sick who cannot work, and many others who for no fault of 

their own are without the means of livelihood. Mr. Speaker, before this House adjourns I will have a 

great deal more to say about the dictatorial methods used in the attempt to close a number of hospitals, 

Neudorf included, without warning, without any consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I will also have a great deal to say about teachers‟ salary legislation when it is 

brought down, Mr. Speaker. I will have more to say about the plight of the farmers, especially the 

hundreds of small farmers, still the main backstay of agriculture in the Melville constituency, who have 

been forgotten by the Liberals at Ottawa and by the Liberals at Regina, Mr. Speaker; about that little 

assistance offered by Saskatchewan to a few hog producers, possibly one or two in the Melville 

constituency and the same can be said for the poultry producer; and about the blow dealt to the small 

cream producer which also can result in only one thing, the disappearance of hundreds of small farms in 

the Melville constituency within the next few years, the disappearance of some of Melville‟s few 

remaining industries such as Swifts and Co-op Creameries; a death blow, Mr. Speaker, to the small 

farmer, small villages, towns and yes, Mr. Speaker, even to cities like Melville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget is a betrayal, a sell-out to the big corporate enterprises. I will not support the 

motion, but will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. McIvor: (Arm River) — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this Budget debate, as this is the 

first time I have spoken in this Assembly, I would like to congratulate you on your re-appointment as 

Speaker of this Assembly. I am looking forward to working under your just and firm decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the Hon. Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, Mr. R.L. 

Handbidge, on his re-appointment to his high position and to join with the rest of the people of 

Saskatchewan in wishing him well in his line of duty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all new Members on both sides of the House and extend my 

very best to the newly appointed Cabinet Ministers of our Government. I also wish to extend to the Hon. 

Ross Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources) my sympathies and do hope he has a very speedy and 

lasting recovery from his present illness. 

 

I would like to take a few moments to refer to the history of the Arm River constituency which I 

represent. From 1905 to 1908 our area was part of Moose Jaw County and was represented by a Member 

of the Liberal Party, Mr. J.A. Sheppard. In 1908, we became known as the Arm River constituency and 

were represented by Mr. G.A. Scott, a Liberal Member from Davidson for 20 years. Mr. Scott served as 

Speaker of this House for six of those years. From 1928 to 1967, the following Members represented 

Arm River: Dr. Waugh of Imperial, a Liberal Member, one year; Mr. Selby Hutcheon of Davidson, a 

Conservative for five 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

718 

years, then Mr. Herman Danielson of Davidson, a Liberal Member for 30 years, a record unequalled, a 

man who sat in this House for 20 years in Opposition to the former Socialist Government. Mr. Martin 

Pederson, the Conservative leader held our seat for three years, 1964 to 1967. Mr. Speaker, 54 years out 

of the 62, this seat has been held by Liberals, and at no time has this seat ever been represented by a 

CCF, Socialist, NDP or whatever they choose to call themselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIvor: — But I might state that if we were ever close to this type of representation, it was during 

the period from 1964 to 1967. When the Conservative Member, a man representing free enterprise, 

chose to support the Socialists opposite on more occasions than he did the Government of the day. It is 

small wonder that even some of the top Conservative supporters of this constituency voted for me in the 

recent election and I would like at this time to thank them and all of my supporters. I will do my utmost 

to fulfil the trust they have placed in me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great personal pride to be part of this Government. I always looked up to one of 

my relatives who was a Liberal MP at Ottawa, the late Rev. Daniel McIvor, the Member from Fort 

William for 23 years, a man who, like our Premier, followed the CCF Party for a short time but rejected 

it because of its Socialist beliefs. Throughout Daniel McIvor‟s term of office, press reports indicated that 

he added much dignity to the Assembly at Ottawa, and I hope I can in some small way do that here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to compliment the former Minister Wilf Gardiner and the present Minister of 

Public Works, the Hon. Allan Guy for their foresight and desire to restore this building once again to a 

sound, clean and sturdy structure, and in doing so retain this historical landmark for Saskatchewan. It is 

easy to neglect, but costly to repair when left too long, and I feel we owe it to the people of 

Saskatchewan, our forefathers, today‟s citizens and the citizens of the future to preserve the building 

where the history and culture of Saskatchewan are carried out. I would ask that Members on both sides 

of the House co-operate and add their support to this needy and worthwhile project, a program that when 

completed, we all can be very justly proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Friday, March 1, our Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) brought down the Budget. He 

first asked for the co-operation of the Opposition and welcomed criticism or alternative proposals from 

their side of the House. Mr. Speaker, when he finished delivering his Budget, which was a balanced and 

responsible Budget, with several tax increases necessary to supply this Government with the funds to 

carry out the ever-increasing costs of our public programs, the Member from Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney) rose to speak and with his usual glee and gloating· manner, declared it a Black Friday. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, from 1944 to 1964, the people of Saskatchewan had a full slate of Black Fridays, under the 

Administration of the Socialists that are seated to your left. Then he announced he would have much 

more to say on, Monday. Mr. Speaker, on the following Monday, the Member from Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney) continued his ruthless attack on the Budget. He offered no constructive criticism, he 

suggested no alternatives and only cried for more social and free programs which, if adopted, would 

only mean 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

719 

taxes. Mr. Speaker, the Member from Regina Centre, the former Provincial Treasurer, the Opposition‟s 

financial critic, in his delivery of this most repressive recital of his and his party‟s opinions could not 

help but remind me of our favorite funny paper hero, Dagwood, the man who misses the bus and stands 

on the street corner waving his arms, fighting with his trousers and blaming the whole state of affairs on 

Blondie. Mr. Speaker, after two and one-half hours of this abusive attack on this responsible 

Government, the Member from Regina Centre eventually did two constructive things: No. 1, he shut his 

loud mouth and No.2, he sat down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIvor: — Mr. Speaker, once again education bas got the top priority in spending of our Budget, 

up $l9.l million from last year‟s showing the determination of this Government to meet the ever-

increasing costs of university and education at other levels. At no time does this Government intend to 

stay in the way of advancement of education, but when large sums of public money are being spent on 

this very expansive building program, we feel that we should have a good look at the accounts. That‟s 

the duty of a responsible Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this controversy, much has been said about the freedom of speech by the Members 

opposite. The manner in which they defend this subject would lead one to believe that they are quite in 

favor of the filth that is printed in the Sheaf and Carillon. I would like to remind the Members to your 

left, when they cry about freedom of speech, of the treatment their henchmen gave the people and 

councils of this Province, when they tried to ram the county system down our throats by refusing them 

the right to ask questions at meetings they held. Mr. Speaker, this Liberal Government has co-operated 

with municipalities by greatly increasing their grants, including grid road maintenance payments, snow 

plough grants, homeowner grants and tax free purple gas to the farm trucks. Although the revenue to the 

municipalities did not increase greatly this year, I can honestly state that as a Reeve of a municipality for 

12 years, this is the first Government that recognized our needs and did something about them. Mr. 

Speaker, our Crown land sales for the year 1967 are up, making parcels of land with deeded titles 

available for the young farmers of this province to build new homes on, with no longer the fear of a 

cancelled-out lease, if they did not comply with the CCF demands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as recent as Monday of this week, the Provincial Attorney‟s Department, acting under the 

Government‟s Consumer Protection legislation, was able to obtain refunds in respect to contracts made 

with a Vancouver firm, whose salesman had sold contracts to five different people in the town of 

Davidson and failed to deliver the goods, as stated in the contract which was entered into in September, 

1967. This is just one more example of this Government protecting our people in towns and villages 

against the fast-buck artist from outside the province. As this instance happened within my constituency, 

I felt I should bring it to your attention and point out the values of this Act to the people of 

Saskatchewan. I would also like to point out that this Act was brought into force by this responsible 

Liberal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when our Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane} presented his budget program to this 

House Wednesday last, 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

720 

the Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) who spoke next, only scoffed at it, a very true 

indication of the attitude his party holds for the farmer. This was a good program designed to help both 

the young and older farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the completion of the Gardiner Dam and the filling up of the Diefenbaker Lake, 

which forms the west boundary of my constituency, we are entering into irrigation for the first time. My 

area will have water for recreation, industry and communities. Parks will be developed in this area 

which will eventually be a large tourist attraction. Mr. Speaker, this irrigation project will contain 

200,000 areas of irrigated farmland when completed, with another 15,000 acres along the canals. During 

the year 1968, approximately 800 acres will be prepared for water and another 900 acres will be served 

with sprinklers. Another 12, 000 acres will be ready for irrigation at the end of 1968, 9,700 acres will be 

ready for. irrigation at the end of 1969 and 19,700 acres, and the balance of the initial stage of 

development in 1970. Farmers are advised to continue to produce cereals, oilseeds and forage crops 

during the first few years, but crops such as sugar beets will eventually be grown when the development 

is large enough to support a sugar refinery in the area. Mr. Speaker, with the stabilization of fodder 

crops, our beef industry will become big business in the adjacent district. ARDA will play a very 

important role in financial assistance to the farmer by helping with the costs of land levelling, ditches 

and drains on the farms, structures and sprinklers for the farms. Mr. Speaker, I can only conclude my 

remarks about the beginning of this great project by stating that the future of this area is going to be the 

great and countless new development that will be seen to thrive there. I am proud of. the fact that our 

Government is going ahead as fast as it sees possible to develop this irrigation project and would like to 

point out to you that the budgetary expenditures for agriculture are up $2 million to help get this 

worthwhile job done. 

 

Much has been said, Mr. Speaker, by the Opposition about our party misleading the people of the 

Province of, Saskatchewan prior to the October 11th election. However, I am sure the public were well 

aware of the ever increasing costs that any Government of Saskatchewan would face, and did not fall for 

their give-away programs, misleading statements, half-truths, but elected us as a responsible 

Government to conduct the business of this Province, and would expect us to bring down a responsible 

Budget making tax increases in relationship, to the areas where costs have risen the most rapidly. This 

our Provincial Treasurer did. When, responsible people take a good honest look at it, they will be 

prepared to accept it as a tough job well done. Mr. Speaker, when the Members to your left talk of 

deceit, I would like to remind them of their convention last fall after the election, where they scrapped 

what was left of the old CCF Party, a party they claimed was the farmer‟s friend and took on the name 

of the NDP, the party whose national president stated they could get along without the farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite should hang their heads in shame when they meet a farmer. They 

have committed the sin of selling their souls down the river to the American and Eastern Canadian labor 

bosses, the people who promote strikes when we are harvesting our crops. I will support the motion and 

vote against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

721 

Hon. D. Boldt: (Minister of Highways) — Mr. Speaker, I rise and I say with great pleasure to take part 

in this debate, and to support the Budget. I want to take this opportunity as this is the first time I have 

spoken in this House this session, to congratulate you on being appointed to the high office as Speaker 

of this House. I would also like to congratulate all the newly elected Members and re- elected Members 

on both sides of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, considerable criticism has been levelled at this Government, most of it completely 

unjustified, and some of it I‟ll say I will accept with responsibility. One is led to believe that the NDP 

have forgotten that the election was over on October 11. They should accept the people‟s decision, but 

they continue to preach the gospel of hate, envy, misrepresentation and untruths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — 1 am sure that my radio audience is not interested in having me knock down their 

unworthy and uncalled for personal and government attacks. I shall deal with them rather harshly after I 

have announced the tremendous highway program that is in store for the people of Saskatchewan. 

Before I do so I would like to let the people of Saskatchewan know, Mr. Speaker, that before we took 

office the Department of Highways had directed a study into the needs and costs of a modern highway 

system. It was so damaging, Mr. Speaker, that the former NDP Minister of Highways decided not to 

make it public. It was only after we took office in 1964 that this report was released. 

 

Upon studying the report, it was revealed that it would take at least 20 years, if we spent a minimum of 

$60 million per year, to catch up with the backlog. What backlog? The backlog left after 20 years of 

Socialist administration. The result of this hindsight by the Socialists has shown up in the last four years, 

since industry has moved into Saskatchewan, with the result that tremendous pressures have come to 

bear upon the Government and upon the Department for improved highway standards. I say in all 

sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that if I were to meet the demands and requests of the urban and rural 

representatives, many of them justified, I would need a minimum of $100 million this year alone. I 

learned to say No in Welfare and have continued to say No in Highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s examine the ability of the taxpayer in Saskatchewan. May I point out to this House 

that highway accidents cost the people of Saskatchewan, according to the Saskatchewan Safety Council, 

an estimate of $80 million. Another $60 million is being spent by the people of Saskatchewan on liquor, 

and another $40 million on tobacco, and when I say this I might not have too many friends on both sides 

of the House, when I say this amounts to a total of 180 million dollars. These three items alone are more 

than 50 per cent of our present Budget. If only 50 per cent of this amount were spent on education, 

health and welfare, all the positive programs could be implemented and Saskatchewan would be a better 

place to live in. However, I realize that this is not going to come about, and as long as these huge sums 

of money are being spent on such useless purposes, I doubt whether the people of Saskatchewan can 

complain that we are being overtaxed. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

722 

I am proud to outline the 1968 program, Mr. Speaker, for continuing the modernization of the Provincial 

highway system. It is the express purpose of my Department to provide optimum level of highway 

services at minimum cost to the users, the people of Saskatchewan. Within this framework of purpose 

one is faced with an almost insurmountable task. Our people, our industry, our natural resources, are 

scattered over more than 100,000 square miles. To service this large area, we now have 10,070 miles of 

Provincial highways, not to mention the much larger mileage under the jurisdiction of rural and urban 

municipalities. The condition or serviceability of our highways ranges from adequate for those improved 

in recent years, to something less than adequate for those built 15 or more years ago. As you would 

expect, the older highways must be included in a continuing improvement program to meet the traffic 

needs. There are four reasons for improving or rebuilding our highways: 

 

(1) A road begins to deteriorate the day after it is built. Studies conducted by my Department have 

shown that the average life of bituminous pavement is 16 years, while that of an oiled surface is six 

years. (2) Roadway obsolescence is caused by increasing traffic volumes. In the last few years, vehicular 

traffic has increased approximately six per cent annually. Traffic counts on our roads is 4.4 times as 

heavy as it was 20 years ago. (3) The travelling public has expressed the desire for better and safer 

roads, including the comfort and convenience aspects of paved road surfaces. With paved surfaces, the 

irritating effects of dust, mud and flying gravel are eliminated. (4) In rebuilding the highway network, 

the most economical network should reflect a minimum road-user cost considering initial road capital 

investment, road maintenance charges, and the cost of vehicle operation. 

 

The program that I will outline to you is intended to reflect these pressures and necessities, and to be the 

best possible blend of the various kinds and ways of improvements within the monies which the 

Provincial economy can afford. We have to be selective about what roads we improve, and to what 

degree we improve them. There are roads we must have to serve our economy, and there are roads we 

must have to expand our economy. Our prime consideration must be for continuing improvement of the 

general highway network. We now have approximately 2,249 miles of paved roads. This represents, Mr. 

Speaker, 21.3 per cent of our total Provincial system. This is an increase of approximately 15 per cent as 

compared to the 1963-64 paved mileage. The oiled roads, .Mr. Speaker, now total approximately 3,904 

miles or approximately 38.6 per cent of the total highway system. At the end of the 1967 season we had 

doubled the oiled road mileages of 1963-64. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — It must be appreciated, Mr. Speaker, that a good portion of this oiled surfaced mileage is 

carrying a volume far in excess of that originally intended. Also a good portion of this mileage has been 

in use for 5 years or more. These are the roads that are of concern to us because they will not last 

indefinitely under increasing traffic use. We have at present more than l, 000 miles of oiled roads that 

have an average daily traffic count of more than 500. Normally a road should be paved at a traffic count 

of 500. So here alone we have a huge backlog of miles, inherited from the Socialists, that will have to be 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

723 

improved in the near future at a cost of more than $65 million. The mileage of gravelled roads is now 

approximately 3,880 miles, or approximately 38 per cent of the total highway system. It is the aim of the 

proposed 1968 program to further reduce the gravelled road mileage, continue the conversion of oiled 

roads to paved roads, and update some of the older paved roads to better serve the traffic needs and 

tastes of the travelling public. 

 

In addition to having to provide for continuing improvements to the general highway network, there is 

the need to make improvements to specific highways directly associated with the industrial development 

of the province. The present highways servicing the potash industry are deteriorating quite rapidly under 

the increasing heavy traffic load. In particular, Highway No. 14 is affected, from the Manitoba boundary 

to Saskatoon. Considerable work is scheduled for 1968 on various sections of this highway. In the same 

category is Highway No. 22 in the vicinity of Esterhazy. The pulpwood industry at Prince Albert is 

placing a heavy demand on roads. The Province is committed to provide 200 miles of all-weather roads. 

Work on roads to be used by the pulp industry started in 1966. By the end of the 1967 season, work was 

completed, or in progress, on various sections of Highways 55 and 120 from Prince Albert via Meath 

Park and Candle Lake, to the Cub Hills area. Work will continue on these highways in 1968 and a new 

Highway No. 376 will be provided between the mill site and No. 2 Highway at Spruce Home, The cost 

of these projects is estimated at $2 million. 

 

These roads are designed and built to accommodate trucks that will be 11 feet wide and capable of 

hauling up to 125,000 pound gross loads. This is a substantial departure from the normal legal 8-foot 

truck widths and 74,000 pound gross loads allowed on the general highway network. It is sufficient to 

say that the cost of building such heavy-duty roads is heavily taxing our proposed budget. 

 

Indirectly associated with the pulpwood industry, Highway No.2 will be paved to Waskesiu, and grading 

started along the west side of Montreal Lake towards La Ronge. Finally, with respect to the industrial 

development, continued improvements in the form of paved or dust-free surfaces will be provided into 

established industries. Surface improvements will be commensurate with traffic needs, and priorities 

established for the improvement of the general highway network. The access road to the Alwinsal potash 

mine at Guernsey is so scheduled for paving in 1968. A new access road will be graded and gravelled to 

the Sylvite mine site northeast of Rocanville, another potash mine brought in by the Liberal 

Government. The Department will continue its policy of assistance to villages, towns and cities for the 

improvement of their streets and roads. The increasing urban growth and resulting traffic is placing a 

heavy tax burden on the urban governments. We are making $3.4 million available this year. This is 

more than the estimated $2.3 to $2.7 million spent in 1967, but it is less than $5 million spent in 1966 on 

shareable work. The chief reason for the slowdown on the urban spending on roads and streets has been 

the tight-money situation. Except for the larger cities, most of the priority street improvements have 

been completed, and a degree of stability can be expected in the urban assistance budget provisions. 

 

Lastly, there is the need to keep pace with the traffic growth on our primary highways, vital for intercity 

travel or regional travel. Here, continued improvement will be In the 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

724 

form of four-laned highways that are capable of handling large volumes of traffic at high speeds, with 

the utmost of safety, comfort and convenience. Approximately $5,436,000 will be spent on this type of 

improvement in 1968. 

 

Work will proceed on the following four-lane projects: Highway No. 1 from east of Moose Jaw to 

Mortlach; Highway No. 1 from east of Swift Current to Highway No. 32; Highway No. 11 from 

Lumsden to Chamberlain; Highway No. 11 from the Blackstrap Coulee to Saskatoon. 

 

Appreciating the needs of traffic and the need for continuing highway improvements, the Government 

stated last fall that $250 million will be made available in the next four years. This is considerably more 

than the $180 million provided for highways in the past four years. I want to emphasize that we have 

surpassed our 1964 objective, a promise made to the people at that time, that we would build highways, 

at a minimum of $175 million in the first term of office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — For the fiscal year 1967-68, highway expenditure is estimated at 59.1 million. The former 

Socialist government spent less than $24.2 million in 1963-64. This year it is planned to hold the line on 

highway expenditure. The proposed budget of $58.5 million should cover our immediate needs 

considering the present economic status of the Province. Last year, we enjoyed one of the best highway 

construction seasons in years. I want to compliment the construction industry, especially the road 

contractors for taking the challenge of our big program. With the excellent weather conditions afforded 

to them they more than met our objectives. I am satisfied that they will continue to carry out our 1968 

program with the same attitude and initiative. For example, a total of 930,000 tons of blacktop were 

produced, 52 per cent more than was produced in 1966. It is interesting to note that this was five times 

the tonnage produced in 1963, under the former Government. The tonnage of base course and sub-base 

materials also increased to a new high of 3.505 million tons, or approximately 22 percent over the 1966 

tonnage. Excavation yardage remained at the 1966 level of 32 million tons. In terms of physical 

accomplishment, the approximate 1967 mileage of paving was 272, oiling was 586, .while grading was 

614. 

 

Before going into the details of the Capital Program for 1968-69 I want to make reference to a number 

of major projects that were opened to traffic during 1967: The new Highway No. 10 from Balgonie to 

Fort Qu‟Appelle has greatly reduced travel distance and time between Regina and Yorkton. A second 

section from Melville to Yorkton has further added to the convenience of. the public. The four-lane road 

between Regina and Moose Jaw has greatly relieved traffic congestion. The interchange at the 

intersection of Highways 1 and 6 south of Regina has further improved traffic operation and safety 

which some Members on the other side would want to criticize. The new bridge over the North 

Saskatchewan River and associated roads between North Battleford and the Battleford are other 

welcome additions to our highway system. Saskatchewan‟s first cable-driven ferry was installed and put 

into operation across the South Saskatchewan River west of Riverhurst. This ferry forms an important 

summer transportation link, serving communities situated on either side of the river, as well as the 

tourist industry. Two major bridges are being built at the present time: work on the Deer Creek 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

725 

Bridge over the North Saskatchewan River, and the Gabriel Bridge over the South Saskatchewan River 

are progressing on schedule, and both are expected to be put into service next fall. 

 

Most of the major highway projects planned for the next two to five years include: (1) South 

Saskatchewan River Bridge and highway from Birch Hills to Prince Albert; (2) completion of the 

reconstruction of Highway No. 2 from Prince Albert to La Ronge; (3) reconstruction and paving of 

Highway No. 55 from Nipawin to Prince Albert; (4) completion of the reconstruction and paving of 

Highway No. 11 from Saskatoon to Prince Albert; (5) paving of Highway No. 14 from Saskatoon to the 

Manitoba boundary; (6) completion of a highway from Saskatoon to Aberdeen as the first link to the 

Wakaw cut-off; (7) reconstruction and paving of Highways No. 37 and 13 from Gull Lake to Eastend; 

(8) the continuation of four-lane construction on No. 1 Highway from Mortlach to Swift Current; (9) the 

continuation of reconstruction and paving of No. 11 Highway from Chamberlain to the Blackstrap 

Coulee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I shall now go into detail on what is in store for us in the 1968-69 construction year: \ 

 

Highway No. 1 — Resurfacing of the section from the Manitoba boundary to Moosomin; resurfacing 

from Whitewood to Percival; completion of paving from Regina to Belle Plaine; completion of paving 

between Moose Jaw and Boharm; grading from Boharm to Mortlach; completion of paving from east of 

Swift Current to No. 32 Highway; completion of grading from Swift Current to No. 32 Highway; 

completion of interchange structures in Swift Current. 

 

Highway No. 2 — Completion of the paving from the Airport corner to south of Moose Jaw; completion 

of the grading and paving north of Moose Jaw; completion of grading from Spruce Home to Christopher 

Lake; paving from south of Spruce Home to Waskesiu access road; completion of the grading and 

gravelling from Waskesiu access road to south end of Montreal Lake; grading and gravelling from south 

end of Montreal Lake to north; clearing and drainage from No. 165 Highway to southwest; grading at La 

Ronge. 

 

Highway No. 3 — Completion of grading from Hudson Bay to West; oiling from Spiritwood to Glaslyn; 

completion of the Deer Creek Bridge and bridge approaches. 

 

Highway No. 4 — Completion of paving at Rosetown; completion of the grading and paving from North 

Battleford to No. 26 Highway; completion of the grading and gravelling from Midnight Lake to south of 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Highway No. 5 — Paving from Kamsack to Canora; completion of the grading from Wadena to Watson; 

completion of the paving from Saskatoon to Borden Bridge; resurfacing from Maymont to Denholm; 

completion of the paving from Lashburn to Lloydminster. 

 

Highway No.6 — Grading and gravelling from Ceylon to No. 13 Highway; resurfacing Corinne south 

10 miles; seal coating from Watson to LacVert. 

 

Highway No.7 — Resurfacing of various sections from Saskatoon to Vanscoy; completion of the 

grading and paving from Harris to Rosetown; and the construction of service roads along Nos. 7 and 30 

Highways at Kindersley. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

726 

Highway No.8 — Grading and gravelling from Rocanville to the Sylvite Mine; oiling from Rocanville 

to Langenburg; oiling from Churchbridge to Wroxton; completion of the grading and gravelling from 

Wroxton to Kamsack. 

 

Highway No.9 — Oiling from International Border to Alameda; completion of grading and gravelling at 

Carlyle; completion of grading from Canora to Stenen; and paving from Canora to Stenen. 

 

Highway No. 10 — Completion of paving from Yorkton to Melville. 

 

Highway No. 11 — Completion of grading and paving from Lumsden to Bethune; grading and paving 

from Bethune to Chamberlain; grading and paving from Hanley to Dundurn; completion of the paving 

from Dundurn to Saskatoon; completion of grading and paving, including interchange structures, of 

Highways No.5 and 11 on north side of Saskatoon; grading and gravelling from Saskatoon to Rosthern. 

 

Highway No. 13 — Completion of grading and gravelling from Carlyle to Arcola; completion of 

grading and gravelling from Cadillac to Admiral, oiling from Cadillac to No. 37 Highway; completion 

of oiling from Robsart east. 

 

Highway No. 14 — Grading and gravelling from Saltcoats to Yorkton; grading and gravelling from 

Yorkton to Orcadia; paving from Elfros to Dafoe; grading and gravelling from Lanigan to No. 2 

Highway; paving from Lanigan to No. 2 Highway; paving from Clavet to Saskatoon. 

 

Highway No. 15 — Oiling from Melville to Fenwood; completion of oiling from Raymore to No. 20 

Highway. 

 

Highway No. 17 — Completion of grading and gravelling from No. 40 Highway to north. 

 

Highway No. 19 — Oiling from Mankota to Kincaid, oiling from Chaplin to Central Butte. 

 

Highway No. 20 — Completion of oiling from Guernsey to Humboldt; grading and gravelling from 

Humboldt to Fulda. 

 

Highway No. 22 — Grading and gravelling from No. 8 Highway to Esterhazy; paving from Stockholm 

to east of Esterhazy; completion of grading and gravelling from Lemberg to No. 10 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 23 — Commence paving from Highway No. 123 to Nipawin. 

 

Highway No. 27 — Oiling from No. 2 Highway to Aberdeen. 

 

Highway No. 29 — Completion of grading and gravelling from Battleford to Southwest. 

 

Highway No. 33 — Resurfacing from Kronau to Regina. 

 

Highway No. 34 — Oiling from International Border north. 

 

Highway No. 35 — Resurfacing Tisdale north, five miles. 

 

Highway No. 36 — Oiling from the International Border to Coronach; oiling from Galilee to No. 2 

Highway. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

727 

Highway No. 37 — Grading and gravelling from Gull Lake to Swift Current. 

 

Highway No. 39 — Completion of grading and paving from Weyburn to Yellow Grass; paving at 

Corinne; dust control from Corinne to Pasqua. 

 

Highway No. 40 — Grading and gravelling from Wilbert to east of Neilburg; grading and gravelling 

from Marsden to Alberta border. 

 

Highway No. 41 — This is the new number given to the No. 27 from Aberdeen to Saskatoon, contract to 

be let this fall for grading. 

 

Highway No. 42 — Grading and gravelling from Dinsmore south. 

 

Highway No. 44 — Oiling from Dinsmore to Elrose. 

 

Highway No. 45 — Grading and gravelling from Lucky Lake to Birsay; oiling from Birsay to Tichfield. 

 

Highway No. 46 — Completion of grading and gravelling from Climax to Claydon. 

 

Highway No. 47 — Oiling from Benson to Stoughton; oiling from Grenfell to the Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Highway No. 49 — Grading from Okla to Kelvington. 

 

Highway No. 55 — Grading and gravelling from Beaver River to four miles west; dust control from 

Meadow Lake to west Jct. No. 4 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 102 — Grading and gravelling at McLennan Lake. 

 

Highway No. 120 — Grading and gravelling from Meath Park to Candle Lake; grading Highway No. 

106 to the Cub Hills. 

 

Highway No. 135 — Clearing and drainage at Pelican Narrows north. 

 

Highway No. 163 — Completion of grading and gravelling from No. 23 Highway east. 

 

Highway No. 167 — Oiling from Denare Beach to Flin Flon. 

 

Highway No. 264 — completion of grading and paving of Waskesiu access Road. 

 

Highway No. 312 — completion of Gabriel Bridge and grading of the Bridge approaches. 

 

Highway No. 318 — Gravelling from Carnduff to Alida. 

 

Highway No. 321 — Gravelling from Liebenthal to Alberta border. 

 

Highway No. 350 —Completion of the oiling from Torquay to the International Border. 

 

Highway No. 371 — Gravelling Fax Valley to 5 miles west of Richmound. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

728 

Highway No. 376 — Grading and gravelling from Prince Albert pulp mill to Spruce Home. 

 

Highway No. 379 — Oiling at Wymark. 

 

Highway No. 381 — Designation of grid road from Foam Lake to ten miles north as a Provincial 

highway. 

 

Highway No. 383 — Oiling at Waldheim. \ 

 

Highway No. 396 — Paving of the Alwinsal access road. 
 

I would also like to announce for the benefit of the contractors a few projects that are expected to be 

tendered in the fall of 1968 for late fall construction or first thing next year. 
 

Highway No. 1 — Grading of Regina Bypass and construction of a bridge over Wascana Creek. 

 

Highway No.3 — Grading from Birch Hills to Prince Albert. 

 

Highway No.5 — Paving from Wadena to Watson. 

 

Highway No. 9 — Paving from Carlyle to north; paving from Whitewood to Stockholm; grading from 

Hudson Bay to 12 miles south. 

 

Highway No. 11 — Paving from Saskatoon to Rosthern. 

 

Highway No. 13 — Paving from Carlyle to Arcola. 

 

Highway No. 14 — Paving from Yorkton to Springside and grading from Orcadia to Insinger. 

 

Highway No. 17 — Paving from Lloydminster to north. 

 

Highway No. 35 — Grading from Wadena to north. 

 

Highway No. 54 — Grading from junction No. 11 Highway to Regina Beach. 

 

Highway No. 55 — Paving from Meath Park to the pulp mill. 

 

Highway No. 57 - Grading from Indian Head to Lebret. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that represents the 1968-69 Highway Program for the Department of Highways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Now, Mr. Speaker, having dealt with the program, I would like to answer some of the 

charges made during the debate at my Government and my Department. May I first point out that the 

people of Saskatchewan made it abundantly clear on October 11th last that they don‟t want Socialism; 

they don‟t want Mr. Lloyd‟s company; they defeated Old Man Sandy Nicholson (that great Santa Claus 

when it came to dishing out public funds); and the people of Hanley kicked out that tall Socialist lawyer 

whom I once called a slimy fish, a remark which you made me withdraw. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

729 

Mr. Boldt: — That fish, Mr. Speaker, has now been caught, filleted and put into cold storage till we 

never meet again in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the election will go down in history as one of the most vicious of all times in 

Saskatchewan. It was obvious that the Socialists put everything at their disposal into it. Facts and 

statistics were thrown out the window by the Socialist candidates and substituted for them was the 

gospel of hate, envy, misrepresentation and untruths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The election results, to me, were most gratifying and maintained the confidence I have 

always had in the good people of Rosthern constituency to show good judgment when it came to 

electing representatives to manage the business of the Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I had never thought it possible that some politicians would stoop to such 

gutter-type politics in trying to win votes. Just listen to this, Mr. Speaker. In Rosthern, the NDP 

candidate and his cohorts made a house-to-house visit among my friends of the Mennonite faith, urging 

them to support him, as he and the NDP represented the teachings of Jesus Christ, whom he claimed to 

be a Socialist, Christ being a Socialist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I believe that the Good Lord took a hand and dealt with this Pharisee on October 11th. He 

lost his deposit. They also sent out a pamphlet called “The Liberal Liquor Story” and I have it right here, 

to every household of Mennonite faith, only. 

 

Mr. Willis: (Melfort-Tisdale) — Read it. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Why not to those of other faiths and other ethnic groups? Because they felt that it would 

lose them votes. But as one of my workers explained to me, by the time they got around to the other 

ethnic groups they were so much under the influence that they dared not show up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me tell this House that my reputation on liquor in this Legislature, in my community 

and in my home, will stand up against any test, when compared to that of the NDP candidate in the 

Rosthern constituency in the last election. My re-election in Rosthern was even more gratifying, when I 

consider the tremendous effort put into the campaign against me by the Saskatoon Star Phoenix and 

CFQC radio and television. Ever since the social aid controversy in Saskatoon, these two news media 

have been my greatest enemies. I don‟t mind this at all. Every time the social aid issue came up, these 

two news media would call on that Socialist Santa Claus Sandy Nicholson and have him attempt to 

knock down my arguments. He got first and third page treatment in the Star Phoenix and personal 

interviews on television. Why the Star Phoenix examined the social aid reports, I have a whole list of 

them, and I just want to read you what the editor said. Note: 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

730 

Welfare Minister Boldt has charged that the City has abused social aid legislation. The Star Phoenix 

has examined a number of files. 

 

That was strictly against the law passed by you people over there. They passed judgment and they said 

they found nothing wrong with the files, until we told them that this was against the law. They changed 

their attitude but I read a day later, the third series. Editor‟s note: “The Star Phoenix has examined a 

number of reports.” 

 

Well; you know, Mr. Speaker, it was only a year after this Government took over the administration of 

welfare — I was not the Minister of Welfare — when the Hon. Mr. MacDonald reported to the Star 

Phoenix, “Welfare cases decreased by 25 per cent within the year.” That was only one year ago and 

there was considerable reduction in costs before that. I would say since the Liberal Government took 

office, the welfare rolls in Saskatoon were reduced by 40 per cent. The Star Phoenix says, there is 

nothing wrong. They were the judge. 

 

When the Premier or I made some comments about Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office, Bob 

Walker was their contact man and they would have him attempt to knock down our arguments. I tried 

my level best to get to some reporters at CFQC television, but they were forbidden to speak to me. At 

one time I received a telephone call from the news director of CFQC television that I was not to talk to 

any other news reporter but himself, because they were trying to protect this little group at City Hall and 

the Socialists, Sandy Nicholson included. I told him that we were not in Russia and I intended to 

exercise my freedom of speech. 

 

My constituents were so fed up with their biased attitude, and showed it on election day. Not only was I 

re-elected by 67 per cent of the popular vote, but these two news media failed to help re-elect Mr. 

Nicholson and Mr. Walker, and the people of Saskatoon in three constituencies elected Liberal 

candidates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — So far, Mr. Speaker, the news media in Saskatoon have overlooked giving me any credit 

whatsoever for this landslide victory in Saskatoon, but I know, and always have known, that the 

majority of the people in Saskatoon agreed with my Government‟s policy on welfare and supported the 

Liberal candidates who stood up for what is right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, listening to the Socialist speeches in the Throne Speech debate and in the present one, I fail 

to recognize in them any worthwhile responsibility that they want to shoulder, in governing this country 

and province on a sound financial basis. Speaker after speaker rises and offers a whole list of give-away 

programs, no suggestion whatever as to where the money must come from, just a do-gooder party, with 

no leader, with no program, every individual Member on his own, sounding off like an empty drum. Mr. 

Speaker, some of their former Members knew that the time was up in 1960 and they flew the coop, some 

with millions, and others with patches on their pants, and the left-overs, Mr. Speaker, are what you see 

on your left . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

731 

Mr. Boldt: — . . . a disillusioned, frustrated, eager-for-power but never to be group. Mr. Speaker, they 

talk as if money and labor had gone out of style. If they take the pill they might get away without labor, 

but I doubt if it takes care of the means of finance. We call ourselves a Christian nation, and I hope we 

all believe in God and His word. If we do, then let‟s do what He tells us to do. In the very first Book we 

read and I quote: 

 

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou 

taken; for dust thou are, and unto dust shalt thou return. 

 

This does not mean free tuition, free lunch kits to everybody. This does not sound very socialistic to me, 

and if this verse were applied by all able-bodied people we would never have chaos. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . 65 books after that one, Dave. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, the financial critic of the Opposition does not impress me too much. He 

couldn‟t read a balance sheet when he was in the Cabinet and I doubt whether he has increased his 

abilities since. He found it perfectly satisfactory as a Minister of the Crown and at one time in charge of 

SGIO to pump half a million dollars yearly into a Socialist Crown corporation, the Saskatchewan 

Guarantee and Fidelity Company, doing business in foreign lands, for a total of over $4 million, without 

once, Mr. Speaker, informing the people of Saskatchewan that this company was in trouble. What 

honesty! That was out of style too, under the Socialists. They didn‟t know what the word honesty was. 

 

Then, of course, you have the great Socialist Mayor of Regina, who always comes up with an extra 

special platform, all his own, not approved by the NDP caucus, and all full of extra goodies. He couldn‟t 

finance the monkey bars which have left an everlasting scar on the people of Regina, so the Government 

took it off his hands. Now, Mr. Speaker, he‟s in trouble with Pioneer Village over some tenders on 

drapes, revealed by the lady alderman for Regina. This lady is giving him trouble, and Henry may need 

some further Government assistance. But, Henry, keep up the fight, for I am reminded of the sage words 

of Shakespeare who said: 

 

That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man, 

If with his tongue he cannot win a woman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — May God bless the lady alderman! The NDP, Mr. Speaker, criticize the Government, 

claiming we are short-changing education, the teachers, the university and the students. Oh, they tell us 

we could take millions out of the highway program and give it to education. Well, we are building a 

highway and a bridge in the Rosthern constituency, started last year on it, and if I were to call a 

plebiscite on the increase in teachers- salaries of 20, 15 or 10 per cent, or the discontinuance of the 

bridge and the highway, the electors in the Rosthern constituency would turn down the increase by 99.9 

per 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

732 

cent in favor of the bridge and the highway. I want to warn the NDP, particularly the rural Members, 

you criticize our highway budget, then tell me what deletions you want made from your ridings. Does 

the Member from Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) suggest that I delete work on Highways 14, 17, and 5? Does 

the Member from Kelsey (Mr. Messer) suggest that we curtail work in his riding? These are the 

questions that you should ask yourselves before you criticize the Highway Budget. I am asking you to 

name the projects in your ridings that you want postponed. Never mind the Liberal ridings. After all, Mr. 

Speaker, the Socialist candidates had an elaborate highway program during the election campaign. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica: (Cutknife) — Just stick to your bid prices. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — For an example, an all-weather road to every farm yard. Estimated cost half a billion 

dollars. 

 

Let‟s take a look at some other commitments made by the NDP candidates in Rosthern. I have a 

pamphlet here. He wants to oil the grid roads. Well, we have 12,000 miles of grid road at at least $3,000 

per mile. That would cost another $360 million. And those fellows over there tell us to cut the Highway 

Budget by $20 million. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Try that again. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — We will emphasize on connecting roads from highways to towns. We are supposed to 

connect all the towns and also cut the budget. He tells us that we should support the work of the 

proposed Wakaw cut-off and eventually to Melfort. This would cost at least $8 to $10 million. Dust-

freeing connecting road from highway to Fort Carlton, a distance of about 20 miles. Rebuild the road to 

highway standard and make dust-free between Rosthern and Wakaw. A great big highway program: Mr. 

Speaker, this makes our program and budget look like little David with a sling fighting the giant. I‟ll 

have some more to say about our four-lane projects in a few minutes. 

 

But, Mr; Speaker, I just can‟t resist the temptation to say a few words about financing education. My 

stand on buildings has been well publicized by the news media and I would not want to retract from it at 

all at this time. I realize that facilities are required that must and should differ from those of 20 years 

ago. All I want to say at this time is that if the University Board, the Trustees, the Department of 

Education, the Government of Saskatchewan, and those giving the services, are not willing to exercise 

restraint, they‟ll wreck the taxpayers of this province. We need functional common sense-type 

institutions that we can afford to construct. We are pricing ourselves out of all proportions when we look 

at some of the buildings built and proposed on some of our campuses. I think the Comprehensive high 

school at Yorkton is an outstanding lavish example, and I could name others. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) criticized the construction of No. 11 Highway south of 

Saskatoon to Dundurn. He mentioned that half the grading had blown away. This is a deliberate 

falsehood and he knows it. I challenge him to produce facts as to how many yards of dirt have been 

blown away. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

733 

Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition had been alookin instead of ablinkin, I am sure that he 

would never have made such a statement. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — You gotta blink with the blowing dust up there, Dave. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The truth of the matter is that I would be happy indeed, if the grading of No. 11 could 

have been completed beyond the Blackstrap as traffic, now that the reservoir is filled, will more than 

double during the weekends to this man-made lake, constructed by this Liberal Government last 

summer, which will give to the people of Saskatoon and area a much needed resort. We are six months 

late with paving on this highway, I‟ll admit, but with the major paving program under way in the 

province, there simply hasn‟t been enough equipment to get all the work done as rapidly as we would 

like. 

 

Mr. Speaker, mention has been made of the condition of the Battleford Bridge. The Socialists would like 

the public to believe that this was, or is, a political failure. Well, let me remind them that the engineers 

that did the survey and the planning at the site are the same ones that worked for the Department when 

they were in office. I want to assure this House that I have every confidence in them. The Hon. Member 

for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) — I believe is milking his goats today — stated in this debate that the 

site was selected by the Government, particularly by Mr. Grant, and that the highway engineers would 

never have been so foolish as to have selected such an obviously wrong location. Well, I noticed the 

Hon. Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) sort of slid under his desk when the nosy Member for 

The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) made that statement. Let‟s examine the facts about the bridge location as 

given to me by my officials only a few days ago. 

 

Five locations were being considered, the number one location being via the existing bridges, which was 

not considered desirable. Location number five, the one which was adopted, was recommended on May 

21, 1963, when the Hon. Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) was a Member of the Cabinet of the 

former Government, by Mr. Genereux, Planning Engineer to Mr. Holmes, as the most favorable location 

for the new bridge. On April 1, 1964, Mr. Speaker, bridge engineer Thomson made this recommendation 

to W.A. Sheard, Director of Engineering Services for the Department (and note they were still the 

Government at that time) and it said: 

 

Alternative number five is certainly our choice for bridge location and is also favored by the location 

engineer. Community Planning are agreeable to Route 5. 

 

Further meetings took place between my Deputy, department engineers and members of the two city 

councils. On July 27,1964, when we were the Government, a plan and a photo mosaic was shown to Mr. 

Grant. Mr. Grant bears the responsibility for the location decision, but he was presented with a nearly 

unanimous technical and local conclusion long before we were even the Government. Certainly the 

Department accepts full responsibility for the location, and even now, Mr. Speaker, no one has any 

hindsight views about a better location. These are the facts, Mr. Speaker, so I am asking the Hon. 

Member for The Battlefords to refrain from telling lies about my officials and my 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

734 

colleague, Mr. Grant. He knows the facts, but he deliberately chose to misrepresent them. This is typical 

of the Hon. Member‟s conduct since I have, been a Member of this Legislature. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood: (Swift Current) — Mr. Speaker, on a Point of Order to say that a Member deliberately 

chooses to misrepresent the facts is outside of language that should be used in this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The point of order is well taken. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Do you want me to withdraw, that statement? To say that he hadn‟t told a lie, then would 

be lying. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I didn‟t hear that one. What was it? Order, order! The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) on a Point of Order. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd: (Leader of the Opposition) — The Member made the same kind of allegation in 

regard to myself a few minutes ago. He accused me of telling a falsehood. I didn‟t rise to it. I knew that 

it was a breach of the rules. I accept the source from which it comes, but I think at this point after having 

been called to order, he should withdraw his statement as referred to by the Member for Swift Current 

(Mr. Wood). without equivocation. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I‟ll withdraw that statement. I am sure that the Hon. Member from The Battlefords did it 

out of ignorance. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — After all, is this a satisfactory procedure for a deliberative Legislature of this kind. The 

Member should withdraw period, without any further comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, if the Member has to withdraw what he said, he can‟t qualify his withdrawal. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I‟ll withdraw the statement, Mr. Speaker. If the Opposition wants to talk about the 

faltering bridge, then let them talk about the South Saskatchewan Landing Bridge that flushed down the 

river when they were the Government and leave the engineers alone. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Minister of Agriculture) — That‟s water over the bridge, Dave. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The bridge, Mr. Speaker, is now again in use. Our people regret that the inconvenience 

caused by the temporary closing of the bridge was necessary. Of course there is a very logical 

explanation for the Department‟s action in closing the bridge to traffic and I will elaborate on that when 

the Estimates come up. 

 

The financial critic for the NDP (Mr. Blakeney) said in his criticism of the Highway Department and I 

quote from the 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

735 

Leader Post: 

 

Stopping the practice of renting construction equipment to friends of the Government at less than cost. 

 

I have checked, Mr. Speaker, with my officials and am informed that we do not rent highway equipment 

to anybody, period. Is this another deliberate falsehood? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ignorance! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The Hon. Member also had something to say about reinstating the practice of 

constructing some highways with Department crews, possibly stopping — and I give him credit for 

saying, possibly stopping — paying ridiculously high prices for some highway construction. Let me tell 

him that we are moving just about as much dirt with Government crews as when they were the 

Government. The only difference is in the percentage. Your Socialist Government had such a small 

budget that highway crews moved about 40 to 50 per cent of the dirt. Today, under our enlarged 

program, this amount only represents somewhat less than 10 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — We have more people in the employ of the Department because of our increased budget. 

Our additional mileage means more maintenance crews. And our oiling crews have increased in size 

because we cannot get the private sector interested in bidding on oiling projects. I want to remind the 

Hon. Members that since I became the Minister we have received as many as 12 to 15 bids on tenders 

from contractors from Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta. With no five per cent preference, as under 

your Administration, I feel we are getting the best possible price for highway construction. I feel that 

any increase in Government crews would lead to inefficiency, and this feeling is shared by my officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me say a few words about our four-lane highways. If a four-lane highway was justified 

some seven years ago from Regina to Lumsden with only 2,500 vehicles per day, then how can the 

Opposition argue against a four-lane structure from Regina to Moose Jaw with 4,000 vehicles per day 

with peaks of 8,000? At Swift Current, a four-mile stretch has an average of 5,000 vehicles per day. 

How can they argue against our judgment when 2,500 vehicles per day warranted four lanes when you 

were the Government? As to No. 11, Mr. Speaker, from Lumsden to the Blackstrap, a new set of lanes 

will be constructed within the next three to four years. When this lane is completed, the traffic on the 

existing lane will be completely taken off and you will still just have a two-lane highway. We will then 

move on the old lanes and rebuilt them around the re-alignment of the existing new ones. We might 

have to speed up this work on No. 11, as the traffic has shown a tremendous increase of late between 

these two cities. Does the Opposition still want to criticize the four-lane program? Yesterday I heard the 

Member from Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) criticize the condition of our highways. Mr. Speaker, for the 

information of this House I want to read a letter from a lady from Newmarket, Ontario, a tourist, that I 

received in my office on January 25, 1968, and it says this: 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

736 

Dear Sir: 

 

Last summer we drove to the west coast, and I think you should be complimented on the excellent 

condition of the highways in Saskatchewan. They are definitely much better than in any other 

province. Our daughter lives in Star City and since we visited her, both to and from the coast, we 

travelled a considerable distance on your highways. They were all equally as good. I might mention 

that we did drive on a country road near Star City, while it was raining. However, that was an 

experience and all a part of the holidays. Thank you for making our motoring in Saskatchewan so 

pleasant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst: (Wadena) — Mr. Speaker, is the Minister going to table that letter? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I‟ll table it. You can have it right away. Mr. Speaker, I just can‟t get excited about all this 

noise the Socialists are making about the bad Liberals. It reminds me of the first year in office in 1964, 

when we formed the Government. I remember the cries of the CCF and the newspapers about those 

terrible Liberals. I have some clippings that I want to read to you. Headlines “Work for Welfare”. “Boldt 

wages war on the poor. He hits at the poor, the old, the sick, and the children”. And Santa Claus 

Nicholson says, “His church is going to deal with him when the time comes.” Relief for Work was what 

they used to preach against us, and here are the headlines: “The Boldt Plan.” Oh! that was criticized by 

the CCF when we were going to get some able-bodied people to do a day‟s work for a day‟s food? But 

that was not Christian-like. I heard the Mayor of Regina speak yesterday, and I can just see these 

Pharisees stand at the corner and thank God that they are not like the Liberals. Here it says: “The 

Government may take over the City‟s Aid Office.” Supported by the Star Phoenix. Here we see: “Mr. 

Boldt out of Order. Council demands Boldt‟s apology”. Oh, they even have a cartoon about Augustus 

Boldt and the social aid games. I could go on. “Boldt refuses to apologize to the statement of the Aid 

Chief in Saskatoon, who wasn‟t fit to run a pigsty.” “Government said lacking legal right to hold up the 

aid money.” “Boldt tells Saskatoon, no money back, period.” This was going to defeat Boldt in 

Rosthern, and Steuart in Prince Albert and all the Liberal candidates in Saskatoon. And I am telling this 

House that if we had had the support that we should have had — we were right and the papers knew it. 

They defended a few that they shouldn‟t have defended — even the Member from Riversdale (Mr. 

Romanow) and Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) would have lost their seats. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, where is St. Nick today? Where is Mr. Walker? These were the ones that 

accused us of dollars before people. We were rapped for closing Embury House, we were criticized for 

taking cigarettes away from the minors at boys‟ schools, we were accused for handling of the Saskatoon 

Social Aid scandal. All these were big issues, the first years of our term of office and we were going to 

be defeated on these issues. None of these issues, Mr. Speaker, to my knowledge were even used in the 

last election, not one of them, at least not 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

737 

in the Rosthern constituency. These issues just faded away. I want to remind my colleagues, especially 

the newly elected ones that those loud noises coming from the opposite benches are just temporary, and 

they too will fade away under the pressures of new industrialization, new mines, new oil wells, new 

jobs, and new highways. 

 

Today we are debating a Budget that is tough on taxation, but absolutely essential. I would not want to 

be accused, nor do I believe would any of my colleagues, of taking the easy way out and have on my 

conscience the chaos the Socialists faced in England. Mr. Speaker, I have great pleasure in supporting 

the motion and not the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes: (Touchwood) — Mr. Speaker, before I go on with the rest of the things I was going to 

say; I listened to the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) with great interest and I was wondering whether 

his statements were right. Then I listened to the figures which he quoted that 12,000 miles of grid road at 

$3,000 would cost $360,000,000 the Minister said. I suggest that he might well go to university, and get 

a little education, because in my mathematics it is only $36 million dollars. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart: (Provincial Treasurer) — Author, author! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — He also when he quoted about the Pharisee, comparing the Hon. Mayor from Regina 

(Mr. Baker) when he quoted about the Pharisee I couldn‟t help but think of the words of the great poet: 

“If we could only see ourselves as others see us it would from many a blunder free us and foolish 

notions.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I promised myself when I came to this Legislature eleven years ago, two things, first 

that I would always try to be a gentleman in the House, and secondly that I would endeavor to follow 

parliamentary procedure. I want to say that never has that promise been as strained as it is right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — The only words to really describe the Budget that we are debating cannot be classified 

in either category. I want to say that I believe that it is an affront to decency. It is a disgrace to the 20th 

century. It‟s a piece of writing worshipping at the fountain of the independent sector. I call it a 

bloodsucker Budget. There has never been such a Budget, Mr. Speaker, at least since 1944, including 

the three Budgets that this Government already has brought in. It completely ignores the needs of 

people, it is completely ignoring the people‟s health and well-being. It is flagrantly providing for those 

who don‟t need help. It‟s a complete surrender to monopoly capitalism. Saskatchewan today is no longer 

a free community of people. Why? Because today we are returning to the days prior to 1944 when we 

had the fear of sickness, the fear of what would happen if we got sick. So I say that this community of 

Saskatchewan is no longer a free community of people. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

738 

No longer can we say that we are the masters of our own destiny. Today we are starting back to the 

degrading days of the thirties. Mr. Speaker, let us look at the Members at your right. My mind goes back 

to the time when they sat to the left of the Speaker‟s chair. Those days were the days when they 

screamed Socialism, high taxes, stagnation; day after day they screamed what a Liberal Government 

would do to lower taxes. Day after day the shadow Minister of Agriculture would stand up in his place 

and say that this Government was doing nothing for agriculture. Mr. Speaker, let‟s just look at some of 

the things they said. I am now going to quote from Hansard. On Monday, February 10, 1964, the then 

Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Thatcher, said this: 

 

We on this side of the House say that the first major failure of the Throne Speech is that it neglected to 

give the hard-pressed Saskatchewan taxpayer any sign of tax relief. 

 

The following day, on the Tuesday, February 11th, he said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I assure the House and the people of Saskatchewan, that if the Liberals form a 

Government next June, one of our primary consistent and determined purposes will be major tax 

reduction. (1) We will reduce the five per cent sales tax immediately to four per cent. 

 

They did, and now they got it back on more goods than it was on before. 

 

(2) We will increase the list of goods exempt from sales tax to include such items as clothing, shoes, 

which are after all necessities of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Provincial Treasurer, did they do that? No. 

 

(3) We believe that some method must be found for reducing taxes on land and property and we will 

find some method. 

 

I will deal with that a little later. Let us go on and see what he said. 

 

So we say that something has to be done about long-term farm credits in Saskatchewan. I wish to 

assure you, Sir, that a Liberal Government will rectify this situation. We believe that the family farm is 

vital for the future of Saskatchewan. We are determined to make it possible for the farmers, and 

particularly young farmers, to borrow money on reasonable terms to commence farming. We will 

make farm loans available on a much more extensive basis, with lower interest rates and over a longer 

period of time. We will work closely with the Federal Government in order to avoid duplication. 

Personally I would hope that these new loan arrangements would be made through banks, through 

credit unions, with the Government guaranteeing a high percentage of the loans. But if satisfactory 

arrangements cannot be made along those lines, a Liberal Government would be prepared to set up a 

Government Loaning Agency. 

 

Have they done it, Mr. Speaker? No: Let us look at what the financial critic of that day on February 

24th, 1964 said. This 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

739 

is now the Senator MacDonald: 

 

The farm costs are certainly the highest they have been in the last forty years. Some of these costs 

have been placed on the farmer‟s back by government, both provincial and federal and I don‟t think 

that this Legislature has played its part in endeavoring to decrease this ever increasing cost of farm 

production and I hope that this House in its wisdom in this session will attempt to alleviate some of the 

problems that confront our farmers, take off their shoulders some of the taxes that are being extracted 

from them today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget is only pouring more expense on the cost of production on the farmer of today. 

I‟d like to quote what the Provincial Treasurer, the present Provincial Treasurer, the Hon. Member from 

Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart), said on February 25th, 1964. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the budget was a bitter disappointing document with a buoyant year because 

of good crops, record wheat sales and high prices, the Government of this Province was in a position 

to do so much for the people and they offered so little. Did they, for example, offer our young farmers 

a chance to go farming, to borrow money at low interest rates, so that we could build up these family 

farms they like to talk about? Well, you know the answer, they did not! Did they cut taxes so our 

people could spend their own money to bring new life to our economy. No, they showed their usual 

contempt, and said, „We can spend your money better than you can.‟ Did they cut taxes, Mr. Speaker, 

give our cities and our towns and our smaller communities and municipalities a chance to cut their 

taxes or to improve their services or to build up local development projects in their own communities, 

so that we could see the re-birth and bring new life back to our local areas? 

 

Let‟s look at what the present Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) had to say on February 28th, 

1964. 

 

This is the largest tax notice ever sent to the people of Saskatchewan. Never in the history of our 

nation has so much been extracted from so few. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we extracted that kind of money in 1964, what do they extract now? I could go on, 

Mr. Speaker, and quote a lot more, but I think those quotations show what this Government was saying 

over there at that time. They forever screamed that they were the friends of the farmer. They forever 

screamed that the New Democratic party was labor-dominated. Mr. Speaker, I say, and I say in this 

House today that the Liberal party is monopoly-capitalism-dominated. This Budget proves it. Today 

with this Budget, they stand charged, found guilty, and condemned for what they are, the puppets of a 

big business world, being led, prodded, pushed and pulled by the barons of the financial world. These 

are the men who will reach into the pockets of the sick, reach into the pockets of the laboring man, into 

the pockets of farmers, into the pockets of the credit unions with extra charges, and suck the last penny 

from the poor. Mr. Speaker, these are the men who are going to put the cash registers back into the 

doctors‟ offices and into the hospitals. These are the men! These are the men who will also let 

corporations off, according to the Estimates, with less tax than a 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

740 

year ago. These are the people who are giving special concessions to those who are already stealing and 

taking away our resources. These are the people who are letting out plus contracts for highways as the 

figures in the answer to a question showed a year ago in this House. But Mr. Speaker, these are the 

people who on October 9th said this was this wonderful New Saskatchewan, and who afterwards said 

that we were in a period of inflation. So what do they do? I asked a question in the House the other day, 

and I got an answer today. The question was this. “Since October 11, 1967, how many cars have been 

purchased by the Government of Saskatchewan for Ministers of the Crown.” The answer is 11, since 

November 1 to February 19. They‟re not worrying about an austerity program there. I say they should 

hang their heads in shame. I challenge them to resign. They would be scared to resign, they know very 

well, and the Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) knows well that he couldn‟t go back 

six weeks from now into his own constituency and win it. He‟d be defeated. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron: (Minister of Mineral Resources) — They told me that in 1965. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — And what‟s more, Mr. Speaker, I challenge them to bring on an election, anytime and 

we‟ll take them on. 

 

An Hon. Member: You know what happened to George Trapp. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, and I won too. We took out your Minister of Education. 

The other day, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), and I 

couldn‟t help but sit and think that, if I had sat and closed my eyes and listened to him, I might well have 

thought that this was 1964 and that he was sitting where I now stand and that I was sitting over there. He 

continued to go on, his speech had the same ring when he talked about reference to Russia and the Labor 

Unions. One thing he never said anything about was the Budget. He went on and he talked about the 

Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney), the financial critic, and he talked about livestock 

population and he contradicted the figures that the Hon. Member had made. It was very noticeable, Mr. 

Speaker, he only quoted the value of livestock sold, he didn‟t really get into the other figures too deeply. 

I am now quoting from the Saskatchewan Economic Review, the document that we managed to get a 

copy of, that we had such a time to get a copy of — and we see that cattle in 1964, on June 1 was $2.3 

million, 1966 was $2.253 million, so there was a reduction. There was a reduction in sheep, and so on. I 

noticed he didn‟t have too much to say about this. 

 

I would like to speak for, a few minutes on what this Budget means to the farmer as I see it. Here we 

find that, in a year of drought, with only an average crop in the last three years, municipal taxes have 

gone up. Many municipalities in my constituency have had to raise anywhere, from five to fifteen mills. 

Already taxes were too high. This Budget is going to make taxes on property go up again. We find that 

wheat has gone down 20 cents a bushel. Very noticeable, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Members across the 

way didn‟t have much to say about this. We didn‟t even hear them protest it. The Liberal party in 

Ottawa was responsible for it, and the Liberal Government in 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

741 

Saskatchewan said nothing. We are already in this price cost squeeze. So what does this Budget say? 

Two cents a gallon more for farm fuel and gas. Put this on one who uses diesel. This is a ten per cent 

increase in the cost of the farmer‟s cost of production in regards to fuel and eight per cent on gas. Don‟t 

forget, Mr. Speaker, this is going to cost more than this, because no doubt — and I can‟t blame them — 

the truckers are going to have more, because their cost of hauling fuel is going to increase, because their 

fuel will be up. Let us go on and look what this Budget means to a farmer. 

 

I think again the most cruel tax of all is the sick tax. This is a tax that is really going to hit especially our 

older people. But if a farmer happens to get caught in town, there is tax on meals, if they get hurt and 

have to go to the doctor it‟s another $1.50. If they go to the hospital it‟s $2.50 a day. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

you where is the friend of the farmer? Was he in caucus? Was he in Cabinet? Apparently not. This man 

who in the sixties blew that he was a friend of the farmer, now after doing all this, still suggests he is. 

 

Let us look at his Estimates for agriculture; 4.3 per cent of the total Budget in 1968-69. Let us go back to 

1964, we had 4.5 per cent of the Budget. In 1965 we had 4.7 of the Budget. If you took the items out that 

the Government can‟t help having in, like irrigation and the Saskatchewan River Delta, there is really 

not much left in the Budget. 

 

He went on and announced-plans for hog production. As the Hon. Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) 

said the other day, if we had a stability in the price of pork, there would be no need of this Government 

lending money to build buildings; the farmers could build them themselves. As long as we have 

fluctuation in the price of pigs on the market we are in trouble. It‟s a big risk for any man to take this 

venture up and borrow the money. It seems to me that it‟s geared for the big operator. It‟s just another 

way of getting rid of the little farmer, less trouble for the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

I would like to say a few words on Community Pastures. I‟m glad that the Government — and I give 

them credit for the fact — has continued to expand Community Pastures. But I want to put this 

stipulation to it. I‟m glad as long as local residents are to be able to use it, and not a few speculators who 

buy cattle in the spring on the market, take them out, dump them into the pastures, pick them out of the 

pastures in the fall and sell them on the market again. I know this, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency — 

it‟s a PFRA pasture, not a Provincial pasture — that people are saying — they told me dozens of times 

last fall in October, when I was travelling — that, if pasture fees are to go up any more, they will have to 

stop using them. 

 

I want to say a few words on the Agricultural Representative services. There has been a great change in 

the whole agricultural technology in the last few years. It seems to me that, if this service is to be of real 

use to the farmer, it must be changed and it must be enlarged. There must be many more Agricultural 

Representatives and technicians. It seems to me that the farmer, as I say again in this new technological 

society, is going to have to have advice of technical people on the farm, advice on soils and fertilizers, 

seed strains, animals‟ diseases, plant diseases, feed minerals and a whole host of other things. I am not in 

any way belittling it. I think the Agricultural Representative service has been a very good one. They 

have served a need, 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

742 

but I think it must be expanded to a much larger extent. I want to say that, as I said once before in this 

House, if there‟s money for tearing up these walls, corridors and ripping them up and re-building them, 

and again, money for Ministers‟ new cars, there should be money for this kind of thing. 

 

One of the great problems facing at least the farm people in my constituency is roads off the grid roads. 

Many of them are finding in the last few years that even with a grid road they are still three or four miles 

from them. In the winter time, they are bogged down in snow, and they just have got tired and they are 

moving off the farms and disposing of their livestock to become grain farmers. I think that, if we are 

going to have family farms, they must have access roads. To me these roads are much more important, I 

don‟t Care what the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) said, about four-lane highways. I want to make it 

clear that I am not against four-lane highways. We need them, but when it comes to priorities there are 

other things more important. 

 

There is but one thing I want to say in criticism of the new auction policy of Crown land. I don‟t see 

how it can help to let the rich acquire more land, so that the people who have the most money will be 

able to buy the land and the small or young farmer will not. It will be just another thing being put in his 

way. I think also that it is another step, Mr. Speaker, towards absentee and foreign ownership. 

 

I am sorry the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) isn‟t in his seat, but I sat and I listened to his address 

today and I realized that it was a real Liberal Budget. He wanted any of us in the Opposition to stand up 

and delete any new highway expenditure from our constituency that we thought we should get along 

without. I listened closely, and, Mr. Speaker, there is nothing to be spent in Touchwood constituency, so 

I won‟t have to go through that process. Nothing except straight maintenance. I am going to have 

something to say about this. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party has been boasting about all the money 

they‟ve spent on highways and in his speech the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) quoted the figure of 

140 per cent over 1964. I can assure you that this money was not spent in Touchwood. The Liberals sure 

can‟t boast about the money they spent there. All through the constituency we have had for the last three 

and one half years, a group of people that travellers and the people of Touchwood refer to as the 

Thatcher Patchers. They have just continued to patch and patch and patch, and I notice especially No. 15 

from Raymore to Leross, the last few years has been terrible. Every spring there have been holes that 

kept being holes until August and September, long stretches you couldn‟t drive ten miles an hour on. 

The Minister talked about the six-year life of a piece of oiled road. Well I want to say that on the piece 

of highway they oiled on No. 35 Highway from Leross to Elfros, they finished oiling it in September 

and before freeze-up they were already patching it. I say that this Government has squandered large 

Sums of money in highway programs. 

 

I want to deal with urban assistance on streets for the small villages and towns. I say that this is a real 

neglect to these smaller villages and town. The program that the Liberals offer is just too high in cost for 

a village of 4 or 500 people. They continue to have to eat dirt all summer. I think that here is a group of 

people living in the small urban communities that have been completely forgotten by this Government. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

743 

I want to deal just for a minute or two with Public Health. I am not going to re-quote any of the 

quotations of the Frazier Report. It has been well quoted. I want to deal for a minute or two with the 

South Saskatchewan Hospital. This Government across the way has dragged its feet for four years; 

hospital beds continue to be in short supply. The whole southern part of Saskatchewan is waiting for this 

new building. If there is ever a do-nothing Government, it‟s this Government in regard to this South 

Saskatchewan Base Hospital. I say that if it is not prepared to act and act with haste then they had better 

get out of the road and let some people do it who are prepared to do it. The small hospital situation is 

serious. The attitude o£ the Minister last fall when he announced closure was criminal. And if it hadn‟t 

been for the protest of communities and the CCF MLAs he would have gone ahead. As it was he had to 

retreat. I ask him; what is he going to do with the other 30 hospitals that were on that list, because, Mr. 

Speaker, if he‟s going to take the advice on these eight hospitals, I would like him to say whether he is 

not going to take that same advice on the others. I think that the one great criticism of this Budget is the 

lack of money to repair the terrible situation in the mental hospitals. Five hundred thousand dollars or 

thereabouts is just peanuts. 

 

I want to now turn to the Indian and Métis problem. It is not often, Mr. Speaker, that I use that remark, 

because I refuse to use it, it is really not an Indian and Métis problem. It‟s a problem of our society, all 

across Saskatchewan. I was glad to see that the Estimates show an increase of over $60,000, I am glad 

for small mercies, but I still think that it is in total inadequate. If we are to have the Indian people — and 

I think it is desirable to move them into the full stream of our society — we must prepare them for it, 

and also the white society must begin to accept them. I know that this is true of all sides of the House, 

people of different political views, that we are all guilty of this, of really not accepting these people into 

our society. I think that the sooner we can train Indian people to work amongst the Indian people, to 

bring the information to assist them and encourage them, I really feel that this is the main answer. You 

know, Joseph the great Indian Chief, one of the great American Indian Chiefs of the eighteenth century, 

once said, and I now quote what he said: 

 

Let me be a free man, free to travel, free to stop, free to work, free to choose my own teachers, free to 

follow the religion of my fathers, free to think, and talk and act for myself. Give me that freedom and I 

will obey every law or submit to the penalties. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we in Canada have not given the Indian people these rights. I want to 

say and I want to make it clear that I think the Department of Indian Affairs in Ottawa, have made 

improvements in housing and I hope later, Mr. Speaker, in another debate, to be able to say more on this. 

I think the housing program they are proceeding with is good and they are to be congratulated on it, 

although there are some things that we could criticize, but I think it is a step in the right direction. I say 

this, Mr. Speaker, about the vote for Indians and Métis: that if the Indian and Métis Branch will work to 

this end, as I have said giving Indians this kind of freedom, they will have my support out in my 

constituency for their efforts. I‟m sorry the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) is not in the House as I want 

to compliment him on what he said yesterday on the school for teaching the Indians more about law. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

744 

One of the things that disturbs me terribly, when I look at my own community and the local newspapers, 

the newspaper‟s reports of any traffic court, is the fact the predominance of those people who are 

brought before the law of Indian ancestry is so large. I am sure that they are not all guilty. 

 

There has been quite a bit said about population. I want to say, Mr;. Speaker, as some others have said, 

Touchwood had no boundary changes. We turned the Touchwood constituency back to the New 

Democratic party with no boundary changes. I want to talk about the people who left that constituency 

in those short three years. In 1964 the voters‟ list in Touchwood was 7,939 — three and one-half years 

later, 1967, the voters‟ list was down to 7,335, a difference of 604 people. Mr. Speaker, I went to a little 

trouble and I dug out and studied the population changes in the municipalities that are wholly or in part 

in Touchwood constituency. I would like to put the changes in those two years, from 1964-66. What I 

quote, Mr. Speaker, for the 1964 figures, is the figures that the municipal secretaries quote as from their 

records of the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. The 1966 figure is the census figure. Lipton 

municipality, No. 217 had a reduction in population of 113; Cupar No. 218 had a reduction of 130; 

Garry municipality, No. 245 a reduction of 121; Ituna-Bonaccorde, No. 246 a reduction of 156; Kilross, 

No. 247 a reduction of 457; Touchwood, No. 248 a reduction of 100; Foam Lake No. 276 a reduction of 

515; Emerald, No. 277 a reduction of 320, this is a total reduction, Mr. Speaker, of people living in these 

municipalities of 1912 people. Where did these people go, Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t go to the small 

towns and villages. You go through them, we find practically no change. Punnichy was down three and 

Lestock was up six, and Leross was down 15 and so on down. These people left, not only the farms but 

left the constituency completely. And they left the province, according to the figures. This is a drain of 

human resources. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I come to the Provincial Treasurer‟s remarks when he asked for alternatives. And 

this I am glad and prepared to do. I say that, instead of taxing the people they are taxing, they should 

first of all increase the corporation tax and actually this Budget in the Estimates shows a reduction. I 

think he shouldn‟t be so easy on his friends. I think we should be prepared to be tough, if we have to 

make these kind of decisions, and maybe we have to make them, but where are we going to get the 

money? I say an income tax on high income. When I talk about high income, I don‟t mean $5, 000 and 

$6,000 people. I mean that group of people in the $15,000 to $25, 000 or up. I think that, if we have to 

make these kinds of choices, of taxing the sick or putting the cost of farm production up, we should be 

prepared to raise the mineral tax. Yes, Mr. Speaker, I say that, if it is necessary, if we have to really get 

down to making this kind of choice of where we get money, I would say, if it is necessary, increase 

liquor tax, tobacco tax. We have to make these kind of choices and I say we should be making these 

kind of choices based on this way. But whatever we do, Mr. Speaker, we should not be taxing the sick, 

and we shouldn‟t be taxing the poor and we shouldn‟t be increasing the cost of production of the farmer 

by taxes on fuel. I say this, as I said earlier, that I think we should be prepared to skim the cream off 

some of .the highway contracts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve sat and I have listened carefully and not one voice across the way has risen to really 

defend the sick, the worker or the aged or the farmer. So, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

745 

in conclusion, I‟d like to say this: I‟ve said that this Government in this Budget is betraying agriculture 

by ignoring its needs. It is a Budget geared to help the rich and rob the poor, Robin Hood in reverse, a 

Budget to build four-lane highways instead of roads to farmers. It does not meet the needs of the health 

of the people. There is not enough money in it to remedy the blunders of this Government in mental 

health and I could not in conscience support a Budget of this kind. If I did do such a thing, I would not 

be able to return to my constituency. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 

and opposing the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Heggie: (Hanley) — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the second time in this House to take part in the 

Budget debate. We are passing through critical financial times and this Province needs direct action to 

stem the tide of inflation. As the Provincial Treasurer said last Friday, this Province along with the rest 

of the Provinces in Canada, faces a crisis in money matters, and as a Government we had to take direct 

action, at this time. The Treasurer said we were faced with four alternatives: (1) Cut back on 

Government spending. This we have done. We trimmed some $25 million off the Estimates. (2) Embark 

on deficit financing. This is a short-term proposition. All we do is put off the evil day. If we don‟t 

balance the Budget this year, we will have to do it next year or the year after and the deficit by that time 

could be colossal. (3) We could borrow in the financial markets of the East and finance by bonds. But, 

mark you, if we do this we are borrowing at the highest interest rate ever. Once the money is borrowed, 

the high interest rate would hang around the necks of the collective taxpayers like millstones for the next 

10-20 years. Lastly, (4) We could raise taxes. This we have done and this is the most economical and 

practical thing to do, and in the face of the criticism which would naturally follow, the most courageous 

thing to do. I concur with the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) that, in relation to the present taxpayers 

and those who will follow, that this is a responsible Budget. 

 

Now, on Monday, Mr. Speaker, this House heard from the Opposition financial critic, the Member for 

Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney). His job was to criticize the Budget and criticize it he did for a full two 

hours and fifteen minutes, I checked Hansard and it embodied 55 pages of 8 1/2” x 14”, I dare say, the 

longest speech made in this House for a long time, perhaps in the whole history of this House. He spoke 

so long and so intensely that he must enter the Hall of Fame for verbosity. He becomes a classic along 

with Castro, Khrushchev, Mao Tse Tung and Sukarno for wordiness. Newspaper reports say these 

fellows spoke for four hours at a time. Disraeli once rose on a point of order in the British House of 

Commons when Gladstone was making an interminably long speech and he said, “Mr. Speaker, the 

Hon. Member opposite seems to be inebriated with the exuberance of his own verbosity.” Obviously this 

applies to my Hon. Friend opposite. Perhaps the financial critic felt that he was the only one on his side 

of the House capable of criticizing the Budget. He certainly left little for his colleagues. Mr. Speaker, the 

Hon. Member for Regina Centre took pains to cite Winston Churchill and I quote: 

 

The Parliamentary system is a terrible form of government — it‟s just that nobody has yet invented a 

better 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

746 

one. 

 

Well, I can say to my Hon. Friend that I too am an admirer of Churchill. I would not be standing in this 

Chamber today taking part in parliamentary government, except for Winston Churchill. Those of you 

who have read his works will find that Churchill was concise and to the point. He had the faculty of 

expressing great thoughts in few words. Consider his speeches. When Churchill addressed the British 

nation, might I say the western world, on that day in 1940 when France fell, it took him less than 15 

minutes radio time to rally the freedom-loving people of the world to carry on the fight. But my friend 

opposite, the financial critic, took two hours and fifteen minutes and read into the record a speech of 

vituperation. sarcasm and propaganda. 

 

Be that as it may, what about the Budget? The Government had to find $35 million to avoid the three 

pitfalls of financing which I previously outlined, and find it we did. The people of Saskatchewan will 

thank the Government before the life of the 16th Legislature expires for taking this course of action. My 

Hon. Friend used the emotional phrase many times. “The people of Saskatchewan — they will 

remember.” They will remember all right, they will remember how the Budget was balanced and their 

children were not saddled with a dead weight Provincial debt, like the albatross hung around the neck of 

the Ancient Mariner. My friend opposite called the Budget Day in 1968, Black Friday. Well, the 

financial critic made sure that Monday, March 4 was Blue Monday. You would have thought to hear 

him speak that it was some kind of a crime to pay as you go and to balance your Budget. Would he 

recommend that a family finance its affairs in the manner he outlined? My friend opposite tried to create 

the impression that because the Government raised taxes, this changed everything. He made sweeping 

statements that because we raised taxes, the New Saskatchewan on which we campaigned was gone, a 

thing of the past. Nothing, Mr. Speaker, is more false. Taxes and tax problems are only one part of the 

picture. Let us consider the Saskatchewan of 1964. A Government dedicated to the dignity of individual 

enterprise; — this is still with us — an .economic climate which is attractive. to industry; — this is still 

with us — a highway system of which we can be proud and is still expanding; this is still with us — a 

welfare system that cares for those in need, expects the able-bodied and the strong to work for a living 

— this is still with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Three producing potash mines, three ready to come. into production this year. two 

mines with shafts in progress, some other mines in the negotiation state — these are still with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — A $60 million pulp mill to open shortly — this is still with us — and most important of 

all, Mr. Speaker, we still have freedom, freedom of choice, freedom of the individual, the freedom 

which was being constantly eroded away by 20 years of Socialist rule. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

747 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I naturally felt some concern about tax increases. No one likes tax 

increases. But over the weekend and since, I have found that most tax increases are being accepted as a 

necessity at this time. With respect to the deterrent fees for doctors‟ office calls, people seemed to accept 

the idea that this was bound to come. Many said it should have been instituted long ago. There was some 

genuine concern about hospital deterrents, but mainly about setting a time limit on the deterrent. I would 

hope that there might be some Government action to remedy this. Hospital utilization fees are not new. 

Experienced municipal men will tell you that municipalities with hospital and doctor schemes before 

Medicare had deterrent fees in effect. They found no fault with it. They claimed it worked well. The 

Swift Current Health Region uses deterrent fees on doctor calls. No one seems to say Swift Current is 

taxing the sick. British Columbia has had a hospital deterrent fee since the inception of its health plan. 

My father-in-law, who is an old age pensioner living in Victoria, has full praise for British Columbia‟s 

hospital scheme. The Hon. Member, the financial critic, ranted and raved and repeated himself, all 

emotionally by saying, “a tax on the sick, a tax on the sick.” Well, if we have a tax on the sick, and this I 

deny, the former Socialist government can take the blame. They saddled us with the Medical Care plan 

in 1962. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Are you opposed to it? 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Just a minute now, you had your turn. No one really disagrees with health insurance. In 

fact, the people of all political beliefs agree with it. But it is the doctrine of universality, that the scheme 

must be universal to cover the rich as well as the poor, that opens the flood gates to ever rising 

expenditures. My friends opposite scoff at using Great Britain as an example of the welfare state going 

too far. The Hon. Member for Moose Jaw says Harold Wilson inherited the crisis from the previous 

Conservative Government, but the truth is that the Conservative Government inherited it from the first 

Labor Government of Clement Atlee in 1945. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — True, two World Wars bled Britain white but all the more reason that the nation 

couldn‟t afford a scheme as comprehensive as the one Atlee brought in. They would have been far better 

advised to have looked after the poor and the needy and left the rich and the well-to-do to look after 

themselves. Germany lost the war, yet today, West Germany is among Europe‟s most prosperous 

nations. I quote the Provincial Treasurer who issued these prophetic words in his Budget Speech: 

 

Make no mistake, any government that continually lives beyond its means even in the name of 

humanity, will eventually deal a cruel blow to the very people it professes to help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that the people o£ Saskatchewan are prepared to pay the necessary price, 

even in higher taxes, to keep the NDP out of power in this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

748 

Mr. Heggie: — As Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition, we on this side of the House have little complaint 

with the NDP. We intend to keep them there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I want: to say a word about something which has had a lot of loose 

publicity in this House and in the press. Our friends opposite, both individually and collectively have 

been bragging about their “New Look” — that they are the party of the young, and virile, the swingers, 

the jet set, There have been reports in the House and in the press that this government is a pussy-cat 

Government, a timid Government. Well any Government that has the courage to face reality, and bring 

in a pay-as-you-go Budget which is sure to cause a storm must be a lion, not a pussy-cat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I took the trouble to consult the parliamentary guide and other reliable 

statistics, and I find that the collective age of the Government Members adds up to 1,666 years, 

excluding the Speaker, an average age of 49. I also find that the collective age of Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition adds up to 1,171, an average age of 48.8. If the Members opposite want to make an issue out 

of .2 of a year, then they are hair-splitting. As a matter of fact, I added up the. ages of the NDP front 

benchers and the average is 56.2. Our Government Front Bench has an average age of 5.0.1. So I say, 

away with all this twaddle that the Government is a Government of old people. The facts do not 

substantiate it. Let the House hear no more about it. 

 

Another financial matter made reference to was the increase in university tuition fees. The financial 

critic said that free university tuition was bound to come. He said there was an inevitability about it. I 

suppose he could be correct in assuming that, since free education is guaranteed by the state up to grade 

12, the same principle should apply to university students. But when this happens, a B.A. degree will not 

be worth much more than a grade 12 certificate is today. It may come, but I see no hurry to rush into it. 

What we need to do is to make sure that no worthy student should be denied university education just 

because he cannot raise the tuition fee. I think we have to keep our universities full of Canada‟s most 

academically qualified people, and for the following reasons: one, to keep up with the increasing 

technology; and, two, to keep abreast of the Russians and the United States in having a maximum of 

trained people. Whether a tuition fee of $400 or so keeps a young man or woman out of university is 

questionable. Certainly board and room and. incidental expenses form the greater part of a student‟s 

costs. Now ask yourself — is a student any better off in the long run if, one, his father paid his tuition; 

two, the state paid his tuition; three, he earned the money and paid the tuition himself. I daresay if you 

took 100 test cases, the result would be surprising, and at the end of 10 years, you couldn‟t possibly tell 

which one had the initial advantage. What I do think would be a real reform is the cancelling of student 

loans, wither Federal or Provincial at the end of the student‟s academic program, if he attained his 

degree by reaching or exceeding a pre-determined standard. 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

749 

Mr. Speaker, I deal with the suggestion by the Opposition financial critic of where the Government 

could find alternative tax revenues. It is all well and good for him to say that this is how we, the 

Opposition, would deal with the increased Budget, the increased costs of Government. The matter was 

dealt with by the Hon. the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) but I wish to add that our Provincial personal 

income tax levy is among the highest in Canada. Further, we know that the Federal Government has 

imposed a surtax which will again increase personal income taxes. This obviously is not the area for 

increased taxation. Certainly we cannot add to corporate taxes if we wish to attract industry to this 

province. Saskatchewan by its geographic position has some natural disadvantages to overcome to 

attract industrial investment. These disadvantages are: climate, the long winter and extremely low 

temperatures; lack of water, this has been remedied to some extent; lack of skilled labor, the 

Government is attempting to remedy this; distance from big markets and high freight rates. Our Province 

can little afford to throw road blocks in the way of industry coming here by having unduly high 

corporate taxes. If we are to attain the broadened tax base which in the end will ease the general tax 

burden, we cannot afford to keep industry out by high taxation. 

 

There have been several references, the latest one last night by the Hon. Member for Kinistino (Mr. 

Thibault) about the Hanley seat. These remarks all refer to me, the Member for Hanley, as representing a 

seat with only 4,000 voters. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the Hanley seat boasts of 5,553 electors. 

Maybe it is one of the province‟s smaller seats, but it allows me to serve it better. As a matter of fact a 

part of my hon. colleague‟s seat of Saskatoon City Park-University used to be in Hanley. But these were 

urban residents of Saskatoon and they are now quite ably represented on the Government side. The 

Member from City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) has my complete co-operation in this matter. I live 

in his seat and I vote for him. I held a fund-raising dance for my seat in a hall in his constituency and his 

people came to my dance. How can the public be served better? The Member for Kinistino (Mr. 

Thibault) said the boundary lines of the constituency on the map looked like they had been made by a 

drunk caterpillar. Well, the caterpillar must have joined the AAs before he dealt with Hanley seat, as it is 

completely rectangular except for two townships in the northeast corner. Incidentally, I could have won 

the seat without them, but I thank the people of Vonda and Prud‟homme for increasing my majority and 

for displaying such mature voting habits. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Actually a row of townships along Hanley‟s north boundary was for years part of the 

Hanley seat, but the former CCF Government took them away from Hanley and put them in Rosthern to 

better guarantee the former-Attorney General (Mr. Walker) a safe seat, after his narrow victory of 51 

votes in 1948. Who cries “gerrymander” now? 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me say that by now we have beard from most of the heavy-weights of the 

Opposition. But their speeches are all the same. The old refrain goes like this: (l) The Government is 

being manipulated by selfish, bloated American capitalists and its Members respond like trained seals. 

(2) We grind the faces of the poor and feed the coffers of the rich. (3) The Government ought to soak the 

rich with taxation 



 

March 8, 1968 

 

 

750 

that is almost confiscation, and then turn around and invite these same people to invest in our industry. 

(4) The Government should increase welfare payments in every conceivable form and at the same time 

reduce taxes. And (5) After 20 years of Socialist failure in this province, they should be called upon to 

form a Government. All this is said with emotion, high feeling and with self-righteousness and self-

effacing attitudes, but never based on facts. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I am a new Member in this House and wanted to have a charitable outlook. But 

the longer I hear the carping criticism of the Members opposite, the more I am astonished by the 

Socialist mentality. Bud Schulberg wrote a book about the Yiddish people of New York‟s east side 

called “What Makes Sammy Run.” After three weeks of hearing the Members opposite, I ask the 

question, “What makes a Socialist run?” They baffle me and to quote a well-known Socialist speech in 

this House, “It is a situation where the facts baffle the imagination.” What do they really believe in? Is it 

State Socialism? Is it complete Government ownership? Is it union domination of our economy? Could 

it possibly be the brotherhood of man? A majority of Saskatchewan people seem to doubt it. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Accordingly I will vote against the amendment and support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:28 o‟clock p.m. 

 

 


