



















































Hansard: April 09, 1968


 

 

 

1695 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

36th Day 
 

Tuesday, April 9, 1968. 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o‘clock a.m. 

On Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

ORDERS FOR RETURNS NOS. 6, 10, 11, 12, 64, 74, 84 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if the 

Government could let me know when Orders for Returns Nos. 6, 10, 11, 12, 64, 74, 84 will be tabled. 

Many of these were asked for very early in the session, February 19, 20, 21 are three of the dates. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — I am signing a number this morning and I just noticed 84, one 

of the ones you mentioned, I‘m just signing it. I will be filing quite a few in a few minutes. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 142 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 

No. 142 showing: 

 

A copy of all correspondence or other written representations sent to the federal government by 

members of the Executive Council from January 1, 1967, to March 31, 1968, with respect to potash 

marketing problems. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I consider this privileged correspondence and I would 

ask the House to reject this motion. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, with so much at stake in industry, that would include investments and 

jobs of the people, the markets, the people who need the product for fertilizer, the people who need food 

because they are hungry, I would hope that we would have some evidence to present to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan that we are putting forth an effort to protect all these things. This motion would produce 

that evidence to all of the citizens of Saskatchewan, and for that reason I am most anxious that the 

information that I have requested be tabled and presented, so that the public will know that this 

Government is going to bat on behalf of the potash industry. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RULING BY MR. SPEAKER ON MOTIONS FOR RETURNS NOS. 144, 145, AND 146. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Motions for Returns Nos. 144, 145 and 146 are all upon the 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1696 

same subject and are, except for one date in each motion, exact word for word replicas of each other. I, 

therefore, propose to deal with them collectively. 

 

On February 29, 1968, the following Motion for Return (No. 40) stood on the Order Paper, moved by 

the Member for Regina Centre, and I quote as follows: 

 

That an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 40) showing: Copies of any agreements or 

contracts entered into between Saskatchewan Power Corporation and North Canadian Oils Limited 

since January 1, 1964. 

 

This motion was debated and defeated on a recorded vote. 

 

I would draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the following rules of parliamentary procedure and I 

quote first from Beauchesne‘s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 194, in part as follows: 

 

A motion or amendment cannot be brought forward which is the same in substance as a question which 

has already been decided, because a proposition being once submitted and carried in the affirmative or 

negative cannot be questioned again but must stand as the judgment of the House. 

 

And further from Citation 163: 

 

A mere alteration of the words of a question, without any substantial change in its object will not be 

sufficient to evade the rule that no question shall be offered which is substantially the same as one 

which has already been expressed in the current sessions. It is possible, however, so far to vary the 

character of a motion as to withdraw it from the operation of the rule. 

 

Erskine May‘s Parliamentary Practice, seventeenth edition, states on page 396, as follows: 

 

Matters already decided during the same session. A motion or an amendment may not be brought 

forward which is the same, in substance, as a question which has been decided in the affirmative or 

negative during the current session. The rule may be fully stated as follows: No question or Bill shall 

be offered in either House that is substantially the same as one on which its judgment has already been 

expressed in the current session. 

 

And further, on page 398: 

 

Repetition of motions which have been negatived. The most frequent attempt against the rule is to seek 

to evade it by raising again with verbal alterations the essential portions of motions which have been 

negatived. 

 

Bourinot‘s Parliamentary Procedure, fourth edition, states on page 328 and I quote in part: 

 

It is, however, an ancient rule of Parliament that ‗No question or motion can regularly be offered if it 

is substantially the same with one on which the judgment of the House has already been expressed 

during the current session‘. 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1697 

And further, I quote as follows on page 329: 

 

But when a question has once been negatived, it is not allowable to propose it again, even if the form 

and words of the motion are different from those of the previous motion. 

 

Motions for Return No. 144, 145 and 146 have obviously been framed by able legal experts who, while 

not acquainted with the precise terms and conditions of the actual contract in question, were fully aware 

of any and all possibilities which an agreement of that nature might or could possibly contain and 

enumerated them one by one as questions in the motions. 

 

The motions are so comprehensive and all embracing as to be productive, if they were passed, of every 

matter or part of importance in the agreements referred to in Motion for Return (No. 40). In other words 

after actual copies of the contracts were refused by the House, a complete description of everything that 

the contracts could possibly contain is now being asked for. Because these three Motions for Returns are 

the same in substance as Motion for Return (No. 40), because there has been no change in the object 

thereof and because it is essentially the same in intent and meaning as Motion for Return (No. 40) and 

would be productive of the same information which was previously refused, I rule Motions for Returns 

Nos. 144, 145 and 146 out of order. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder may I be permitted to make a comment 

on your ruling. The earlier Motion of the House was one which asked for copies of the agreements. I 

don‘t want to refer to that debate in the House, but the essential nub of the Government‘s objection was 

that the Government would not reveal the price at which the gas was bought or sold. This position of the 

Minister was reiterated in Crown Corporations Committee. The Minister indicated in Crown 

Corporations Committee that he would give us the details of the agreement other than the price. I thank 

the Speaker for his kind comments on our drafting skill but I would direct the attention of the Speaker to 

item No. (1) which says, ―Particulars other than the unit price of natural gas to be sold or purchased.‖ 

Now these motions or Motions for Return were drafted so as to exclude any obligation to disclose the 

price. It was my judgment from the previous debate that that was the basis for the objection to the 

previous Motion. It was my belief, and is my belief that, if the Motions which are before us exclude such 

a relevant item as the price in an agreement, they are, because of this exclusion not the same as the 

previous Motion and they ought to be able to be put before the Assembly. That‘s my position, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We agree with . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I have not heard anything which would change my views on this ruling. These 

Motions as I see them would produce all of the details of the contract, whether it be the price or 

something else, it‘s not for me to say. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the Member for 

Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) has established the vital difference between this Order and the one which 

was asked for previously. He met the objections which the Government gave at that time and 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1698 

with respect, Sir, there is no alternative except to challenge your ruling on this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question before the House is, shall the ruling of the Chair be sustained? I won‘t be 

a judge in my own case. Call in the Members. 

 

Ruling sustained on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 30 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Bjarnason Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Larochelle 

Steuart Estey Gardner 

Heald Hooker Coupland 

McIsaac Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Loken Heggie Forsyth 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

NAYS — 21 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 — HOUSING PROGRAM 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North 

West): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Provincial Government to enlist the support of the Government of 

Canada in developing a housing program particularly for low and medium income families which 

would include: 

(1) the establishment of a provincial housing authority; 

(2) the provision of funds at a low interest rate for home building; 

(3) the establishment of research facilities to develop new and less costly techniques for the 

construction of homes; and 

(4) the development of a program which will guarantee the construction of a minimum yearly quota of 

housing for each province in Canada. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): 

That the words ―the establishment of a provincial housing authority‖ be deleted and that the items (2), 

(3) and (4) be renumbered as (1), (2) and (3). 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Resolution on 

housing, 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1699 

the credibility gap in the matter of housing in Saskatchewan I think is widening now. Prior to the 

election in 1967, there was just a sort of a hair-line crack and now it‘s more or less a yawning chasm. 

The Government has stated that it will not allow dust to collect on the Batten Report, I believe at this 

point that only lip service is being paid to the Batten Report and that it intends to disregard it at the 

earliest opportunity. There is a feeling afoot in this province that this Government‘s word cannot be 

trusted. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I resent that statement, and I think it is 

unparliamentary. The Hon. Member said this Government can‘t be trusted. Coming from the Socialists 

you can appreciate that this it to be resented. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — You‘ll notice I didn‘t sit down, Mr. Speaker, because I really didn‘t think it was a 

point of order, or a point of privilege either. 

 

Housing is a necessity due to our climatic conditions and I don‘t think that this opening remark requires 

any further elaboration, even to the people with the weakest powers of observation in this Chamber. 

However, there are people in Government who may find themselves in disagreement with the 

observation that a minimum level standard of quality should be established in our modern society below 

which housing standards should not be allowed to sink. An examination of substandard living 

accommodation and the people therein have led professionally trained people to conclude that a 

multitude of social mal-conditions exist in those surroundings. While we might be tempted to argue that 

substandard conditions were the result of individual social maladjustment we would have to admit that 

there still exists a social problem, social problems of education, health and general welfare that defy 

solution while mired in substandard housing. 

 

Canada is rich, Mr. Speaker, Canadians are intelligent. All that is required, Mr. Speaker, is the 

organization of our talent and resources in the proper direction. Saskatchewan with assistance from the 

Federal Government especially in the areas of long-term finance and research can dwarf this problem in 

a decade. 

 

Initially an examination of the housing situation must be made to determine where the problems lie. To 

begin with a great number of surveys have been carried out which have marked out the bounds of slum 

housing problems urban renewal need, low rental housing need and their attendant social implications. 

In the summer of 1966 a country-wide assessment of the housing situation was undertaken by the 

Canadian Welfare Council. Major issues of concern were identified and succeeding working 

conferences were planned. It appears, Mr. Speaker, that the Canadian Conference on housing will 

convene in September, 1968. This conference is expected to develop recommendations in such areas as 

(a) appropriate scope and objectives of housing policies, (b) inter-governmental relations in housing, (c) 

the financing of housing and (d) the opportunities for the stabilization or reduction of housing costs, (e) 

investment in housing and its implications for economic and social development. 

 

It‘s alright to spend hours talking about establishing an orderly process of priority determination in 

which social 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1700 

objectives are not submerged for a short-term economic consideration. We should take some time to 

recognize that the recent Batten Report urges the three prairie provinces to take action on the matter of 

housing. The Batten Report seems to lean heavily on the Dominion Bureau of Statistics as a key 

organization to collect data and statistics. A matter of high priority in their view. 

 

The recommendations of the Batten Commission are many and varied. I would like to refer to one 

recommendation in particular. 

 

Because of general public concern over increases in housing costs, over potential lack of response in 

the market to particular needs, and over the apparent lack of research and development in the field of 

housing, this Commission recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan create a provincial 

mortgage and housing authority. 

 

This recommendation of the Batten Commission serves to strengthen the policies that our party has been 

advocating in Saskatchewan and the New Democratic party at Ottawa. Financing costs of housing has 

climbed drastically in recent years, and I have some figures to show the impossible situation in which at 

least 80 per cent of Canadians now find themselves in regard to housing. This covers a 10-year period 

from 1957 to 1967. The cost of land for an average house in that period of time has gone from $2250 to 

$3500, an increase of 56 per cent. The cost of labor has gone from $5300 to $5600, an increase of 5.7 

per cent. The cost of materials has gone from $65000 to $10, 400, an increase of 60 per cent. Legal, etc., 

costs have gone from $500 to $700, an increase of 40 per cent. This makes a total increase over that 10-

year period from 1957 to 1967 of $5, 700 or 40 per cent increase. The cost of money over that period, 

the interest charged, Mr. Speaker, has been increased by 139 per cent, in other words $14, 786, and the 

grand total of a cost of an average house financing included has gone from $25, 100 to $45, 586. 

 

Here‘s a quotation from the Canadian Conference on Housing brochure that I received that is of interest 

and people have referred to it at different times on both sides of the House. I think it is worth 

consideration by Members again. The quotation is as follows: 

 

Every dollar spent for housing and other construction generates between $4 and $6 in other spending. 

This is where we will achieve our economic growth. 

 

Mr. Stanley Randall, the Ontario Minister of Economic Development, is reported to have said in the 

Globe and Mail, September 19th, 1967: 

 

Money spent for housing is not a charitable investment. It is our best economic weapon as well as an 

essential social need. 

 

I have here, Mr. Speaker, a cartoon that more or less illustrates the situation in which some people find 

themselves. I might warn the Hon. Member from Moosomin (Mr. Gardner) that this cartoon is from the 

Star Phoenix, December 19th, 1959. At that point the Government had boosted the NHA interest rate to 

6¾ per cent. The cartoon shows the office boy coming into the office of the big-money man, and the 

big-money man looks at the 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1701 

headline in the newspaper and says, ―Gad Fisby, there is a Santa Claus.‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, the interest 

rates have climbed far beyond 6¾ per cent at this point. I would assume that at this time the honorable 

gentleman, the money-man, would say, ―Gad Fisby, there is a super Santa Claus.‖ 

 

The figure representing the rise in the cost of labor per house puts to rest the claims of some segments of 

government and construction industry with regard to labor cost. I am referring to the previous chart I 

presented. For example a Halifax developer blames the rising wages, freight rates, material and interest 

costs and a general shortage of ready cash from conventional lenders for the decline in construction. 

While labor costs have risen, the amount of direct labor costs in home construction has dropped, while 

other costs such as I have mentioned have gone up drastically. There has been considerable research 

done to show that housing costs can be drastically reduced even to the level of $10 or $11 per square 

foot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the ingredients for a good housing policy are available but one, and that one is will. 

There is an old saying which goes, ―Where there is a will, there is a way.‖ I fear this Government does 

not have the will and consequently I predict that it will do nothing about the Batten Report as it affects 

housing, at least until the fall of 1968. The Government at Ottawa has put a lot of patches on the 

problem but has never thought of eliminating the problem by addressing itself to it, and thereby solving 

it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that we should endorse this Resolution and not allow the amendment to delete, if 

we mean to do something about the housing mess in Saskatchewan and the three prairie province areas 

and in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 30 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Bjarnason Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Larochelle 

Steuart Estey Gardner 

Heald Hooker Coupland 

McIsaac Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Loken Heggie Forsyth 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

NAYS — 20 

Lloyd Berezowsky Pepper 

Wooff Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Meakes Brockelbank  

 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1702 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed that the section in the 

original Resolution, calling for the organization of a Housing Authority was deleted by the Minister. It 

seems to me that his reasons for doing so left us with the impression that we could expect little or no 

action from the Government to alleviate Saskatchewan‘s desperate housing situation. In speaking to this 

motion, the Minister offered the Assembly the proposition that housing in Saskatchewan had not 

reached the situation comparable to the Province of Ontario, and that with the present arrangement we 

have, we could do as much as they are doing in the Province of Alberta. In these two areas they have 

housing authorities apparently. Mr. Speaker, I wonder what has happened to this province. What will 

happen in the housing field before there will be some effective action taken by the Government? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You had 20 years, Ed. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — We never had the kind of interest rates that we have at the present time in 20 years. I 

can tell you that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, as the Hon. Premier knows we have the highest rents in the history of our 

province. New homes are not being built, construction costs are beyond the reach of the average person. 

Interest rates have risen so high you would have to have an astronaut to find them. The housing industry 

is disorganized and struggling to stay alive. Then the Hon. Minister comes forward with a statement that 

our housing problem has not reached a situation comparable with the problems of the Province of 

Ontario. What an explanation! 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with that kind of an attitude and that kind of enthusiasm in the fight to provide 

housing for the low-income groups and those who need it, I would say that in the battle for proper 

housing the Minister is about as effective as a boy with a water pistol. I sat in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

as did many Hon. Members with the Chairman of the Royal Commission on Consumer Problems and 

Inflation in the prairie provinces. She was an effective Member. I suggest that her Report on the problem 

regarding housing is practical. She was a Member of the party opposite. I suggest that her reasoning and 

her logic as contained in her Report regarding a housing authority are well worth reading by the Hon. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my contention that the Housing Authority the Royal Commission recommends is long 

over-due. To delete this section from the Resolution pulls the teeth of the Resolution, removes the tools, 

withdraws the machinery that we need to get on with the job of providing housing for the low-income 

groups in our province. 

 

Housing for young couples, housing for farm groups, housing for native people, building codes, 

financing, new construction techniques, all of these aspects of housing, as I said in this debate earlier, 

could and would come within the jurisdiction of the Provincial Housing Authority. I am not convinced 

that a carpenter can build a home without tools, or that a plumber can install plumbing without tools. I 

am not convinced, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Government under the Department of the 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1703 

Minister of Municipal Affairs, can undertake an extensive housing program without a housing authority. 

The housing authority provides the tools. Nothing the Hon. Minister has said will convince me that the 

Government is going to build enough homes with its present plans. It has not done so since 1964. 

 

As I said earlier in this debate, it will not provide housing for low-income groups and it will not provide 

financing at an interest rate that is reasonable and fair and within the reach of people who need homes. 

There is no indication that it has established the machinery to reduce costs or to reduce taxes on home 

building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the component parts for housing in this province. The Housing Authority would 

be the agency that would develop the three sections of the Resolution still before the Legislature. As I 

said earlier in the debate, without the proper motivation and machinery, people are going to live in 

poverty, paying high rents and existing in second and third-rate housing. They will fill our jails and our 

juvenile courts and our mental hospitals. 

 

The Minister said in his speech that this Government is going to spend in the next fiscal year $1, 450, 

000 in low-rental housing. I heard the discussion between the Minister and the Hon. Member for Regina 

North East (Mr. Smishek), my colleague. I checked the Estimates for the Department of Municipal 

Affairs. These are not expenditures that he is talking about, Mr. Speaker, these are under the heading of 

loans, advances and investments. The Hon. Member for Regina North East spoke of the actual cost to 

the Government for low-cost housing, loans you expect to be paid back and an advance you expect to be 

paid back. An investment is something that is still yours and on which you will draw interest. To 

maintain, as the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) did in debate, that the Budget that we are 

considering ―calls for an expenditure in the next fiscal year of $1, 450, 000 on low-rental housing, ‖ is 

very misleading. These are loans, advances and investments that he is talking about, something that 

draws interest over a period of time, something that will be repaid. Just as the investment provides for 

the acquisition and development of land as shown, this will eventually be purchased and paid for. The 

actual expenditure for subsidies and grants in the administration of housing under the Department of 

Municipal Affairs is only a fraction of that amount, the amount quoted by the Minister. If this is an 

expenditure as he contends and it will not be returned, then the loans to SEDCO, the Government 

Telephones, Saskatchewan Power and the Water Supply Board, are in the same category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am hesitant about the kind of program we will have without providing an authority to 

promote, to co-ordinate and to develop it. Without assessing the needs, without developing techniques 

for construction, without obtaining money for financing on a quota basis through a Housing Authority, a 

housing program will be ineffective. There is need for a Housing Authority to do this. I regret the 

deletion by an amendment of this most necessary and proper administrative vehicle, which had been 

recommended by the Batten Royal Commission on Consumer Problems and Inflation. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1704 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN NO. 137 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion of Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords) for 

Return No. 137. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, on this motion I have an 

amendment which I proposed to the House, seconded by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), 

that the Motion for Return No. 137 be amended by deleting all the words of Section 1 and substituting 

the following therefor: 

 

(1) Whether the agreement is still in effect, 

 

that all the words after ―not‖ in Section 2 be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

(2) the date on which it was terminated. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — I must draw attention to what the amendment does to 

the Resolution. The part that is being eliminated entirely, namely, part 1, reads, ―Whether the Company 

complied with all the terms of the agreement as amended.‖ And the Minister‘s amendment proposes to 

substitute for that, ―Whether the agreement is still in effect.‖ It only takes a minute of observation to 

note the information which we are not going to get. That is the extent to which the company lived up to 

the terms of the previous agreement. In connection with this, attention must be drawn to the very 

considerable amount of fanfare which surrounded this agreement at the time that it was first signed and 

continued for a period of many months afterwards. Many Members will recall the announcement in the 

House on April 1, 1965, I think it was. It has turned out that that was a pretty appropriate day to 

announce the agreement — April Fool‘s Day. The announcement was subsequently repeated in 

newspapers and also following statements of Ministers all over the northern part of the Province. Since 

that time the industry has got lost in the bush in north western Saskatchewan some place. We have no 

information except that we know that the Government spent over $1 million in building a road in that 

general direction. To what extent the company lived up to its portion of the agreement, what action the 

Government took if the company didn‘t live up to its portion of the agreement. All of this we don‘t 

know. All of this we are now being told again we have no right to know. It seems to me that the 

amendment is one which denies to the people of Saskatchewan some information to which they have a 

right. After all, the people of Saskatchewan did spend over $1 million in constructing a road for the 

development of this project. It has suddenly collapsed and disappeared and we are not going to be given 

the information that we are seeking. Because of that, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the amendment 

must be opposed. 

 

Amendment agreed to 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1705 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 12 — LOUDSPEAKER IN LOUNGE OF LIBERAL MEMBERS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader 

of the Opposition): 

 

That this Assembly is of the opinion that equipment to transmit proceedings of the Legislature should 

to be installed anywhere except in the offices under the direct control of Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Blakeney: 

 

That the following words be inserted between the word ―that‖ where it appears for the second time in the 

first line, and the word ―equipment‖: 

 

except with the express consent of the Assembly acting through Mr. Speaker. 

 

and that all the words after the word ―anywhere‖, be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

and that this Assembly hereby confirms its consent to such installations in offices and galleries under 

the direct control of Mr. Speaker. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 20 

Lloyd Berezowsky Pepper 

Wooff Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Meakes Brockelbank  

 

NAYS — 30 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Bjarnason Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Larochelle 

Steuart Estey Gardner 

Heald Gallagher McPherson 

McIsaac MacLennan Charlebois 

Guy Heggie Forsyth 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition which has been expressed to this Resolution is really not 

such as to require any considerable amount of time in reply. That opposition has been almost entirely 

confined to saying that the motion was silly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1706 

Mr. Lloyd: — And ―hear, hear, ‖ they say now. That it was a waste of time. They suggest that this 

matter is one which was raised for political considerations only. In that, I suggest we get a measurement 

of the attitude of the group who sit on your right toward a very important matter. 

 

In commenting on the debate to begin with, may I remind them that I had reference to a somewhat 

similar, although more justifiable, occurrence in the House of Commons at Ottawa not many years ago. 

At that time there was discussion of a similar procedure. Among the people who spoke on it, I remind 

the Hon. Members sitting opposite, was the Prime Minister of Canada, then the Leader of the Liberal 

party and the Leader of the official Opposition. He viewed it as being extremely important. He found it 

important enough to make a very intensive statement about it. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this is a 

measure which Members across might think of when they say that this is a matter of silliness and a 

waste of time. 

 

What is being presented here is simply this. It is a Resolution which reaffirms the right of this 

Legislature to make the disciplines under which we work in this Legislative Chamber. I find nothing 

silly in that. I find it extremely disturbing that Members who sit opposite should call such a decision 

silly and useless. It is important that this Legislature have the right to make the disciplines under which 

we operate. If that isn‘t important it isn‘t important that we sit here at all. That right has been infringed 

by the action of recent days in this regard. I find that this is a matter worthwhile talking about. It is a 

matter of importance for us to decide the disciplines, the rules, under which we are going to operate in 

the future. I would hope that in spite of the Government‘s outburst the other day, it might find it 

worthwhile supporting. 

 

You know you get the impression from statements of that kind emanating from Government benches 

and Government front benches, with particular vehemence that unless something is big enough to pave 

or deep enough to dig into for oil or potash it can‘t possibly be of any importance. I say that that is a 

very dangerous point of view for a Government to take. We must not be content to accept the position 

that this Legislature is a hand-maiden of the Government. This Legislature is a Parliament. We have 

been given the responsibility of making our own rules. It is not for the Government without reference to 

this Legislature to change those rules as it did in the incident about which we are talking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I find particularly disturbing, may I say to the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) his 

reference on this matter. He said in the debate that this is something that is not serious at all. ―Not a 

serious thing at all‖, he repeated, he went on to say, ―If you want a loudspeaker I am sure that the 

Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) would have given you one.‖ That, as I said previously, is by no 

means the point. I must express pretty extreme disappointment in the point of view of the Attorney 

General in that particular respect. Just as a bit of diversion, I know that the Attorney General was one of 

the ardent supporters of the present Leader of the Liberal party and was evidently reasonably successful, 

more successful than 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1707 

many of his colleagues I gather. That may account for the greater amount of smiles on his face than the 

extreme grumpiness of the Premier since he has returned from that conference, I don‘t know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — But I am not sure — the Attorney General hasn‘t confirmed this — whether he was on 

Mr. Trudeau‘s editorial committee or not. The Editorial Committee that published daily during the 

convention, I understand, a tabloid newspaper called ―Trudeau Today‖. But I thought it worthwhile 

because of some of the happenings the other evening, to point out that in this newspaper published on 

behalf of Mr. Trudeau, the allegation was made in one issue in these words, 

 

Bell Telephone officials have confirmed that communication systems of three candidates, Winters, 

MacEachen and Trudeau, and convention headquarters were bugged on Thursday. 

 

I don‘t know whether the Attorney General was on the Editorial Committee or not, but this sort of thing 

seems to get around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And a number of people are raising accusations. As it turned out this was later denied as 

well. 

 

Now to get back to the debate, I want to sum up very briefly by saying again I think this is an important 

matter. I have reread the statements of the Resolution and the statement which I made in introducing it 

— I find nothing that is silly in those. I find nothing that is time-wasting. I find nothing that is of a petty 

or a two-bit nature. Frankly, again, what the Resolution suggests is this. It reaffirms or seeks to reaffirm 

the right of the Members of the Legislature to make the disciplines under which we operate. Because it 

does that, because that is denied in the actions which the Resolution is based on, because that is denied if 

this Resolution is voted against, I think it is important that the Resolution be supported. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The motion was negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 20 

 

Lloyd Berezowsky Pepper 

Wooff Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Meakes Brockelbank  

 

NAYS — 30 

 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1708 

 
Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Bjarnason Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Larochelle 

Steuart Estey Gardner 

Heald Hooker Coupland 

McIsaac Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Loken Heggie Forsyth 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 13 – REQUEST FOR REMOVAL OF LOUDSPEAKER 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Hon. W.S. Lloyd: 

 

That, if he has not already done so, the Minister of Public Works be directed to remove or cause to be 

removed forthwith, any equipment to transmit proceedings of the Legislature except that installed in 

offices directly under the control of Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

In connection with Resolution No. 13, the loudspeaker referred to in this motion having been removed 

some time ago, it would be wasteful of the time of the House to now debate an order for its removal. 

 

Moreover, by debating and deciding Resolution No. 12, the House has already expressed its opinion on 

any such equipment installed in offices directly under control of Mr. Speaker. Because one part of the 

motion has become redundant and the other half has been already decided, I rule this motion to be out of 

order. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 — CENSURING OF GOVERNMENT 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. W.S. Lloyd: 

 

That this Legislature censures the Government for having installed, or caused to be installed and/or 

condoned the installation of equipment to transmit proceedings of the Legislature without having first 

obtained the leave of the Legislature. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to detain the House at any length because I have already 

stated our position with respect to it. I think it is a matter of considerable regret that the Government 

chose this course of action without any reference to the Legislature. As I said in introducing the 

Resolution, I am not suggesting that this was intentional disrespect to the rules of the House, but I am 

suggesting that it was an action of such great carelessness and of such indifference to the rights of this 

Legislature that this Legislature ought to express its opinion on it. 

 

I want to emphasize again how very important it is that we retain the rights of this Legislature to make 

decisions about how it is going to operate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1709 

Mr. Lloyd: — I want to express again, how very important it is that we do not regard what goes on in 

this Legislature as purely some kind of a ritual. I am afraid that at times that is what the Government 

thinks that it really is. The Government undoubtedly, and there is precedent for it, should have referred 

this action to the Legislature before taking it. It failed to do so and because of that I suggest that it does 

deserve the severest criticism which this Legislature can level on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS — 20 

Lloyd Berezowsky Pepper 

Wooff Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Meakes Brockelbank  

 

NAYS — 30 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Bjarnason Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Larochelle 

Steuart Estey Gardner 

Heald Hooker Coupland 

McIsaac Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Loken Heggie Forsyth 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister 

of Education) that Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend The Larger School Units Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, once again I rise to speak to a Bill that involves 

education, an Act to amend The Larger School Units Act. Now it would make me very happy if I could 

concur with all the sections of this amendment and I shall proceed to bring out to you in some detail, Mr. 

Speaker, my views on this Bill, pointing out what I consider those which are good and conducive to 

good education and also those that I consider bad. 

 

Now in Section 23, amended in subsection 2, whereby the unit elections coincide with the municipal 

elections, it is very commendable indeed. It‘s a step that the unit board members and the municipal 

councillors will welcome. 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1710 

Now in subsection 1 of Section 29, where there‘s no local school board, the secretary is given the 

authority to appoint another person who shall comply with this subsection. Again because local boards 

have in many cases disappeared, by virtue of the fact that no ratepayers had met and that no trustees 

were elected, the composition of the board therefore is null and void. So this provision, Mr. Speaker, this 

provision of the secretary being able to appoint one person to replace them is a very good one. Now this 

is very commendable because the situation arises many times, that local school districts exist, but there 

is no school board and therefore no one to carry out the work necessary. The appointment of this person 

to take the place of the local board this vacuum if filled, makes it possible for some form of 

communication between the school unit board and the school district. Now, Mr. Speaker, this same Bill 

No. 66, with which I have readily agreed in principle and practice in some sections now shows a bit of 

the Premier‘s unbridled passion for power. 

 

Now in part 4 of the Bill, Section 81, is amended by adding on to it the following: 8A ―to close any 

school or part there of . . . 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — On a point of order. I think that it‘s been a customary practice in the 

House that in dealing with second readings that the principle of the Bill only and not the particular 

sections are to be referred to in speaking on the Bill. 

 

Mr. Howes: — On the point of order, I think the Member should try and do that but I do realize there 

are difficulties too. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that is 

quite right in general but as long as there happens to be a principle in a section as distinguished from 

another, it is quite in order to refer to it. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, if I may proceed. Going back to 8A ―to close any school or part 

thereof or discontinue one or more of the grades taught in the school; but no action shall be taken 

pursuant to this paragraph unless: 

 

(a) the district and unit boards concerned have agreed thereto; or 

(b) the unit board has at least six months before acting under this paragraph, notified the district board 

by registered mail of its intentions to so act and has consulted the district board.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, once again, the heavy hand of Thatcher, Thatcherism strikes out, but I must agree 

this section has some purpose and maybe the possibility of some merit in a few but very few units 

boards, but definitely with the purpose of further emasculating the power of units boards. Again, I‘d like 

to suggest that the unit boards have nearly always acted in very good faith in such matters though there‘s 

the possibility that there might be an occasion for school unit boards to use undue pressure to close 

schools. Maybe, Mr. Speaker, because the Members to your right under their Leader are so often guilty 

themselves of the use of those high-handed tactics that the 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1711 

immediate supposition is that all other democratically elected members of other ruling bodies must be 

the same. Now it would then be very natural for such people to take powers away from the boards and 

add it to themselves as this Government is doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know and I should, as I‘ve been on a school unit board as a member for 10 years, that 

unit boards bend backwards as far as is humanly possible in consideration of local boards. I know the 

Government is using the Sturgis incident which to base their argument on. Now I can readily sympathize 

with the Sturgis board. I know they, the same as we, always act with the full understanding and backing 

of the Department of Education. The long and the short of it was they could not get a teacher to teach. 

So what does one do in such a case, Mr. Speaker? What is a unit board to do? Now three years ago we 

had exactly the same situation in Goodeve. We advertised for teachers for grades 10, 11 and 12, from 

early March until school opened in September with no success. Now it was the first time that our 

secretary advertised as far west as Vancouver and east to Winnipeg. But not one qualified teacher could 

be secured. Now two weeks before school was to open, I called a meeting of local taxpayers, who are 

interested because their children have to have a teacher. Certainly there were a few dissatisfactions on 

the part of some ratepayers. We so desperately, and by we, I mean the school unit board, wanted to keep 

the school open because we had no room in the other schools in Melville and Ituna. Yet there was 

nothing to be done but to close these two rooms. Mr. Speaker, some even paid a visit to see their MLA 

at that time. He and his assistant secretary both harked on the evils of the school units, which wasn‘t 

anything new for the Member for Melville at that time and said that they would see that they would get 

the required teachers. But, Mr. Speaker, that was the last we heard about this from them. There were just 

no qualified teachers to be gotten. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what this part of the Act is doing is creating a situation from which a stalemate could 

resolve which would be impossible to solve. This section makes it possible for the local boards to stand 

pat on their demand for a teacher, even at the time of school opening and be legally right if this Bill is to 

pass. What is the unit board to do? Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that some Members to your right will 

maintain that if such a thing will happen, these incidents will be few and far between and maybe rightly 

so, but happen it will and this year will be no exception. There‘s no doubt in anyone‘s mind that the 

possibility of a teacher shortage in Saskatchewan for the next term will be just as critical as last year‘s 

resulting in strong competition for the services of these available, the result being that some schools 

might just go unstaffed. What kind of schools can they be? These are the smaller two or three-room high 

schools and the school board then is in a real dilemma. Mr. Speaker, the Committee that was established 

to deal with the situation in Sturgis consisted of a judge, a lawyer and a city school teacher but nobody 

to represent the viewpoint of the trustees, the unit trustees, nobody from the school unit section. This 

disregard of unit representation was deliberate, Mr. Speaker. Not one, no one knows the feelings of these 

unit boards like the people who have worked on these boards, people who have had firsthand experience 

in the problems of staffing such schools, yes, Mr. Speaker, in closing them when necessary. Yet the 

Minister ignored putting on a member of the school unit section in that investigating committee. I‘m 

sure a different light would have been thrown on the whole situation had an independent unit board 

member been part of that Committee, and 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1712 

the possibility of a different recommendation as well. What bothers me, Mr. Speaker, and I know it 

bothers all board members, is that in nearly all cases extreme care and consideration are given when the 

necessity to close a school is considered, and always in consultation with the Department. Mr. Speaker, 

this section is just another further erosion of the powers of the school unit boards. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask you to call the Member to order again. 

He has already stated and the record will show that he has said in this House, not more than 10 minutes 

ago that he agrees in principle with the Bill. I say to him that if he wants to discuss or go into a clause-

by-clause discussion of this Bill that he wait for committee and bring it up there. If he wants to talk 

about principles, then let him talk about principles. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, speaking to the point of order, to 

begin with, the Member wasn‘t already called to order. There was no point of order. He was perfectly 

within his rights to proceed. It was pointed out that there was some specific areas where the principle is 

not agreed with by the speaker. He can say that he agrees generally but there are some specific areas. I 

think there is no point of order here. 

 

Mr. Leith: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, may I again speak to the point of order. I think that every Member 

has to learn to accept the rules of the House and that is, on second readings we discuss the principles of 

the Bill, but we do not discuss it section by section. And I draw your attention to the fact that the 

Member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) has already asked to or brought to our attention a point of order 

and I remind you about it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I think I said at that time and I will repeat it, that the rule is that the principle 

of the Bill is supposed to be discussed. However, on Bills that constitute amendments to Acts, there may 

be different principles in different parts of the Bill, and I for one am not going to rule the Member out of 

order. I think he is perfectly in order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before that this section is just further erosion of the powers 

of the school unit boards. 

 

Mr. Leith: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I ask again for the indulgence of the Chair in instructing 

the Member to speak to the principle of the Bill and not to the section. I think it would be very easy for 

the Member to adhere to the accepted part of the debate by not referring to a section. I have no objection 

to him talking about the principle contained in the Bill or a section, but I think he violates the practice of 

the House by saying ―In the section, in such a section.‖ 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1713 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — If all that the Member is objecting to is that the 

Member from Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) is using the words ―In this section‖, that of course is very 

easily overcome. But on the main point that he is raising it would be impossible to discuss this Bill, the 

principle of it, without, as the Deputy Chairman has just so very well said, discussing it on the basis of 

the principle in the specific sections. There is no relationship between the principle in clause 3 and the 

principle in clause 4, and it can only be discussed in principle by talking about the contents of each 

section. May I simply add in commenting on it, Mr. Speaker, that I‘ve heard Ministers over there, in this 

section, talk about Bill is terms of ―What‘s in section so and so, section so and so, section so and so.‖ 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I will try to observe . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well I think possibly it will be just as well to review the reason for discussing a Bill on 

second reading. When a Bill comes up in the House for second reading, the question before the House is 

the principle of the Bill, not how it should be done in detail but the general principle; shall it or shall it 

not be done at all? The crossing of the t‘s and the dotting of the i‘s, the discussing of the Bill section by 

section is properly done in Committee. This is of course why the House goes into Committee, in order to 

achieve an informal discussion, item by item, section by section and clause by clause of the Bill. Now 

the principle before the House in this Bill and this is an amending Act; an Act to amend The Larger 

School Units Act is what is before the House. It is the principle of the Bill not the principle of the Act. It 

is the principle of the Bill only and that part of the Act only which the Bill seeks to amend which is 

before the House. I know that Members have sometimes discussed Bills section by section in the House 

before, and I also realize that on some occasions it is quite hard to limit one‘s self strictly to the basic 

principle. But those are the rules and the reason why they are there and the reason they are there is to 

conserve the time of the House, in other words to discuss in Committee that which is discussed, item by 

item and to discuss the broad principle of the Bill on second reading. 

 

Mr. .E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that, as 

the Deputy Speaker pointed out, there are different principles in different sections of these Acts. These 

Acts, we have which are amending another Bill, have one principle involved in one part of the Bill in 

which the Member may be in concurrence with, and yet in another part of the Bill he may not be able to 

discuss it with the wording, the exact wording, clause by clause, but in this certain section with the 

principle of the Bill, he may be diametrically opposed to it. If he doesn‘t oppose it at this part of the 

proceedings, when he gets into Committee, it is too late. The principle of the Bill has already been 

agreed to. At that time he is only allowed to discuss the crossing of the t‘s and the dotting of the i‘s, but 

if he wants to say anything about the principles of these sections and, as I‘ve been able to hear, this is 

exactly what the Member from Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) has been doing, is talking on the principle in a 

certain section. 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1714 

Mr. Speaker: — I agree with what the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood) has said in part and I 

agree with what the Deputy Speaker said. But because this Act seeks to amend various sections in the 

Act, not just one particular part, it is rather hard to keep the whole thing untangled. But it is not true to 

say that you can only just cross the t‘s and dot the i‘s, because in 1931 a Bill went into Committee and 

by the time the thing came out of Committee, they had struck out every part of it except the first section. 

The only part left was clause 1. And that‘s the way they ended up, they had nothing left when they got 

finished. You can amend any part, any section of an Act in Committee of the Whole, if you can get the 

House to agree to your amendment. In this particular case in 1931, they started striking out clauses and 

they ended up striking out the whole darned lot in the Committee. That‘s what they ended up with. So it 

isn‘t correct to say that in Committee you cannot do these things. You can. You can offer amendments 

and/or move to have any part of it struck out as the case may be. You vote on it. 

 

Mr. Wood: — I accept what you‘ve said entirely, Mr. Speaker. What I was trying to say is that the 

proper place to discuss the principle of the Bill is here rather than in Committee. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is just further erosion of the powers of the school unit 

boards. This Bill, along with the deletion of powers contemplated in other Bills, leaves the unit boards 

with the status of a caretaker government, simply doing the mediocre duties of a caretaker government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other part of The Larger School Units Act that I object to is that part dealing with school grants. 

Now we have asked for explanatory notes on this and so far have received some from the Hon. Minister 

of Education (Mr. McIsaac). But I find it impossible to do the calculations on the facts obtained. Some 

examples, the grants payable have been worked out and the increase in grant amounts, these whose grant 

total is less than one mill on their assessment and in each case making it necessary for these school units 

to levy in cases anywhere from 2 – 10 mills or more. Now it‘s no use window-dressing the cold and hard 

facts, Mr. Minister. The People of Saskatchewan are once again being subjected to the harsh fact that 

under this new grant structure they will have to pay more school taxes than ever. But in spite of the 

Liberal promises to relieve the local tax burden, they the taxpayer will be harder hit than ever before. 

Now let me quote some of the school units tax increases for 1965 under the new grant structure: Yorkton 

school unit, up 5.5 mills; Canora, 8 mills; Cupar school unit, 8 mills; Melville school unit, 5 mills; 

Kamsack rural 3, village 5; Foam Lake, 4 mills; Sturgis, 5 mills; Neudorf Consolidated, 17 mills; and I 

understand Lemberg Consolidated has also gone up quite extensively. 

 

Now let me quote you an article from the Saskatchewan School Trustees‘ newsletter of March 4, 1968, 

in regards to these local tax increases and I quote: 

 

Five mills — $8 million. For all intents and purposes the item anticipated increases in operating grants 

can be struck from school board budgets. The Provincial Treasurer announced operating grant 

increases of 2.7 million 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1715 

when he brought down the Provincial Budget, March 1. Then he announced new taxes which will 

recover about $500, 000 of the total from school boards. We estimate that about 25 per cent of school 

board purchases are subject to sales tax. A one per cent increase in some $30 million would yield $300, 

000 for the Province. Now add this to an estimated $120, 000 which is recovered at 2 cents per gallon 

on gasoline consumption by school vehicles, plus a further $30, 000 in increased licence fees and 

incidentals, and the effect of operating grants increases pared to about $2 million. It is estimated that 

the school board expenditure will increase by $10 million. This figure is arrived at by adding the $7 

million in increase in teachers‘ salaries, increases negotiated last year plus changes in classification, 

and $3 million in other expenditures. Teachers‘ salaries account for two-thirds of the total 

expenditures, so we are assuming that the increase in other expenditures will remain close to the same 

ratio of $3 million. When the effect of operating grants increases is deducted from the $10 million 

estimate, an item of some $8 million remains to be raised through local taxation, on the basis of 1 mill 

across the province, yielding about $1.5 million. It appears an average increase of about 5 mills in 

taxation will be required to balance school board budgets for the year. If further increases for this year 

are considered . . . 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — Point of order, Mr. Speaker, I have read this Bill over and I find 

nothing in this Bill relating to school grants, not in dollars and cents. I think this should be a question for 

the Estimates. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, may I go on, Sir. I want to end by saying the quotation: 

 

If further increases for this year are considered, the mill rate increase might well be higher. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes to show beyond the shadow of a doubt that the changes in the grant structure 

although in probability, and of this I am not so sure, as the Hon. Member when introducing the Bill had 

so little to say and termed many parts of this Bill as routine, that I just could not fathom very much of 

what he said in regards to the grant formula. I am not so sure any of his colleagues on the Government 

side of the House understood it either. In all probability, the Premier doesn‘t understand it either, and of 

this I wouldn‘t be too surprised, as I remember his comments regarding the famous so-called incentive 

grant formula wherein he was reported as stating that he didn‘t understand it and wasn‘t going to be 

bothered about it. Well I want to inform the Hon. Premier that he wasn‘t the only one who didn‘t 

understand it. I‘m convinced that the Minister of Education of that day didn‘t understand it either. But as 

I said before, it was wonderful and juicy and useful for political patronage, Mr. Speaker. Remember the 

event when the Prince Albert school unit came and received the usual amount of this incentive grant like 

any other unit somewhere within the vicinity of $15, 000. But they weren‘t content, Mr. Speaker, they 

went back to Regina, the Prince Albert unit board did, and I don‘t know whom they saw, probably the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), but Mr. Speaker, they went back home with something like $55, 000. 

Quite an 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1716 

incentive formula! Mr. Speaker, quote a formula! As I said before, it‘s stretchable like the Liberal 

election promises. I only hope that the new grant structure is different, more fair and equitable although 

the amount of grant increase for this year of $2 million is as I say a contradiction of Liberal election 

promises. Let me quote you some of these Liberal election promises, Mr. Speaker, as quoted. Here is a 

quote from the Regina Leader-Post, April 9, 1964. ―Reduced taxes and increased services in 

Saskatchewan are not only possible, but will be accomplished by a Liberal Government, ‖ Wilf Gardner. 

Liberal candidate, speaking in Melville, Saskatchewan. Further down, Mr. Speaker, also in the Regina 

Leader-Post of April 11, 1964. 

 

A Liberal Government reduction of taxes would not mean curtailment of any essential services because 

it could be done by cutting some of the fat from the Government spending. 

 

Davy Steuart, Liberal candidate for Prince Albert speaking in Milestone, Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

these promises for the reductions went out the window. The people have been stuck with, as I said in the 

Budget, an amount of some $34 tax for every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan. I also said that 

day that we shouldn‘t forget that direct local taxes that we knew would be forthcoming. $2.7 million in 

operating costs, $700, 000 which is taken back by the Government through taxes, this I say is another 

extension of the Liberal philosophy that Thatcher giveth and Thatcher taketh away. This was an amount 

that set the stage for large tax levies in this province, Mr. Speaker. Today we see the evidence. The local 

taxpayers ever since this Government took office have been hit again and again, particularly in school 

taxes. For the 10-year period, 1954 to 1964, the former CCF Government saw to it so that for that 10-

year period the grants were large enough to take care of nearly all increased costs of education, so that in 

many school units the local tax levy didn‘t increase it all. A good example of that is in Canora unit, 

which for a 10-year period had no increase from 1954 to 1964. And in other units taxes went up 1 or 2 

mills. In the Melville unit, we had a 1 mill increase in 1958 in that 10-year period. Even then we 

managed to pay off a debt a provide a $100, 000 surplus for future building, not realizing then that this 

would have to be used to fill in the holes, financial holes, due to mismanagement and lack of financial 

consideration by the present Liberal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the grant picture for the last five years under this present Liberal Government is grim 

indeed. In Canora in the past four years the local school tax increase was 17 mills, 17 mills in four years‘ 

time, Mr. Speaker. In the Melville school unit the rise was less spectacular, but still 13 mills in four 

years‘ time. This is a crying shame, Mr. Speaker, considering that the Government to your right 

promised repeatedly that this would not happen, that the local tax burden would be lightened. This Bill 

and the other Bills are of no great value in relieving the local taxpayer. If more money isn‘t provided, 

Mr. Speaker, the amount of money received through operating grants this year proves beyond the 

shadow of a doubt that this is not so, that these grant formulas do not provide the necessary alleviation 

of the local tax burden. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in view of this and other objections, voiced by me, I 

will oppose this Bill. 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1717 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — In the short time I have been in this Legislature I have never 

heard such nonsense since I came here. There is only one thing that I can say, I hope the Hon. Member 

opposite in his speech didn‘t understand what he was reading, I don‘t think he really did. I want to come 

to two particular points he brought up. One was the accusation that the Government was trying to take 

away the complete power of the unit board. We should have realized and expected it, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Hon. Member opposite believes in dictatorial methods that have often been employed by some unit 

boards. Of course today he proved to us that he did believe in that type of action, and he belonged to 

some of those boards. What he told us is that he really believes that unit boards should be able to go out 

and tell some small school the day before school starts, ―You‘re closed up.‖ That‘s what he told us he 

believes in today. Such dictatorial actions that have been carried out by some unit boards certainly are 

not believed in by the Members that are on this side of this Legislature. That, Mr. Speaker, is the precise 

reason for the change in this legislation. It is because some unit boards have actually gone out and 

closed up small schools with no consultation. The Member from Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) tells us one 

day that he thinks that we should have great consultation with hospital boards, tells us we should be 

consulting them years and years ahead, and today he tells us that we should be able to go out and close 

up any small school that the unit board feels like, the day before without even asking. What consistency, 

Mr. Speaker, has been given us by the Member from Melville! I don‘t know, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, 

he‘s the Opposition critic; he speaks for the Members on that side of the House. But I am dismayed to 

hear such words come from the Opposition. I can well recall years ago how so many small schools were 

closed up by unit boards that just walked in and told you a week before that you can‘t get a teacher. 

They made a good case for it and said, ―You‘re shut down and we‘ll take you some place else for the 

coming term.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is precisely why this legislation is being changed, so that there will be consultation, so 

that any small school will be given notice that their school is in difficulty at least six months ahead. Now 

the Member opposite tells us that this may mean the school will continue operating and the unit board 

can‘t carry out its function. But the legislation also provides that the two groups can get together, the 

small local board and the unit board. If they reach an agreement, then they may decide that it will benefit 

all if that school closes. But, Mr. Speaker, far too often in this province have unit boards abused their 

powers by telling small schools that they would no longer be able to operate in the coming year with 

absolutely no consultation whatsoever. He talks of the erosion of the power of the unit board. What the 

Member opposite tells us is that he believes that units boards should have absolute and complete power 

without the local people having any say whatsoever. He says they shouldn‘t even be consulted, Mr. 

Speaker. That‘s what he tells us. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Are you talking about hospital boards? 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — We‘re talking about school boards, George, in case you didn‘t know. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Put your earphones on, George! 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1718 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, this change in legislation is something that has been long overdue. 

 

The second point that is in this legislation provides that the local boards will be able to get unit board 

minutes, within I believe 10 days after a board meeting has been held. All too frequently it has been 

brought to my attention that local boards had great difficulty in being able to get unit board minutes of 

the meeting that had just been held. 

 

The various methods employed often meant that the local board wouldn‘t be able to find out what 

precisely was going on in their unit. Mr. Speaker, may I call it 12:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina south East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a fine group of 

grade eight students seated in the east gallery accompanied by their principal, Mr. Selinger and one of 

the other teachers. St. Andrew school is in my constituency, the South East constituency of Regina. It‘s 

a very fine school, a new school and certainly serves that community well. I welcome them on your 

behalf, on behalf of this Legislature. I hope their stay here this afternoon will be most educational, 

fruitful and that they will gain much from their own democratic institution. With that, welcome to these 

students and I hope their stay will be pleasant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a group of students in the 

Speaker‘s gallery from Langbank school. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Blackwood. 

Langbank is a small community and I think they should be commended for regularly sending students to 

the Legislature. I hope they enjoy their stay and that they have a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, rather than interrupt the proceedings 

of the House later, I would like to draw the attention of the Members to the fact that in a few moments 

there will be a group of students arriving from Hugh Cairns, V.C. school in the city of Saskatoon. These 

students have travel arrangements which make it impossible for them to be here at the moment that the 

House opens. I would like to have them feel welcome in the House and to express the hope that they 

enjoy their stay in the city of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw your attention and the attention of the 

House to a group of 10 people in the Speaker‘s gallery. They are school children, but they are students, 

students of the political process from Elrose constituency. I am happy to welcome them here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1719 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on the proposed motion by Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister 

of Education) that Bill No. 66 be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, when we adjourned the Legislature at 12:30 o‘clock, I was making 

some remarks on comments made by the Member of the Legislature from Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk). 

 

I would like to summarize my position insofar as at least two of the changes in this Act are concerned. 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, that there is a great deal to be said about retaining enough power for the larger unit 

board. However, despite the fact that many of these unit boards have carried out their functions in an 

orderly and democratic fashion, there are some unit boards in this province which certainly have not 

done this. Some unit boards in this province have acted in a very dictatorial manner in the closure of 

some of the local community schools. This Act provides that these unit boards will be required to give a 

minimum of six months‘ notice by registered mail to the local community that changes will be effected 

in that particular school. Some of the problems that are well known to Members of this Legislature could 

have been avoided, if this provision had been made by the previous Government many years ago. The 

Member for Melville does not seem to think that such notice would be required. He seems to favor, Mr. 

Speaker, that some unit boards may be able to go to the local community two or three days before it is 

about to start and say, ―We are about to close you up and we will be taking a certain number of grades or 

all grades to another community.‖ This has not been good enough. This change in legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, will mean that many of the unit boards rather than lose their power will be put in a position of 

having to do ground work to gain public acceptance for their action in changing and bringing about a 

rationalization of our school system. 

 

I believe that every Member of this Legislature would be in favor that these unit boards act in a more 

democratic manner in gaining the public acceptance of these local communities before there are changes 

effected in many of these small schools. I for one had a difficult school problem in my constituency. Just 

this past year another school problem in this province was brought to the notice of the people of 

Saskatchewan simply because a unit board had not done the necessary ground work of getting the public 

acceptance that was necessary in a small community before they closed up that particular school or 

moved many of those students. 

 

The second provision of course, Mr. Speaker, is another move to make unit boards act in a more 

democratic and responsible manner. Far too often it has been brought to my attention that local boards 

were unable to find out what went on in their particular unit board. I have been told on many occasions 

that you cannot find out what is said or what happened at unit board meetings, that it is exceptionally 

difficult to be able to find what a unit board member said or what motions were passed or what direction 

their unit board was advocating that that particular unit move in. Now this provision, Mr. Speaker, 

provides that any local board will be able to receive the minutes of a meeting within 10 days of the last 

unit board meeting. All that will require is a request made by that local community board to the unit 

board, and the minutes must be provided by law to them within 10 days of the last meeting. This, I 

suggest, 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1720 

is another move by this Government to require that larger unit boards act in a much more democratic 

manner and in a manner in which they will be forced, if they had wished otherwise, to require the public 

acceptance of people in smaller communities for their actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very disappointed to hear the Member for Melville in his remarks reject these 

concepts to move towards a more democratic procedure. These are two moves which should have been 

instituted 20 years ago, Mr. Speaker, and we would have had a much better relationship between unit 

boards and local communities, if they had been. Mr. Speaker, I am very much in favor of the legislation 

which is being brought forward by the Minister of Education and I commend him for it. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I just want a word or two on 

this particular Bill. I want to say first that I was interested in the remarks of the Member from Melville 

(Mr. Kowalchuk). I know he is a newcomer to the Legislature, I know that newcomers sometimes have 

to grow through a period of trial by error. It is always interesting to see a man get up on his feet with a 

prepared address in which he starts out in high gear supporting the principle and by the time he is 

finished reading his copious notes he finds himself in opposition to the principle. That was the position 

in which the Member for Melville found himself. I was surprised too as a member, I understand, if a 

larger unit board that he should have taken the rigid attitude that he took on behalf of the Bill, The 

Larger School Units Act. I might remind him that there are other Members of this Legislature who 

likewise have sat as members on a larger school board. I am always pleased that I had the opportunity to 

serve for a number of years on a school unit board. My concept of the function of the school unit board 

is in many respects directly opposite to that of the Member for Melville. It‘s a strange performance when 

you see a man accuse the Government of invading the rights and the powers of the local governments. 

He says that you are taking away from this local government its powers and thus you are weakening it. 

When he objects to the principle that a local unit board, before closing a school or a classroom, should 

get mutual consent of the local ratepayers of that district, or failing to obtain the local consent, they 

should be obliged to give six months‘ notice to the local district before the school is closed, it is a 

strange attitude that he should oppose this provision for negotiating when he and his cohorts took such a 

vigorous stand on the matter of the closing of hospitals — that none should be closed before full 

negotiating with the people concerned, and without a determined effort to make sure that those people 

were conversant with all the facts and that they too were in agreement with the move that was being 

taken. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, it depends whose ox is being gored. I know that there are those who like 

to build a little empire of their own, and I am afraid the Member for Melville revealed that characteristic 

in his speech. Therefore he doesn‘t like this little empire building interfered with. I would remind him as 

a member of a unit board that a unit board has first and foremost a responsibility to see to it that every 

child in that larger unit has an equal opportunity for education and that education that is granted to one 

should be equally granted to all, that, in order to carry out in the interest of the student a good 

educational program, it is most essential that you have the co-operation and the understanding of the 

parents of the child as well. This whole Bill is designed to 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1721 

prevent the confrontation that has been occurring between local districts and the larger school unit 

board, not because of the lack of desire of the unit board to provide educational facilities, but at a times 

simply because the statute of this House gave them certain powers, they stood adamant behind those 

powers. They would claim regardless of the Opposition this is their right, this is their privilege, this is 

what is proposed to do. I am surprised that the Member from Melville should have first found himself in 

support of the Bill and then reversed himself and reversed his attitude that he took not too long ago 

about the need for negotiating with the local people before you move in to disrupt and disturb the local 

structures in the community. 

 

He reminds me of a hen in the snow that stands first on one foot and then stands on the other. It will be 

interesting to know what foot the Member for Melville stands on when the vote is called on this Bill. 

 

Hon. .C.F. MacDonald (Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I only want to make a few comments on what the 

Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) just said. 

 

First of all as a school teacher and a Member of the Legislature I am interested in this particular 

amendment and I want to compliment the Member from Cannington for the points that he outlined to the 

Assembly. First of all I think there is one very basic principle that he clearly outlined. It was the 

difference between the NDP philosophy and the Liberals‘ in relation to rural Saskatchewan and 

particularly to the school problem of rural Saskatchewan. This amendment, Mr. Speaker, does not in any 

way attempt to remove the authority of a school unit, but what it does do, is demand rational and 

reasonable judgments on their part in requesting a six-month period of notice. I think there is a real 

purpose behind this idea of a notice. First, centralization is not only an educational problem, but it has 

vast social implications particularly in the rural parts of the province. All of us recognize that the school 

in any community is without question a most important service and the most important facility in that 

community. By closing a school, very often we are echoing or sounding the death knell of that 

community. There have been many, many communities in Saskatchewan that have lost their schools 

without any question or without any notice or without any responsibility on the part of the larger school 

unit. It also, Mr. Speaker, recognizes that we are no longer in the day of the little red school house, that 

centralization is important on many occasions for the better educational opportunity of our children, but 

it also recognizes that these have implications on the family, the child and the community. For example, 

it is very interesting to note that today many children spend more time in the school process than you 

and I do in an average working day. We can have a seven or an eight-year old child get on at 7:30, 8:00 

o‘clock in the morning and get off at 5:30 in the afternoon, with the resulting loss of the family 

relationships and the family supervision. It is also interesting to note that some children today go further 

to school than their grandparents did on vacation. In other words we are now transporting children 30 

and 40 miles. Of course this has very serious implications on the entire attitude of parental supervision 

and care. It not only has an impact upon the education of the child, but certainly on its social and 

recreational activity. For example, if a boy or girl is transported 30 miles to school and particularly at the 

high school level the first thing we know that their recreational and social pattern is transferred to that 

town as well. They use 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1722 

their car in the evening and with the resulting loss of parental supervision. Also, I think that this 

particular action forces the school unit to recognize that educational efficiency is not the only judgment 

or criterion required. The Member for Melville also used the other argument about school teachers. Mr. 

Speaker, I think that this is without question the weakest argument that could possibly be elucidated in 

objection to this particular amendment. All of us recognize that the unit board has the responsibility first 

of all for hiring school teachers and second for assigning school teachers to individual communities. It is 

true that a local school board can certainly nominate someone to be appointed as a teacher in their 

community, but this is usually the exception rather than the rule. Also a school unit very often will 

assign teachers to those communities that they wish to consider the school most important and often 

leave the assigning of teachers to smaller communities or ones that they do not consider too important 

until the last. It is very easy to say that the reason we are closing the school is because there is no teacher 

in this community, and of course it is often the best excuse. It is also important to realize that if we ever 

do close a school in a small community it is extremely difficult to re-open that school. Very often it is 

much better to have a problem of no teacher for a month or two months and to try to organize temporary 

provision to provide teacher supervision until such a teacher can be hired rather than to close that school 

in that community because of a temporary problem. 

 

I think that the people of rural Saskatchewan want this amendment. They want to know that the school 

unit will act in accordance with reasonable judgment in the closing of all schools, that school unit will 

take into consideration not only educational efficiency, but the social impact upon the community and 

upon the region in which this decision is forthcoming. I think this amendment as the Member for 

Cannington outlined is one that should have been put into the Act in exactly the same time as The 

Larger School Unit Act was put into effect. I certainly support the amendment and I think that all 

Members of this House should do so also. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, there is not very much I have to say about this Bill, 

except I too find myself a little bit confused regarding the wording in some sections of it. 

 

The Bill, Mr. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), states that the unit board has at least six months before 

acting under this paragraph, ―To notify the district board by registered mail of its intention.‖ Six months 

before school opens in the fall comes to March 1, Mr. Speaker. It is very difficult to understand just how 

a board by March 1 would know what they are going to do come September 1. I agree with the Member 

for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) who in his predicament finds it impossible to have the unit board placed 

in the position where they have to give notice or they fail to give notice and can‘t get a teacher before 

school closes. Then they have to take other steps to close the school. I think that this bit of legislation 

here is something that is going to be very difficult for the unit boards to administer. I am sure that most 

unit boards in the province try to do their level best to try to solve this in a democratic manner, Mr. 

Speaker. I am certainly pleased to see that most of the people on the other side are determined that there 

should be democracy acting in this sphere. I would think that they have learned a lesson, Mr. Speaker. In 

the past they have 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1723 

run rough-shod over local people and I hope they have finally learned that they can‘t do it. If they think 

that this is going to solve the question, like the Member for Melville, I am a little bit concerned that this 

only adds to the confusion. Some schools are going to be closed come May, some schools will be closed 

in June, because they can‘t find a teacher for September. If you do this, the unit board will go to the 

local school board and say, ―We have to close, we can‘t find a teacher.‖ They are putting force on that 

local school board again. There could be different wording here, but I certainly agree with the principle 

that unit boards should consult with the local boards in a democratic manner. Like the Member for 

Melville, I don‘t see how they will always be able to carry this out. I certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

when the Minister rises to reply he will clarify the situation here as to how the unit board could always 

act in a democratic manner in this regard. 

 

Hon J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, much of what I had intended to say in 

reply to the Hon. Member from Melville (Mr. Kowachuk) has already been reiterated here this afternoon 

by my colleagues. 

 

He started out by saying that this Bill will emasculate the powers of the unit board. Later on he agreed 

that this perhaps was a good idea, this particular section of the Bill toward which he directed his early 

remarks. At the end when he sat down he said he would not support the Bill. Now I don‘t know, Mr. 

Speaker, whether or not this amendment will avoid the situations that are intended. The Member from 

Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis), who just took his seat asked that I try and clarify the intent of this 

particular amendment. This amendment states as follows, and all he has to do is read the amendment I 

believe. This is where he has some difficulty, I appreciate that. This is a section dealing with the general 

section of the powers of a unit board and they have the power to 8(a) — if we had this amendment — to 

close any school or part thereof or to discontinue one or more of the grades taught in a school. They 

have that power, but no action shall be taken pursuant to this paragraph unless the district and the unit 

board concerned have agreed thereto. Of course they may do this, by mutual consent in other words, at 

any point in time right up to September 2nd, or 3rd or 4th as the case may be. 

 

If the situation is such that there is no teacher or there is some other particular situation, and if the local 

people understand fully and accept that at any point in time, June, July or August, right up to the 

opening of school in the fall, if they agree to it, fine, then the school can be closed. Failing agreement, 

the section provides that six months‘ notice must be given. I think that my Hon. Friend, the Member for 

Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) pointed out that the time is with us now when we are not closing one-room 

schools in the province. That day has almost gone; practically all of the one-room rural schools have 

been closed. We are closing in many cases high schools or a section of a high school or a portion of a 

school or various grades to accommodate the division system. In many cases, there is not only a 

community disruption but a family disruption in implementing some of the division system in the rural 

areas of this province. If I have one fault to find with the planners of the division system for this 

province, it was the fact that they did not give consideration to how this particular system will affect the 

rural areas of Saskatchewan. The Member from Melville also made reference to the Sturgis Committee 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1724 

of Enquiry that was set up to investigate the closing or the difficulty encountered with the closing of the 

Endeavour school by the Sturgis unit board last fall. I don‘t wish to go into all the points that came up in 

that particular situation, Mr. Speaker, this amendment is brought in part as a result of that and many 

other situations that have developed. However, on that particular Committee or Enquiry there was a 

judge who has also been active in inquiries of this nature previously; there was a lawyer who has been a 

member of the school board for many years and quite familiar with school and school units and school 

board activities; there was a teacher from the city of Regina, who was not only a former principal of a 

rural school, he was a former reeve of a municipality and he was a former member of the school board 

and a unit board in the rural parts of this province. So I suggest that it is rather unfair of the Member of 

Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) to criticize the membership and the makeup of that Committee. 

 

He criticized, Mr. Speaker, the grant structure and the amount of money that was being provided by the 

grants, yet nowhere in this Bill is there any reference made to the total monies that may or may not be 

provided. All that this Bill does is to try and allocate more fairly the monies to be allocated for school 

units. On this principle he didn‘t have a word to say. I suggest, and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the new 

section dealing with the allocation of the grants in this Bill is a good one and a fair one and one that will 

serve to better distribute the funds. 

 

The grants today incidentally, Mr. Speaker, are over twice what they were four years ago when this 

Government was last in power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — We don‘t deny that local mill rates have risen since we have taken office. But for the 

Member opposite to try and intimate that they never rose under the NDP is certainly the height of fallacy 

in my opinion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all Members on both sides of the House to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

TRIBUTE TO MARTIN LUTHER KING 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, it has been suggested to me and I think appropriately, that perhaps this 

House should pay tribute at this time to Martin Luther King. That great American, as Hon. Members 

know, was assassinated a few days ago. He is being buried today. I think all citizens in this province are 

well aware of the great contribution he made to the Civil Rights Movement in the United States. I would 

invite you, Sir, to ask Members to rise for one minute silence in tribute to this great American. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It has been suggested that the House should rise and stand in silence for a period of 

one minute in tribute to Martin Luther King, who was unfortunately assassinated. Please rise! 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1725 

If the House would deem it appropriate, perhaps you might deem it appropriate that I should transmit 

your feelings and the action you have taken on this occasion to the widow of Dr. King. 

 

Agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister 

of Education) that Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Larger School Units Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, just a few minutes ago I heard a remark across the floor 

that I didn‘t have the courage of my convictions. I‘d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I have the courage to 

admit when I make a mistake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I have, and I want to say I did insert the wrong ending for the right Act. That‘s all I 

have to say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in rising to speak to this group, Mr. Speaker, on another educational Bill I want to emphatically 

point out that I am not an official critic for anybody but myself. The reason that I am here is because I 

was elected to criticize all Bills in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — And the reason that the people of Melville saw fit to elect me because of the fact 

that I have done a lot of firm and proper things in regard to school and school work. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Better get the right speeches from now on. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I intend to speak on these Bills, Mr. Speaker, and point out the things that I think 

are good. I also intend to point out the things that I think are bad. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I intend to, at times, commend the Government for any Bill or any part of a Bill 

that is good. I intend to deal with this Bill in the same matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this Bill — and I would first like to say this, Mr. Speaker, — that I 

spent most of the noon hour taking out these parts that are said to be ―sections‖ and I would like to be on 

the right side with you in this regard. I want to say this, that I wish to reiterate what I said the other day 

regarding the provision in this Act making it legal to include Indians off Indian reserves in a school 

district, 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1726 

and thus making it possible for the native Indians to legally become part of the school district and to 

participate freely in the said administration. This is very commendable. In other words they become full 

partners in an integrated school system. As I understand this they could become part of any school 

system, a school unit, a consolidated school district or even a city or town school district. Now as I also 

mentioned the other day, these native people have been asking for this and we on this side of the House, 

and I am sure the Members on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, as well, agree that such 

decisions should be made in conjunction with these people rather than forcing something on them, 

which in all likelihood is of such benefit to them, but many times unacceptable, because we tend to 

shove things on them without consultation. In spite of the remarks made about what was said in hospital 

closure, I will continue to say that all legislation of this type should be in consultation with all the 

people, including local boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — If I may be permitted to say, Mr. Speaker, that this is a proper step in the right 

direction. May I also say, Mr. Speaker, that some measurement of understanding, some measurement of 

listening instead of talking, of keeping an open line of communication with our native Indians is long 

overdue. It has been the unfortunate passion of all Liberal Governments to hold things tight, to retain the 

status quo, to keep saying to us, ―CCFers or New Democrats you are much too fast. You are in too much 

of a hurry. Slow down and do what is only absolutely necessary.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have reached a point in our history that is of such extreme urgency that now and 

immediately every avenue of action to solve and work out our many problems, including problems of 

minority rights, including Indians, problems of economic nature, the problems of the ever-increasing 

distance separating the have-nots from the rich, and so on, must be met head on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, nothing has colored and focused the attention of our problems in 

Canada and including education problems, as the tragic catastrophe in the United States. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — On a point of order. I think that it is against the rules to read a speech in this House. 

And if it isn‘t against the rules, I wonder if he has the right speech this time? 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — May I continue? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member may be well supplied with exceptionally well documented notes. If he is 

reading them he is giving an excellent demonstration of gymnastics. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we dare not wait. The future of Canada depends on what we do 

today. Right now! Not tomorrow! The inclusion of extending school privileges off the reserves is a step 

in the right direction. 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1727 

The old Bill stated that the Department of Education retains control of construction, furnishing and care 

of school buildings and the arrangements of school premises. The new Bill includes the location 

specifications, financing, furnishings and care of school buildings and the arrangement of school 

premises. Also, this Bill gives the Minister the power to appoint one or more persons to advise him in 

respect to the approval of plans, specifications, financing and care of school buildings, and the 

arrangement of school premises. As I read it, Mr. Speaker, both of these amendments mean again more 

erosion of local autonomy. In the first of this, three very important deletions are made, taking away the 

powers of the school boards, and these are locations, specifications and financing. The Department did 

have some control over the specifications and financing, but now this Act would give them full control. 

 

Now the most dangerous of the three limitations as you might say, outright exclusions of boards‘ rights, 

is location. I can see where the location of a school might just be located and even reallocated because of 

political pressure or even outright political interference. Along with the fact the local people and local 

boards have no say as to the school‘s location, the Minister may appoint more or one person to advise 

him with regard to this matter. This, in my opinion, is dangerous and definitely the means of cutting off 

local wishes altogether. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that these are dangerous precedents. Why this Government seeks to erode the 

freedoms of the individual, while at the same time professing to be champion of the individual, is a 

contradiction that is certainly difficult to understand. 

 

Some powers are being taken away from the unit boards and centralized in the power of the 

Government. Now these school boards have exercised, as I have said before, exceedingly careful 

judgment in most cases, with some exceptions of course. But the majority have always shown great care 

and diligence in the building programs and all other matters relating to the financial expenditures of the 

school boards. Yet, this Government is bent on taking more and more powers away from these school 

boards. With the removals of these powers, Mr. Speaker, that I have just mentioned – that is, power of 

deciding the locations, specifications and financing of schools, a government-appointed so-called 

adviser to advise the Government on these specifications and so on down the line, Mr. Speaker, the 

school boards are becoming caretaker boards. Yes, Mr. Speaker, very few areas of local autonomy will 

be left intact. The boards are left with a few details in running the schools. They are left with the right to 

bargain with the teachers for fringe benefits and yet, as I understand it, no machinery is provided in any 

amendment or Act, indicating on what basis this bargaining is to be done. This Government, Mr. 

Speaker, is bent on taking freedoms away from duly elected board members for one reason only. Now it 

may be to possibly save some money, and that would be quite commendable if that were possible, Mr. 

Speaker. These school boards were actually wasting the taxpayer‘s money as the Hon. Member for 

Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) would have us believe. But to get down to the fact, what this Government wants is 

control on all the important matters in the educational field. 

 

Now the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) has repeatedly made statements to the effect that the Government is 

going to stop writing blank cheques for school boards, knowing full well that the charge is absolutely 

untrue, that most school boards have shown 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1728 

remarkable business-like abilities in running their schools and that the blame for the financial difficulty 

these school boards are in today can be blamed squarely on the shoulders of the Premier and his 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I will repeat hat I said before, that a decade ago all the leading educators across the 

whole of the North American continent pointed out again and again that the cost of education will more 

than double in the next ten years. Now this Government should have taken heed of that, Mr. Speaker. 

The former CCF Government, and I will repeat again, recognized this and for a 10-year period from 

1954 to 1964, nearly, and I want to repeat — nearly all education increased costs were totally alleviated 

fortunately by increased grants. And even though the cost of education kept increasing, the cost to the 

local taxpayers either stayed the same or rose slightly. Ever since the Liberals took over in 1964, instead 

of heeding the warnings of these educators who had warned repeatedly of the rising cost to education 

and to be prepared for this, they did nothing. They chose to ignore changes in the tax formula for 

teachers‘ salary grants and other operational grants, till this year, Mr. Speaker, and in doing so, paved 

the way for this great increase in local tax levy. Not only did this increase the local burden, but it gave 

the Premier the excuse that school boards were not efficient and their powers had to be curbed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as with the Educational Bill presented this morning, this one in spite of its failings has 

many good features to it; the inclusion of Indian reserves in school districts; the inclusion of provision 

for the use of French as a teaching language in some schools; the creation of large comprehensive 

boards by means of agreements. These are all excellent. This Bill deserves our support. May I repeat, 

this Bill deserves our support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words with regard 

to this Bill. Under Section 14(2A), I think we are very pleased to support including the French language 

to be taught as designated by school boards and so forth. But I do think that we have to go a little 

further. I would like to see this province, this country, learn more languages. I believe that it is important 

in this day and age, because we are not only citizens of this province or this country, but we are now 

citizens of the world and getting to be more so every day. I think that, if we are going to have a grant 

structure, it should be made available to others who may want to teach their language, whether it be 

German, Serbian, Ukrainian, Romanian, or the Jewish language or any other language that they want to 

teach, if designated by a school board, whether it be for an hour a day more or less. 

 

Why do I say this in Saskatchewan? Well Saskatchewan is made up of people from all parts of the 

world. Over 50 per cent come from continental Europe. 40 per cent are Anglo-Saxon and 7 per cent 

French or of French origin. We are pleased to back this to see that French is taught because of its 

position throughout this land. But I am going to speak for other languages too, and any area that wants 

to teach more languages in 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1729 

their communities. 

 

We have a great heritage in this country because our pioneers did come from all parts of the world. That 

is why Canada is great, because we are made up of nations from all parts on this universe. I would 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we should amend this even further. I support the Bill wholeheartedly, but I do 

not think it goes far enough in this day and age. We in this House should approve further monies and 

designate further authority to boards with regard to the teaching of other languages. I think that it is 

good, when you travel throughout this province and you find many people who came from many parts of 

Europe and other parts of the world. There may be people who would want to learn the Chinese or 

Japanese language. They might want to do it in a location other than in the schools. I don‘t see anything 

wrong with providing monies for private groups, to support the teaching of more languages. I think it is 

good for us all. I wish that I could speak six languages; in this way we could communicate our thoughts 

and ideas to other parts of the world in a much better way. 

 

We all recognize the position of English and French, but I think that here in the West, particularly in this 

province, when you have 53 per cent of the people coming from continental Europe, they should be 

given some rights, too, through our taxation system. No one objects to this clause; in fact if we wanted 

to do more I am sure that we would all support it. Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about this section not 

doing more for our people in this province, in the areas which may want to teach the language of their 

mother tongue. 

 

That‘s why people came to Canada so that they had that freedom, the freedom to use their mother 

tongue if they so wished. They came here to worship freely under the Queen and this great country. I 

make a plea to amend this further because it can only do good rather than harm in teaching other 

languages. So, Mr. Speaker, while I am supporting this wholeheartedly on second reading, I would hope 

that we would take another look at it, to extend the basis upon which other languages may be taught. We 

have, as I have stated, practically every nation represented in the world, living in our city and in this 

province, people from every country living in your constituencies and in ours. We should encourage 

more languages to be taught and in so doing we will preserve many of the cultures of the ethnic groups 

that exist, which actually makes Canada all the greater. We are a shining example to the world because 

of the way we accept people and the way we treat them. When you look across the line, (and we just 

stood in silence a few moments ago in memory of one of its citizens) we in Canada think differently 

than many across the line toward people with regard to race, color or creed. I would like to see, Mr. 

Speaker, something more added to this Bill so that funds could be made available for groups that want to 

teach other languages which in essence can only help in making Canada even greater. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a very few comments at 

this time in closing this debate. I should like again to refer to a few of the remarks made by the Member 

for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk). I appreciate that by and large the school units of the province have done 

a very good job in all matters relating to school 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1730 

affairs and I certainly do not intend to indicate by this clause in this Bill, dealing with the location, 

specifications and other aspects concerning school buildings, to indicate dissatisfaction with the 

handling of the school program of the Province by the unit boards. 

 

I do think that there have been cases where local politics, if you will, and not party politics, has too often 

played a part in the location of certain schools within some of the units of this province. I can go back to 

my own hometown and look around and see about 15 or 16 classrooms that have been built in the last 10 

or 12 years, some of which could have been avoided, I think, with proper planning. The object of this 

amendment is merely to help and to assist the local unit boards in planning for the location of school 

construction from here on in. 

 

I think from talking to many unit board members, prior to bringing this amendment in, that they will 

welcome this amendment and they will welcome some assistance in deciding on locations for schools of 

division 3 and division 4 and this type of thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have nothing very much to add to the remarks of the Hon. Member from Regina south 

East (Mr. Baker). I agree in the main with some of his remarks. However, I would point out that we are 

taking a big step in this legislation in extending language rights to our French-speaking people and I 

would really hate to think of the Member for Regina South East or North East being fluent, as he 

expressed a wish to, in six or seven languages. Goodness knows it is tough enough listening to him 

fluent in one. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. J.D. McIsaac (Minister of 

Education) that Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The School Grants Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, first of all in rising to speak to Bill No. 54 – An Act to 

amend The School Grants Act, I want to make it clear that we on this side of the House believe that the 

$2.7 million in operating grants allotted to schools this year is woefully insufficient. Last year the school 

grant figure was about $3¾ million and even that was far too little. As a result there were large increases 

in local school mill rates. For example last year Regina City was up 5½ mills; Swift Current up 9; 

Yorkton public school up 13 mills; Yorkton separate school up 17½ mills, so last year mill rates 

increased anywhere from 2 to 3 mills on the low side to 17½ mills on the high side. This occurred with 

an increase in operating grants of $3.75 million. Now what do you suppose will happen this year, 1968, 

with the niggardly $2.7 million increase in operating grants? There is no need to guess what will happen. 

The trend is already established. Mill rates are rising once again this year. I can recall two school 

districts in the northwest of the province who are fortunate enough to be able to hold the same mill rate 

this year as last year of 37 mills, that one being the Lloydminster school unit, but the assessment was 

away up this year. So most of the school districts have already increased their mill rates anywhere from 

1.5 to 6 mills to date. 

 

Now it is amazing to see what has happened to that platform No. 6 on the Liberal platform in the last 

election where 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1731 

they promised that they would increase grants to schools and thus reduce the tax burden on . . . 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. This Bill, in my opinion, deals with 

the formula for The School Grants Act. It has nothing to do with the total amount of money put into 

grants for Saskatchewan and therefore, I consider the Member out of order. 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if talking about grants in general doesn‘t apply to grants 

specifically, I don‘t know what does. This I can‘t understand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — At any rate in examining this Bill specifically. I find two different principles 

involved here. The first increases the amount of grants paid to small school districts whose assessment is 

less than $200, 000. This is a good amendment, and we on this side of the House agree with this 

principle. The second principle which sets out more precisely the grants paid to boards for teachers 

based on teacher classifications and based on the number of students in the school district, in our opinion 

is a move in the wrong direction. 

 

Now in bringing in this Bill, the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) made very brief reference to the 

policy that grants will be tied to the teacher-pupil ratio in schools, and then he made glowing reference 

to the policy that schools with higher enrolments will get larger grants so that there will be a more 

equitable distribution of grant money. Now this idea sounds good when you examine it superficially, but 

let me point out some of its dangers. First of all, this policy of tying grants to the teacher-student ratio 

does not help to improve the quality of education. This is the big point. It does not induce school boards 

to reduce or hold steady the number of pupils one teacher teaches in a school year, or in his classroom 

for that matter. Instead this will force school boards to enlarge their enrolments so they can receive 

larger sums of money. Now this is a negative and dangerous policy to pursue. So, under this grant 

structure school boards will not increase staff but instead will increase enrolments, thus increasing the 

workload of teachers. And every extra student in the classroom means extra individual attention and 

extra exam papers and essays to mark for the teacher. This increased workload will increase tension 

between teachers and students and between teachers and trustees who are putting the pressure on them to 

work harder and mark more papers. Now what will this penny-pinching policy do to our division 3 and 4 

schools, better known as junior and senior high schools across the province, and there are several. Now 

these are the ones that are our major concern. 

 

In a division 3 or 4 school that is highly centralized and departmentalized, one teacher could teach as 

many as about 240 different students in a year. Now that‘s assuming that he teaches eight classes at an 

average of 30 students per class. Now, if a teacher were to use all of his available teaching time during 

the day and one and one-half hours after school for individual help to these 240 students, he would be 

able to give each students about six hours of individual instruction in the total school year. 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1732 

Let‘s look at it in another way, suppose the teacher could spend only one and one-half hours after school 

for individual help, four out of five days because of some extra-curricular activity like drama, or school 

sports or music, which keeps them busy that one day after school, these 240 students would receive 40 

minutes each of individual help in a school year. Now the point I am trying to make is increasing 

enrolments will, first of all, decrease the quality of education and secondly, it will increase tension 

between school boards and teachers because of the increased workload. If these are the aims of this 

Government in regard to our educational system, then this Government will certainly achieve those aims 

by introducing this amendment to The School Grants Act. 

 

There is yet another bad effect of this legislation. School boards, being shrewd as they are handling the 

taxpayer‘s money, and I am not chastising them for being shrewd, may choose another course of action 

to get the increased grants which can be obtained by enlarging enrolments. They may choose to reduce 

the number of vocational and optional subjects offered to students, such as Home Economics, 

woodwork, metal work, drafting, typing, welding, motor mechanics, music, drama and what have you. 

Now these are the subjects that are the culprits as far as teacher-pupil ratio goes. Yet these are the 

subjects that brighten up the school day for many, many students across the province, especially the 

student who is not extremely academically inclined. These optional vocational subjects, because of their 

complexity and because of the nature of the machines used, and because of the large space required to 

teach them, limit the size of classes to around 8 to 14 students per class. Now if, for example, a junior or 

senior high school has six vocational teachers, and 12 academic teachers, the academic teachers must 

take up the slack to increase that low student-teacher ratio in the vocational subjects. School boards may 

then decide to reduce the number of subjects sharply, much to the dismay of the young, vibrant student 

who demands subjects of varying depth, and varying interest in order to keep him in school these days. 

This would bring us back to the good old days. They weren‘t good, they were just old, and the old 

philosophy of education when every student took the basic eight subjects and no consideration was 

given to individual differences of students. Ask any teacher in high school today and he will tell you 

how easy and pleasant it is to teach when students are interested in school because there is a wide range 

of courses offered at school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is true that, when one applies the proposed grant formula to school districts across the 

province, it appears that most districts will be getting an increase compared to last year‘s payments. The 

school districts with large numbers of students and fewer teachers benefit most. But I ask: should this be 

the criteria for school grants? Isn‘t quality of education the important point? Isn‘t variety of subjects 

desirable to meet student differences in intelligence and in interests the important point? Isn‘t this the 

wisest policy for the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) to follow in this modern day of ours? Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill, an Act to Amend The School Grants Act is so glaringly insufficient, so grossly 

misguided in principle, that we on the Opposition side are very much concerned with it and urge the 

Minister to reconsider the direction he is giving to education in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1733 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I do not think I will take the time of the 

House and the Members on either side to try and dispel most of the mythical fears expressed by my Hon. 

Friend, the Member from Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica). I am sure if he took a few moments to discuss with 

his own Leader and a few other Members on the Opposite side, who I am sure are much more 

knowledgeable about the school grants formula than he is, that he would not have made the remarks that 

he did here this afternoon. First of all his remarks were largely out of order because he was dealing with 

the amount in the school grants which do not come under this Bill at all. I say again that this Bill, in my 

opinion, and the opinion of my officials, and the opinions of trustees and others, will more fairly allocate 

the grant funds to be provided, with respect to the teachers I will come to this point, again made by my 

Hon. Friend opposite, with respect to vocational and technical students. If he checks on the amount 

allowable per student, he will find it is $75 with respect to each elementary student, grades one to eight; 

$125 with respect to each academic high school student; and $150 with respect to each vocational pupil; 

and $150 with respect to each pupil in average daily attendance in a special class, thereby giving 

recognition to the very things and the very points that he raised here in his remarks this afternoon. 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I would urge all thinking Members of the Opposition to join with us in support 

of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister 

of Municipal Affairs) that Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The City Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that in general I agree with the 

principle of this Bill as I said yesterday. I do believe, however, that there is some room for allowing city 

aldermen a higher maximum than what is allowed at the present time in the present Act. In this Act that 

is before us I don‘t see any mention made of this. The present maximum of $2, 400 a year for city 

aldermen was brought into effect in the earlier part of the time when I was Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. There has been quite a bit of time elapsed since then and I think it would be quite appropriate to 

have this reassessed at this time. I was somewhat disappointed yesterday when the Minister (Mr. Estey) 

did not make mention of it when he was making remarks on second reading. I understand, however, that 

there is a strong possibility that the Government may bring in something along this line by amendments 

in Committee. I would like to commend this to the Minister and I would commend him in advance if he 

does take this action. 

 

I will be supporting this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I have nothing to add to what I 

said when introducing this Bill for second reading. We are giving consideration to the point which was 

brought up by the Hon. Member from Swift Current. 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1734 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister 

of Municipal Affairs) that Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Town Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, I have the same comments to make in regard to this Bill. I am not in 

opposition to the principle of the Bill at all, I would commend the Minister that he do give consideration 

to the possibility of raising the maximum that may be allowed for town aldermen the same as has been 

proposed in regard to the city. I will be very pleased indeed if he is able to do this. 

 

I will support the Bill. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, my comments on the former Bill have application to this Bill and I now 

move that Bill No. 45 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend The 

Securities Act, 1967. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal here is to amend The Securities Act, 1967 by making minor 

changes to six sections of the Act. These amendments will not change the intent of the Act but are being 

effected for the sake of greater clarity and to facilitate the administration of the Act. There will be 

amendment to Section 117, subsection 2, which will provide that it will not be necessary for the 

Securities Commission to publish a monthly bulletin of reports on insider trading, which will save 

considerably in the printing costs of such a publication. The information required to be published under 

the present Act is available to the public during normal business hours at the office of the Commission 

and will also be published in the monthly Ontario bulletin by arrangement with the Ontario Commission. 

We have made that arrangement so that this information will be in the monthly Ontario bulletin. Ontario 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, is at the present time the only province undertaking the publishing of a 

monthly bulletin. Those are the only changes in the Act, and with that short explanation I would move 

second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 49 — An Act 

Respecting Elections in Urban Municipalities. 
 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill consolidates all of the provisions formerly found in the Urban Acts 

into one Act. The consolidation commenced, I understand, about two years ago. Many meetings have 

been held with a committee of SUMA; the Act has been approved by that committee. Meetings have 

been held with the clerks concerning the Act and the Act we now feel is 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1735 

in shape to come before the House. There are many changes in this Act, some of little consequence, but 

in the main they took The City Act and made the necessary adaptations so that it could apply to the 

voting procedures in the towns and the villages. A few of the changes in this Act are that a spouse of a 

burgess who resides in a municipality is now a burgess. There are several other changes simply in 

procedure. The definition of elector has been changed to permit anyone who has resided in a 

municipality for five months immediately prior to the voting date to vote, whereas previously a person, 

in order to vote in the fall elections, had to reside in the municipality for five months prior to the first 

day of June. The nomination meeting has been advanced to the third Monday in October which is one 

week earlier than under the former Act. The other change in this Act, which is rather important, is that 

the larger urban centres favored another method of enumerating voters. The Act still contained the old 

system of enumeration, but it also sets out an alternative to that system, namely that in order to prepare a 

voters‘ list for an election the urban municipality prepares a list of the burgesses but does not enumerate 

for a list of electors. An elector approaches the polling booth and registers while in the polling booth as a 

voter. Now whether that system will be used by the larger urban centres or not remains to be seen, but 

they were especially concerned and asked that at least an alternative procedure be put in our Act. It is 

similar to a new procedure being adopted, I understand, in the Province of Alberta. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would again like to commend the Minister for 

bringing down this Bill at this time. I will have to argue with him a little about action starting on this Bill 

two years ago. I think the preliminary discussions on it started on it while I was still Minister of the 

Department. I am glad to see that they have finally been able to come through with something along this 

line. 

 

The only comment that I would care to make at this time, Mr. Speaker, would be in regard to the 

possibility that they could have considered some other way of lining up the voters list, rather than in 

alphabetical order. I think that in some cities there is a strong desire that they might have it in order of 

residents in the block and I think consideration should have been given to allowing the cities if they 

wished to have it drawn up that way. But these matters can be better taken up I believe in Committee. I 

will be prepared to support this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Estey moved second reading of Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Department of Municipal 

Affairs Act. 
 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with amendment to The Department of Municipal Affairs Act 

and really is an attempt by the Department to set out a system for reassessments or picking up 

assessments on a basis whereby we hope to bring some system into the method of assessing. For 

instance it calls for reassessments every 12 years in villages and RMs, eight years in cities and towns, or 

at such other intervals and times as the Minister may order direct. We have been able recently to 

increase our staff of assessors and it may be that we can follow the procedure. If we can‘t follow it, of 

course there is 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1736 

provision that the Minister may vary the procedure, but it is simply an attempt to set out some system. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, again I am prepared to go along with this Bill. I will say that up to this time 

and when I was Minister of the Department in earlier years, the policy was that the assessment of 

municipalities should be done as soon as possible after we had been requested to do so by the 

municipality. Now I certainly approve of promoting more uniform and more regular assessment. I will 

be asking some questions in Committee as to how this can be done without encroaching upon the 

autonomy of the municipality. I will support the Bill. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, when the Minister closes the debate I wonder if 

he would explain to the Committee the reason for the exception of centres of population of 15, 000. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t want to speak on this Bill but I do want 

to put another question to the Minister. I am familiar with the need for reassessments, I think in every 

city of any size this has been a particular problem in recent year. I believe it is quite correct that there 

should be the sort of intervals that are indicated in the Bill. But one of the problems is, Mr. Speaker, and 

Mr. Minister, the kind of financing that is necessary for municipalities to undertake these re-evaluations. 

There has been some assistance provided from time to time in recent years to at least some of the 

municipalities that have had reassessments with the co-operation of the appropriate Government 

Department. I am wondering here whether anything of this kind is contemplated beyond what has been 

done, or if any policy at all will in fact apply, because I think the Minister will agree that the matter of a 

reassessment in almost any one of the larger urban areas today is a pretty formidable financial outlay. I 

am not familiar at the moment with just precisely what assistance the Department provides but it would 

be useful if the Minister could tell us something about it this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, first of all dealing with the question as to why the figure 15, 000 population 

is placed in this Act. That already appears in The Rural Municipality Act as the limit beyond which the 

Department is not responsible for the assessments. They do their own assessments and apparently want 

to keep their own assessing departments. I have never heard any complaints since I have been Minister. 

 

In regard to the other question concerning the assistance which we give to the larger urban centres in the 

way of assistance in assessing, we do not contemplate any change in the system. Off-hand I do not think 

there is any assistance but those kinds of things are under consideration. I will be able to give more 

definite information on that point in Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Estey moved second reading of Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Housing and Urban 

Renewal Act. 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1737 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this is an amendment which deals with lots which we have assembled or are 

assembling under the Land Assembly Program. It is now coming to our attention, for example, in the 

city of Swift Current, in the town of Allan and will come in other centres, where lots are not fully 

serviced that people wish to purchase these lots and build a house. Under the present terms of our 

Housing and Urban Renewal Act and our contracts with the Federal Government under CMHC, these 

lots are not for sale until they are fully serviced. The purpose of these amendments is to create a 

situation where we sell them for instance when they are surveyed., the plans registered, and the sewer 

and water is installed. We can by this amendment sell them for a portion of the purchase price and carry 

the balance of the purchase price as an annual payment through the payment of their taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 72 — An Act respecting 

Theatres and Cinematographs. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I would like to tell this House, Mr. Speaker, in rising to propose this motion, that it is a 

consolidation of The Theatres Act. There are some changes which in essence do not change the whole 

principles of the Bill. For example, instead of recognizing the censors as censors, they will be 

recognized as a Board, because the Board as such classifies the films in the various categories. Another 

change to the Bill is giving authority to place into the regulations the authority for placing the fees on 

the distributors because they pay the full cost of the classification of the films by the Board. The other 

thing that was in the Bill and which at the time will be withdrawn is the reference to Sunday movies. I 

would like to tell the House that in the case of Sunday movies this section which is now in this Bill will 

be in The Lord‘s Day Act and will be withdrawn when the Bill goes into Committee. Other than that, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the fact the Bill itself is a consolidation more than anything else can be best dealt 

with in Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 78 — An Act respecting 

Plumbing Contractors. 
 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, this is a new Bill and I think that Hon. Members should have a bit of 

background information on this Bill and the reasons for it. Those of you who were here in 1966 will 

recall that at that time a petition was made to the Legislature for a private Bill. That Bill was drafted 

along the lines of a professional association act. That Bill was rejected by the Clerk of the Assembly on 

the advice of the Legislative Counsel for the reason that professional association acts are public bills and 

therefore require sponsorship by a Minister of the Crown on behalf of the Government or by a private 

Member supporting the Government. Discussions were held after that by myself and members of my 

Department with the solicitor for the sponsoring association which is the Plumbing Association of the 

Province, at which time we indicated to them that we felt the proposed 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1738 

Bill was unacceptable as a public bill, namely for the reason that the Bill provided at that time, the 

private Bill, provided for the establishment of an association which would have had an unfettered power 

to decide without a right of appeal those to whom licences of plumbing contractors would be issued. In 

other words they would have closed shops as far as plumbing business was concerned. Now the Act that 

was submitted at that time didn‘t make any provision for examinations nor did it set any standards to 

guide the association in determining those to whom licences would be issued. We felt that the Bill was 

not therefore in conformity with existing professional acts and we suggested to the Association that the 

needs of the Association to regulate the plumbing contractor trade would perhaps best be met by 

licensing-type acts, such as The Real Estate Licensing Act; The Motor Dealers‘ Licensing Act; and The 

Direct Sellers‘ Act. So that was the course taken, and what we find here before us today is a licensing-

type act. I‘ll go into details in a moment or two. 

 

Now as for the purpose of the Act, it‘s been suggested by the Association to the Government that there 

is a need to regulate the plumbing contractors‘ business to prevent the sale and installation of equipment 

by persons who may be unqualified for the installation and do not establish any facilities to provide 

service after installation. We are told by the Association that many people in this business come into the 

province for a crash program of installation in areas where a new water sewage system has been 

installed, make a substantial profit through installations of defective or substandard equipment and then 

refuse to replace defective equipment or to give any service to the customer. I have here, Mr. Speaker, a 

very extensive list of failures in this type of business in this province over the last 10 years. What has 

happened in many cases, particularly in large projects — we‘ll take a housing project of 50 houses and 

the general contractor, for example, lets the plumbing subcontract out to the lowest tender — is that 

sometimes these people come into the province without sufficient financial responsibility and they end 

up going broke and not fulfilling their contract. The result is that many homeowners suffer thereof. I 

have a list here of I think about five or six typewritten pages of companies that have defaulted in this 

regard. So the purpose of this Act is to protect the buying public, the home-owning public, or the home-

building public in our province against this type of situation. 

 

I won‘t go into a great deal of detail but I would like to draw Hon. Members‘ attention to some of the 

features of the Bill. Section 3, the purpose of this section is to provide certain exceptions to the 

application of the Act. Most of them are self-explanatory and are contained in Section 3. Clause (b) 

renders the licensing requirement applicable only to the principal who has undertaken the installation 

and not to a person acting on his behalf in connection with the installation. In other words, under this 

Act there is to be no licensing of the salesmen or agents. Clause (b) of Section 3 renders the licensing 

requirement inapplicable to an employee whose duties are to supply a plumbing service to his employer. 

An example of that would be a person employed by the Regina school board to supply a plumbing 

service in the schools in Regina. This is in the course of his employment and he‘s not required under the 

Act to be licensed. 

 

Now subsection (2), clause (a) of the Act is rendered inapplicable to the sale of plumbing equipment 

unless the sale 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1739 

includes a plumbing service. Clause (b), we thought it desirable to make specific mention of the fact that 

the Act does not apply to the Crown. This is because there have been indications that, as a matter of 

Prairie Economic Council policy, bids may be accepted from persons carrying on business outside 

Saskatchewan. Clause (c) of the Act is rendered inapplicable to a person supplying a plumbing service 

to a municipal corporation unless that corporation passes a bylaw making the Act apply. Clause (d) of 

the Act is rendered inapplicable to a person supplying plumbing services to himself. Such a person is 

however subject to the applicable plumbing regulations for the area in which he resides. Clause (e), this 

clause has been included to make it clear that the Act does not apply to a municipal corporation or 

public utility company in connection with the installation of a customer service. Clause (f), and clause 

(f) is important, I suggest, because clause (f) has the effect of making the Act apply only to persons 

carrying on business within a city or larger town. You will notice what it says — ―the total value of 

contracts entered into by him to provide plumbing services for any one person does not exceed $1, 000 

in any calendar year.‖ The reason this has been inserted in the Act is that we all know that in some of 

our smaller centres, our towns, and villages, there are many people, I suppose you might say under the 

category of handyman, who do a very good job and perform a very useful service. We felt it would be 

unduly onerous if we imposed upon them the obligation in these smaller jobs under $1, 000 of being 

subjected to the licensing and bonding provisions of this Act. 

 

Then you will notice Section 4, which provides that the Act applies in a city, town or village in which 

there is installed or under construction a system for the collection of liquid wastes including ground 

surfaces or storm water. I would of course remind you that Section 4, the effect of Section 4 is reduced 

to some extent by clause (f) of Section 3. 

 

Now Sections 5 to 11, these provisions are the same as those contained in The Motor Dealers‘ Act, 

1966, with the exception that no salesman is to be licensed and that the licence under this Act expires on 

the 31st day of December whereas under The Motor Dealers‘ Act it is the 30th of June. 

 

I draw your attention to Section 10 which requires the maintenance in Saskatchewan of a place of 

business. Sections 12 to 21 are similar to sections 15 to 24 of The Motor Dealer‘s Act. Section 22, 

subsection (1) of this section authorizes the Lieutenant Governor in Council to prescribe a form of 

contract which when prescribed shall be used. Sections 23 and 24 are similar to Sections 28 and 29 of 

The Motor Dealers‘ Act. Section 25 is similar to Section 31 of The Motor Dealers‘ Act. Section 26 is 

also taken from The Motor Dealers‘ Act as are Sections 27, 28 and 29. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that is all I care to say at this time in moving second reading. We can go into the 

details in Committee. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, essentially this is a Bill that Members on 

this side of the House, I‘m sure, will support in principle in second reading. It‘s a Bill that I think the 

Hon. Attorney General and the Government have to be commended on. It‘s a step, as the Attorney 

General has talked about, toward consumer protection. 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1740 

In second reading, however, I should like to bring to the attention of the House and to the Hon. Attorney 

General what seems to be a very strange pattern in the introduction of this Bill and other such similar 

Bills by the Attorney General and the Government. That is, when one peruses very carefully the 

provisions of this particular statute, proposed statute, you‘ll see there, Mr. Speaker, very stringent 

controls and powers given to the Registrar. Now this is the person who has been designated by the 

proposed Bill to have the power of granting a licence and I warrant that there is a need for one individual 

person or office to do so. In other words what the Government has done by this Bill and various other 

Bills that the Attorney General has alluded to in this debate is to place very strong control in the hands 

of government. And I really don‘t mean to comment on that particular aspect of it, but it makes me 

wonder sometimes why the Government would not go one step further, Mr. Speaker, and in a Bill such 

as this, afford an amendment or afford such legislation that would allow the Registrar to obtain a list of 

the prices or quotations of the goods and services that are going to be provided by the particular industry 

that is affected. In other words, if you will, it seems to me the Act goes far enough, but if we have one 

more extra step, you‘ll have what Members on this side of the House have been advocating for many 

areas, some form of consumer review in this area. Now we noticed this in The Agricultural Machinery 

Act. I believe it was mentioned in the form of debate in this Chamber and in other legislation as well. 

What I want to say in conclusion is this. The statute is a good statute and it does provide consumer 

protection. But we are wondering if now might not be the opportune time for the Government to 

consider some consolidation of the various powers put in the hands of the Registrar and the various 

industries now affected, so that we may move towards some sort of prices review board or some sort of 

consumer agency of government as Members on this side of the House have been advocating and as of 

course the Batten Commission Report talks about. 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment 

here, particularly on the view that has been expressed by the Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. 

Romanow). I think what he mentions of bringing in the matter of prices and so on, is not the intention of 

the Bill. I think it should be quite clear to all of us here that the Bill is one that requires that any 

plumbing contracting that is done in this province should be done by qualified people and people who 

are financially responsible. So I think what has been suggested by the Member from Riversdale is 

certainly going well beyond the intent of this Bill here. We‘ve had the experiences here in this province, 

particularly, of contractors coming in from outside the province who have in many cases done improper 

work. They have not put in equipment that meets the specification and they are suddenly gone and out of 

the province. There‘s no way to get at them. They have no place of business, there‘s no responsibility 

whatever for the maintenance. The Bill is more to cope with this kind of situation. It doesn‘t pretend to 

go as far as what the Member from Saskatoon Riversdale asked that it should. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make one or two comments as a result of the remarks of the 

Member for Riversdale. He said that this Bill gives the Registrar a great deal of power. In a certain 

narrow field, this is true. But all of these Acts that we‘ve brought in the last three or four years in the 

field 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1741 

of consumer protection have one rationale running through them, and this Bill has it as well. It‘s true 

that the Registrar has considerable power to regulate this industry, but in all cases every decision of the 

Registrar is subject to an appeal to the courts, so this is protection against an over-powerful government 

official. I don‘t want to comment to any great length, but I could take you back to some of the Bills 

which were passed when your associates were sitting to Mr. Speaker‘s right. There were some Bills 

there that used to disturb me because there wasn‘t a complete and unfettered right of appeal to the 

courts. I think it‘s fine to place power in the hands of an official provided that power is subject to 

judicial review. That‘s what I‘ve been insisting on in all of these Bills. You‘ll find it here in this Bill in 

Section 18, that there is an appeal from the Registrar‘s decision. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I‘m sorry to interrupt the Hon. Attorney General on a point of 

privilege. Just so that we don‘t misinterpret each other, Mr. Attorney General, I really was not 

condemning the fact that there was power in the Registrar. I was merely pointing out that with the power 

why wouldn‘t the Government go one step further and sort of make an initial attempt to review prices. I 

just want to make my remarks clear. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I read you loud and clear, but I was simply pointing out to Hon. Members — I knew you 

were aware of the provisions — but I wanted all Hon. Members to be aware of the provision that there is 

an appeal from the Registrar‘s decision to the courts in a normal way. Now your other point was, as I 

understand it, and I think the Member for Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) has dealt 

with it, but I just want to associate myself with what he said: that this is not a Bill having to do with 

price control. This is a private enterprise Government and we believe that there should be free and 

unfettered competition in these fields. All we are ensuring in this Bill is that there‘s financial 

responsibility. This is a financial responsibility Bill. That‘s what it is. That‘s what it is designed to do, 

and that‘s what it will do. But it is not a prices‘ control Bill. I can‘t go that far with you. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer) moved second reading of Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend 

The Forest Act. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Forest Act are concerned with changing 

the description of certain Provincial forest boundaries. The forest boundary descriptions are listed in the 

schedule to the Act. The description changes are three in number. In two instances the changes provide 

for the withdrawal of lands from the Provincial forests, while the third change provides for the addition 

of lands to the Provincial forests. The proposed changes in the Provincial forest boundaries have 

received the approval of the co-ordinating committee on land use, which is an inter-departmental 

committee comprised of representatives from the Department of Agriculture and the Department of 

Natural Resources. The recommendations of this committee were made after reviewing and considering 

reports of field examinations which were conducted by both the Department of Agriculture and the 

Department of Natural Resources. I don‘t 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1742 

think it is necessary, Mr. Speaker, to go into details of the changes. As I pointed out there are three in 

number and we can discuss these in Committee. I have one map which I have given to the Hon. Member 

from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) and when we go into Committee on this Bill, if any other Members 

wish, I‘ll try and supply some more maps for them if they feel it is necessary. These changes are made 

every year and I don‘t think they are anything very controversial. With that brief explanation, I would 

move second reading of this Act. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Minister would care to comment 

further on the purpose. First of all, you have added one section to the forest in the more southerly area 

and then one small block further northwest of there and a larger block in the Bjorkdale area. Now what 

is the purpose of this? What may this land be used for? Is this for agricultural purposes or some other 

purpose? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I‘ll answer the question without closing debate if I may. Now specifically the areas that 

are being added, 12.5 square miles on the south boundary of the Porcupine Provincial Forest west of 

Usherville is being added. Now this piece of land which is considered unsuitable for agriculture has a 

large volume of hardwood. We reckon some 60, 000 cords growing on good sites with good forest 

potential. This area which is 12.5 square miles has supported timber operations in the past and we think 

can do so again in the future. It is felt the best land use for this block is one of management for forestry 

purposes within the Porcupine Provincial Forest area. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — That is the area straight east of Bjorkdale. I think it‘s two sections further northeast. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The first two square miles you just mentioned have been cut over and we feel the 

merchantable timber has been pretty well cut out of there. Our soils experts tell us that they don‘t think it 

will really produce enough timber to bother with. So we are going to put it into agriculture as it will 

probably be good for grazing leases and this sort of thing. 

 

And the other one, the deletion of forest lands in Townships 43, this block of land is approximately 12.5 

square miles. An extent has been burned over and now contains little merchantable timber. Forest 

regeneration is patchy and light and the incidence of grass sloughs is high. The area is considered best 

used for agriculture. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — If I may, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this is recommended by your people and in 

this area, the danger in removing lands from public domain is not nearly as high in the north and doesn‘t 

mean as much as some of the land further south. Now I think the Minister is aware that I‘m speaking of 

the more southerly area. I would like to see more of these lands revert to the Crown in some places, 

more of these appear in the southern areas of the province because we are losing game habitat at a 

tremendous rate. I‘m sure that, if the benefits of ARDA were used, we may be able to combine grazing 

game habitats and prevent this denuding of woods, especially for instance in the south as there‘s an area 

there where we are losing game habitats 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1743 

so fast that it is creating a great deal of worry among naturalists and certainly among sportsmen. I‘ve 

wondered if when we are taking Crown land in the north and turning it into agriculture, in turn we might 

not look into some of these areas that are natural habitat and return them to the public domain and keep 

control in the public domain rather than allow them to be used entirely for grain production. There‘s a 

denuding area. You lose a lot of natural snow cover in the winter time. They are drying out the area. 

Certainly I don‘t think we want to see it continue. I‘m sure no Members on the other side of the House 

want to see the whole thing become a desert where your upland game and your ducks and so on as well 

as your deer and other animals do not have any shelter, any coverage, any natural habitat. I hope the 

Minister who unfortunately is not here, but the Minister who is speaking for the Minister of Natural 

Resources will take (I‘m going to say more about this in the Estimates) this matter of public domain 

under consideration. Even though it can be used as a multi-purpose area, it should, I think, be kept in the 

area of public control through the Crown so that it isn‘t just denuded and used for one purpose which is 

completely detrimental to game habitat and to the further protection of our future game production. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I just want to say that I don‘t disagree with the Hon. Member for The Battlefords and I 

think a good place to bring it up would be in Estimates. As he is aware having been a Minister of 

Natural Resources, there‘s a constant battle between Agriculture and the sportsmen, the naturalists and 

the foresters, the timber industry against Agriculture. We must be careful about taking lands out of the 

forest area and putting them into agriculture and sometimes turn what is quite good potential forest lands 

into what turns out to be rather poor agricultural land. I think this is a good point to bring up, and it is 

something we should continue to watch closer than we have in the past. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Steuart moved second reading of Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The Game Act. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Game Act may be summarized as 

follows: under the general penalty, Section 82 it is proposed to raise the minimum penalty of $10, which 

has been in effect for well over a decade, to $25. In the present Act the forfeiture of firearms and other 

equipment other than a vehicle or a boat is mandatory for violations in several sections. In the proposed 

amendments such forfeiture would apply only to Section 20, that is hunting with a light, night hunting 

with a light. To compensate for this reduction in penalty, that is the forfeiture of firearms, it is proposed 

to raise the minimum fine for a big game violation from $25 to $50. This will also create more 

uniformity in equality in the penalties imposed under the Act. In the case where a big game animal has 

actually been taken, wounded or killed, minimum fines of $100 and $400 respectfully are proposed. This 

amendment replaces the present Section 78 which places various fines on different species. A similar 

amendment to Section 79 makes provision whereby an additional fine may be imposed of not less than 

$5 or more than $25 for each game bird actually taken wounded or killed. Hunting on posted land is 

becoming an increasing problem to the Department and landowners alike. In 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1744 

compliance with requests from many farmers and ranchers, it is proposed to increase the minimum 

penalty for this type of trespass from $25 to $50. 

 

Difficulty has been encountered in obtaining public and judiciary acceptance of a compulsory jail 

sentence in regard to the dangerous practice of hunting with a light. In amending Section 20 we propose 

to give the court the option of assessing the 7-day jail sentence on the first offence. For subsequent 

offences for hunting with a light the minimum fine has been raised from $200 to $300 and the minimum 

mandatory jail sentence has been reduced from 30 to 7 days. In effect here we found, I‘m told by the 

people in the Department, that over the years they found that they just will not hand out these mandatory 

jail sentences on the first offence, so we‘ve increased the fine and we have said on the second offence a 

mandatory jail sentence will be at least 7 days. 

 

Amendments to other sections of the Act are also proposed to update and facilitate enforcement 

procedures. As an example, in Section 81, we have made provisions whereby the penalties for aiding 

and abetting will be the same as those under which the violation took place. In Section 85, the 

amendment is proposed which will make it permissible for the RCMP to submit written evidence 

pertaining to ballistics and firearms rather than requiring them to appear in court. I am told that this is 

allowed in other types of evidence that they give. They can give it in writing but for some reason over 

the years it‘s been maintained that for this type of expert evidence they have to appear in court. This 

drags out the cases and makes it very difficult to proceed with the cases sometimes. So we‘re suggesting 

this change in the Act. 

 

Other sections which have been amended deal with the definition of a seal which updates legislation in 

accordance with the type of licence and tag now used. Restrictions will also be placed on the use of 

tracer shot shells which we feel are a fire hazard. In Section 90 provisions have also been made whereby 

anyone killing a big game animal by accident has only to notify the local RCM Police or wildlife officer. 

The Act now stipulates that the animal be dressed, taken away and kept in the good state of preservation 

and then reported to a wildlife officer or RCM Police. Very often when an animal was killed, say with a 

car by accident, the individual just wasn‘t in a position to dress and look after the animal properly. So 

they didn‘t and just broke the law and had no choice but to break the law. So we changed this more in 

keeping with the way conditions actually exist. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, if I may ask, there are two or three points I want to raise, I may ask these 

questions so that there isn‘t any confusion about who‘s closing the debate. 

 

I would like to say that I believe that some of these changes are in line with what is happening in 

modern times. I believe that if $25 was a hurting fine, 10 – 15 years ago, certainly a $50 fine is in line 

with that now. Certainly it is a good thing to tighten up wherever possible on night hunters. I don‘t think 

that anyone will complain except the night hunters about any strict enforcement there. This is a 

dangerous practice, because anyone firing a gun at night is bad enough. He is out taking a pretty low 

advantage of game by blinding him with the light, but most of the time he doesn‘t know in what 

direction 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1745 

he is shooting, or what may be outside of his circle of vision. It is bad enough with some of these 

fellows shooting in the day time without letting them pound away at night. I think too that it hasn‘t 

diminished much, I believe the practice of night hunting is becoming even a little more prevalent. I don‘t 

know what reports the Minister has to indicate the incidence of night hunting. It‘s a difficult thing to 

catch them at it, and I believe that anything the Department can do to apprehend them would be 

advantageous. 

 

Flyers have told me especially flyers of the bush area that, if they were given the job to fly at night over 

these areas — and some of them are skilful enough to do this — that they would spot these and radio to 

the ground to the patrol to indicate what road these people were on, especially in wooded areas, and that 

you possibly might be able to trap them and bottle them up in an area much easier if you had a scouting 

plane up in the air at night. I know of two pilots who would be prepared to do this night flying for the 

Department, if they wanted to hit the trouble spots in order to nail offenders real good. I would submit 

that idea for the Department‘s consideration. 

 

In the matter of guns, I think I understand you did say that it would no longer be mandatory here for 

field officers to seize guns if someone was caught violating the Act in any way at all. It has been the 

practice to seize a gun for any offence. Certainly this has been difficult in more recent years when guns 

have become more expensive. One man might lose an old blunderbuss after knocking down, as the 

Member for Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) was telling me when we were discussing it, a couple of elk, 

and another individual might lose a $250 shot gun just for knocking down an extra duck. The fine does 

not seem to be in proportion to the offence. Incidentally I think that this change in the Act is also timely. 

It tends to make more of an honest woman of the Minister because I believe he has probably been 

sending back an awful lot of guns almost for any request. I don‘t know whether he wants to comment on 

this at all, but certainly the seizure of a gun is not a fair fine. If you‘re going to fine somebody, let the 

fine be commensurate with the offence. The gun can mean a $250 fine or it can mean a $10 fine or a $25 

fine, and the offence bears no relationship at all to that particular type of fine. I believe this would be a 

welcome thing. 

 

As far as the animals killed by accident are concerned, I would like to ask the Minister to comment here. 

Is this by accident due to vehicles or is it by accident when he probably shoots a mule deer in an area 

that is out of season, a mule deer, rather than a flag or shoots a doe in an area where only males are 

allowed to be taken, or if he shoots two by mistake? It isn‘t the first time that a hunter has shot two deer 

with a powerful rifle, knocking down two when he only intended to shoot one. If this is true, I presume 

that it may be interpreted that way, I would suggest that the hunter should be responsible for dressing 

out that game, and bringing it in in a good state for use. I don‘t think he should be allowed to walk away 

from it and allow it to rot. Too much of this is done now. Anyone who has been hunting especially in the 

antelope country has seen far too many of these animals and deer during antelope season knocked over 

and left there. A lot of this is deliberate, I believe, but a good deal of it results simply from fear, fear on 

the part of the hunter that, if he does report it he will be fined and probably worse, lose his rifle. So he 

simply says 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1746 

nothing, while he could very well bring this animal in. I think if the Minister accepts that most hunters 

are good sportsmen, then this mistake area could simply be accepted. I believe that anyone who has 

hunted a great deal has had friends or possibly it has happened to themselves where they have shot an 

animal by mistake. I know of an instance where a friend of mine took a shot at an animal. It went off 

into the woods, just bounded off into the woods. Another one came out and he shot it and when he got 

over to it, just a few feet further inside the woods, there was the first one he shot lying there dead. He 

had two of them. He hadn‘t intended to shoot two. He thought he had missed his first shot. Things like 

this, I believe, should be spelled out a little more clearly so that a hunter can take this in to the Red Cross 

and in to the police who can in turn, turn it over to charity in a good condition, a good edible condition. 

That is about all I have to say on this. There may be more questions in Committee, but on that one item 

at least I would like a comment from the Minister. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, very briefly in answering the Hon. Member‘s questions. Light hunting is 

still a great problem and this is as he pointed out an effort to make our control of night hunting more 

practical. We hope this will do it, and we‘ll certainly take his suggestion about the spotting by air into 

consideration, because as he knows it is almost impossible to catch these people. The only time we will 

confiscate guns is for light hunting, and I agree with him. This was the reason we are changing the Act. 

There are a variety of prices in guns. It certainly meant that the penalties were very unfair. They had no 

relationship to the crime, they had no relationship to the ability to pay, they had no relationship to 

anything, just if you happened to have a very good gun you paid a large penalty. Then the pressure was 

on the Minister, and while I never mind a little pressure on the Minister, I am sure the present Minister 

doesn‘t or the former Minister either, but it made a clear-cut policy impossible. As you well know, when 

you were Minister, people came with all kinds of stories. Many of them were quite justified, but I don‘t 

think it‘s good policy to leave the discretion up to the Minister. It should be written in the Act and 

everybody will know exactly where they stand or in the Regulations. This is why we‘re changing that 

part of the Act. 

 

Now Section 90, you‘re quite right, the present Section 90 doesn‘t make any difference between any 

kind of an accident. It just says a person who by accident unlawfully kills a big game animal shall report 

the killing to the nearest wildlife officer or a member of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, who shall 

dispose of the meat and the hide and report to the director. I will certainly discuss this with the officials 

and see if we can either bring in a House amendment to the Act or change the Regulations. I think your 

point is very well taken. I hope I have answered the questions raised by the Member. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Steuart moved second reading of Bill No. 83 — An Act to amend The Prairie and Forest Fires 

Act. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker the proposed amendments to The Prairie and Forest Fires Act are 

concerned with (a) the responsibility of municipal authorities under the Act and (b) the fines or penalties 

for offences under the Act. Specifically the purpose 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1747 

of the amendments are as follows: first to extend the burning permit area beyond the three-mile limit in 

existence as dictated by the forest fire hazards. We learned to our sorrow last year that the three-mile 

limit was not enough in some cases. So we are going to give some flexibility so we can make the 

burning permit area much wider than three miles, if weather conditions and general fire conditions 

dictate that we should. The Act in its present form does not provide for the appointment of fire rangers 

in local improvement districts, as is the case for rural municipalities. Since local improvement districts 

are usually centred in the close proximities of forested areas it is considered necessary to amend the Act 

to provide for the appointment of fire rangers in local improvement districts, and also to amend Sections 

10, 11, 17 and 19 of the Act so that the provisions of these sections will be applicable to such fire 

rangers. Section 19 is amended further so that personnel from a local improvement district or rural 

municipality may be transferred to another district and/or municipality to assist in fire fighting. 

 

The general responsibility respecting fires in rural municipalities and local improvement districts is 

supplemented by an amendment to provide for the action of the Minister in respect to such fires when 

they are a threat to Provincial forests. In order to make the above mentioned sections, that is Sections 23, 

26a, 26b and 28, clearer in meaning, we have taken out all excessive verbal expressions. This is just 

housekeeping. The fines or penalties for offences under the Act have not been increased for some time 

and are presently considered to be too lenient and not to have much deterrent effect. The proposed 

amendments to the above mentioned sections increase the fines as follows: an owner or an occupant who 

fails to assist in protecting land or property is now liable to a fine of $50. It is proposed to increase that 

fine to $200. A person who starts a fire for the purpose of burning saw-mill debris within 100 feet of any 

part of a sawdust pile or fails to extinguish the fire upon request is now liable, if an individual, to a fine 

of not less than $50 or more than $500; if a corporation, to a fine of not less than $100 or more than 

$1000. It is now proposed to increase the range of fines for individuals to not less than $200 or more 

than $1000 and for corporations to not less than $500 or more than $5000. 

 

We intend to amend Section 37. A person who fails to properly supervise a railway right-of-way fire is 

now liable to a fine of not less than $10 or more than $100. It is proposed to increase the range of fines 

to not less than $200 or more than $500. A person who enters or travels in a designated area which has 

been declared closed by the Minister and does not hold a subsisting travel permit is now liable to a fine 

of not less than $10 or more than $100. It is proposed to increase the range of fine to not less than $50 or 

more than $500. There are just one or two other amendments in Section 36 and Section 53(a) and (4) to 

add the word local improvement district, so that we will have the same powers and the same rights 

within local improvement districts generally speaking that we now have in rural municipalities. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — I‘m just going to ask the Minister a 

question, I don‘t see it in the Act. But does it mean that farmers, particular farmers, such as in our area 

up there will not be able to burn, say, any brush that has been cut and piled during the summer 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1748 

season? This is the rumor that is in the district and I am just wondering just what is done in cases like 

that. Will we be able to get a permit as in the past? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Just in answer to your question, as the law now stands the only place we would require 

people to get a burning permit is within three miles of a forest area. They will now have to obtain a 

burning permit within any distance of the forest according to the dictates of the weather or the fire 

hazards. It may be that we declare a very low fire hazard up in your area for, say, the month of May and 

they wouldn‘t require a burning permit at all. But then in June it may become very dry and we would 

then state that a burning permit would be needed within 10 miles. They can still burn, but they have to 

get a permit. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I certainly agree that you need extra leeway. Three miles is not enough during a period 

of high fire hazard. I would suggest that simply going back any distance is too much. This would permit 

an official to go back even 15 miles. But I think it might be wise to extend an area of five miles under 

ordinary conditions, or six miles or something like this, because it would be an extreme circumstance 

where fire could run for a length of five or six miles without some obstruction of summerfallow or other 

in a settled area. It seems to me that there have been in the past a lot of complaints from people who 

want to burn at a certain time, with some official saying, ―No you can‘t do it, ‖ period. They are put to a 

great deal of trouble in their farming or clearing operation. I would suggest that in Committee the 

Minister might take a look at putting in a mileage limit, so that every Tom, Dick and Harry along the 

whole forest belt from Alberta to Manitoba doesn‘t have to run for a burning permit even if it‘s 15 miles 

from forests. This is what they are going to feel they have to do. I believe once this three mile area is 

lifted that some officials are going to interpret this differently than others. You are going to be in a 

considerable amount of difficulty in some areas, because a certain official decides to lay the stick on. 

Other than this, I see nothing in this Bill that would require any further questions. As the Minister said, it 

seems to be housekeeping. Some of the wording in a good many of these acts may require a lot of 

housekeeping so that the ordinary laymen can understand. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 85 — An Act to amend The 

Statute Law. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, this is an Act that we bring in just about every year to pick up errors that 

have occurred in previous years. Many of the changes in here are to correct typographical errors. I 

would like to just run over them briefly. The changes to The Interpretation Act in the first section are 

printing errors. The change in The Legislative Assembly Act is to correct a printing error. The Schedule 

to The Legislative Assembly Act is for the purpose of correcting the description of the Hanley 

constituency (I knew I would get a smile on that), the purpose of correcting the description of the 

Hanley constituency by excepting Saskatoon Riversdale, a separate constituency. The Election Act, a 

change for printing error; The Water Rights Act 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1749 

is a printing error; The Surrogate Court Act is a printing error; The Water Resources Commission Act is 

a printing error; The Brand and Brand Inspection Act, a printing error; The Optometry Act, a printing 

error; The Mortgage Brokers‘ Act, we‘re taking out Section 13, because it is a duplicate except for the 

15-day period of Section 5, subsection (2) of that Act which reads, ―every licensee shall notify the 

superintendent in writing of any change in his address for service‖, so there was a duplication there. The 

Registered Social Workers Act, we‘re advised that the Department states that the words ―and passes 

examinations prescribed by the Board‖, were intended to be included in the Act enacted in 1967, but 

were inadvertently omitted and are being added by this amendment. The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act 

is a printing error, and The Wascana Centre Act was a printing error. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I think we ought not allow this passed without 

directing Members‘ attention to Section 14 which says that the Act except for subsection (2) of Section 

3 comes into force on the day of assent, and that subsection (2) of Section 3 comes into force on the day 

of assent, but is retroactive and shall be deemed to have been in force on and from the 8th day of 

September, 1967. I think some of us will appreciate the significance of the 8th day of September. There 

is a statute called The Legitimation Act by which subsequent marriage illegitimate children can be made 

legitimate. The Member for Hanley will be familiar with that law. I think that this Bill is really on all 

fours with the Legitimation Act. We are by Act in 1968 changing the boundaries of the Hanley 

constituency effective on September 8th, 1967 so that that rump area of the Hanley constituency from 

which the sitting Member claims his majority can now be constituted into the whole Hanley 

constituency and he can sit in this House without the cloud which has been so obviously hanging over 

his head. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — I just want to assure the Hon. Members, Mr. Speaker, 

that this isn‘t the last time, I know they are worried that we intend to look at the boundaries. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Heald moved second reading of Bill No. 77 — An Act respecting the Procedure of 

Expropriating Lands and for Determining Compensation for Expropriated Lands. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that this Bill marks a significant advance in the field of 

expropriation in this province. It will provide our province with legislation which, while affording 

maximum protection to the landowner, will not seriously interfere or impede the construction of 

necessary public programs. Now the substance of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, was recommended by the 

Special Legislative Committee on Expropriation that reported to the Government on the 31st day of 

December 1963. I say that this Bill derives its substance from the Committee‘s report and this implies 

that certain changes have been made to the draft act submitted by the Committee. I shall refer to these 

changes in detail later, but in brief changes were only made to provide for those circumstances where the 

provisions worked unjust 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1750 

hardship on the expropriating authority. For example, I will be referring to a provision that allows some 

authorities to enter upon property immediately without notice to the owner. Now those of you who were 

on the Committee will remember that the Committee had recommended that notice at all times be given 

to the owner of the property before entry, and it‘s hard to quarrel with that principle. 

 

The Power Corporation, however, for example, would find this provision impossible to abide by, since 

natural gas transmission lines and power lines can make immediate entry imperative for public safety. A 

natural gas line may rupture and it may be necessary to re-route the line while repairs are being effected. 

To do so may mean going off the easement enjoyed by the Corporation in case it is felt necessary to 

allow the Corporation some latitude in the interest of efficient service to the users and the customers of 

SPC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, expropriation is an acknowledged power that certain authorities must have to carry out 

their public functions. It would be intolerable I suggest if one person could thwart a beneficial public 

program. The concept of expropriation has existed in our law for centuries, the earliest exercise of the 

power being where the Crown occupied land and used private property in times of national peril. The 

power or right has been extended to municipal authorities and schools. I suggest it is obvious these 

agencies must have the power to expropriate. It has been acknowledged as well that certain private 

agencies must be allowed to expropriate. So the power is extended to pipe lines and local irrigation 

districts, subject of course to governmental approval and control. Expropriation is a power that all 

authorities I am sure try to use with discretion. It is only when negotiations fail that the power in the 

various statutes is resorted to. The real purpose of expropriation legislation then must be to guarantee 

that this power is exercised fairly, that is, that the land owner is treated justly by the expropriating 

authority. When expropriation becomes necessary, legislation must attempt to provide machinery that 

can, within the limitation of the legislation, prevent the individuals from feeling victimized. I say 

victimized, which implies some intent on the part of the authority, but I do not mean to convey that 

implication. In all expropriations, I am sure, the authority acts bona fide and what usually occurs is an 

honest difference of opinion between the parties as to valuation. But in many cases, and I know all Hon. 

Members will agree that this isn‘t right, the landowner gives in to the opinion of the authority rather than 

fight for what he is rightly entitled to. In most cases, in many cases anyway, it is a matter of economics. 

The time and money spent in contesting the matter hardly make the contest worthwhile. In these cases, 

of course, the landowner can only feel that he has been victimized by the expropriating authority. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, the creation of an independent board, a truly unique aspect of this legislation, the Public 

and Private Rights Board in Section 6 of the Act, we hope will provide machinery that will assist the 

landowner in determining his rights before settlement is made with the authority. The services of this 

Board will be free as recommended by the Legislative Committee. The Board will consist of one 

member who will be appointed by this House, by the Legislature, for a term of five years. He will report 

to the House, to the Legislature, on his activities during the year and make recommendations as to 

particular amendments to the various Act including the proposed Act. This Board, you could call this 

one-man Board, this Public and Private Rights Board, 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1751 

you could call him an ombudsman, because that is really what he is. The Board acts as a mediator 

between the individual and the authority. He has no power to settle any dispute but rather will try to 

bring the parties together. The principal function of this one-man Board will be to assist the landowner 

in assessing his rights. To do so, the Board may, at no expense to the landowner, conduct an appraisal of 

the land taken and may, in circumstances it sees as just, try to persuade the authority from a course of 

action with respect to the design, location or route of the public work. This might apply to a highway. 

The Ombudsman or the Public and Private Rights Board will be given the proposed route of the 

highway and, if in his judgement and after making studies, he considers that this is not the best possible 

route, then of course he will take steps to try and persuade the Department of Highways, if this is the 

expropriating authority, to change the location or route of the highway. 

 

Now again, and quite properly so in my opinion, the Legislative Committee recommended that the 

authority have the ultimate responsibility for such matters, so that it will be the power of persuasion 

rather than decision that this one-man Board will have. Section 7 of this Act outlines this aspect of the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, this man‘s main weapon I suggest will be one of publicity. He has the power to 

deal with the Department and has the power to compel them to take a second look and to be sure that the 

decision they are making, whether it be with regard to compensation, or whether it be with regard to 

location, is a justifiable decision. So I think he will have real powers from the point of view of publicity 

and of being able to publicize the fact that he doesn‘t agree with the Department‘s decision. I think that 

in many cases his activities and his action may result in changes in the opinion of the expropriating 

authority to the benefit of the landowner who is being expropriated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my experience that much of the misunderstanding that does occur too often in 

negotiations with the parties, arises out of a lack of knowledge on the part of the landowner. Quite often 

the landowner feels that his property is more valuable than it is in fact. Quite often he has not the 

sophisticated knowledge necessary to arrive at an informed opinion. Since it is usually the first and only 

expropriation with which he will be involved, hostility and suspicion can only occur where the 

landowner has only the authority‘s word for the value of his property. The opportunity that this 

Ombudsman presents to the landowner will not only assist the individual I suspect but as well the 

authority towards arriving at more settlements, whereby saving both parties what are often unnecessary 

court costs. 

 

Another benefit that I can see is that the Board will assist the various agencies that are involved in 

expropriation in arriving at a more uniform settlement with the landowner. Undoubtedly this will be of 

great assistance in the administration of programs that necessarily involve expropriation. The creation of 

this Board then, Mr. Speaker, will recognize what has often been a pretty one-sided negotiation, with the 

power and resources of some public agency pitted against the individual. I think it will be of substantial 

benefit towards solving a difficult problem area that plagues all those who must resort to expropriation. 

 

The proposed Act, and I have referred to this previously, protects the individual in another way. This 

follows the 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1752 

Committee‘s recommendation again. In Section 22, the owner may compel the authority to provide him 

with an evaluation report indicating how the agency arrived at the amount of compensation offered. That 

is an independent appraisal. The matters that must be assigned a value are listed in Section 22. Failure to 

provide such a report, or to provide a sufficient report can result in the cost of any action for the 

determination of compensation to be assessed against the authority. This, I believe, will further assist the 

owner in arriving at an educated determination of the sufficiency of the offer. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, although the rights of the individual are important under such legislation, so too are 

the rights of the public. Treating a landowner fairly is only one function of such legislation. It must also 

protect the rights of the public. To do this the legislation must provide a framework in which public 

programs can be carried out without unnecessary interruption. These public programs must be carried 

out in such a way that they are not placed in a strait-jacket to the administration so that the projects will 

become too expensive to carry out. Now this expense can arise in two ways. First the amount of 

compensation that must be paid to the owner may unjustly enrich him at the expense of the public purse. 

Compensation provisions in the Act then must be fair, that is, being fair to both parties. Secondly, 

expense may occur to the authority through procedures that would compel the authority to adopt such 

expensive techniques to comply with the Act that the additional costs of administration would preclude 

the program altogether. This province could then only defer necessary programs with a subsequent loss 

of real benefits to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest, that the essence of good legislation is to arrive at a balance that does not unduly 

penalize either the state or the individual. Such a delicate balance is difficult to achieve. The major 

concern in the preparation of this legislation was that the rights of the individual were to be protected 

fully. Any infringement made on these rights could only be made where first of all no serious prejudice 

occurred to the owner and secondly, where it was felt that any other provision would seriously prejudice 

the authority. In an example I gave a few minutes ago of the Power Corporation, Mr. Speaker, having a 

right of immediate entry to land to repair a ruptured line, it is obvious that the individual will suffer only 

slight prejudice to his rights but to deny the privilege to the Corporation would result in serious 

consequences. 

 

With these brief words, Mr. Speaker, by way of introduction and because of the technicality and 

complexity of the proposed Act, I would now like to turn to a brief exposition of the provisions of the 

Act. The purpose of the Act is to make uniform the procedure for not only taking land but to make 

uniform the method of determining the compensation to be paid for the land as well. At present there are 

a great number of statutes each with their own provisions and they all vary. This is one of the primary 

functions of this Act. The application of the Act has been changed from that recommended by the 

Special Legislation Committee. It is not at the present time to apply to municipal governments, or to 

school boards. This, Mr. Speaker, is at the request of these agencies, the intention being that the Act will 

apply in the future when these elected bodies have had the opportunity to observe its application. It does 

apply to all other authorities, however, such as pipe lines which have authorization to expropriate. 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1753 

The Bill does not contain in it any provision authorizing the authority to expropriate. This authority to 

expropriate remains in the Act establishing the authority. This is basically a procedural statute. For 

example, the SPC Act provides that Corporation with the right to expropriate and as well it describes 

what the Corporation may take, such as the fee simple in land or an easement. Nothing in this Act before 

us now alters this. But what is altered is the procedure, the way in which such powers are to be exercised 

and the procedure established for the determination of compensation. After this Act is passed, only this 

Act will apply to such matters. This will mean that at some later date amendments will be necessary to 

all those affected by this new Act, but as this Bill is proposed to come into force on a day to be 

proclaimed, these amendments cannot be made at this time. 

 

Under Section 9 of this Bill where the authority is empowered to enter upon land for survey purposes — 

and not all authorities have this power under their own Act — or to take samples and borings, notice of 

such entry must be given to the owner before entry. Mr. Speaker, this section demonstrates the attitude 

of the Committee to unannounced entry on private land. A reconciliation between public and private 

interest is made in the section in that service of notice can be made fairly readily thereby serving both 

the individual and the authority. Such concern for the individual is again demonstrated I suggest in 

Section 5 where the Act demands that negotiations be made for purchase before expropriation can be 

effected. To allow maximum administrative flexibility, however, this requirement does not apply where 

the authority is taking building materials, such as clay or gravel, only, that is without taking the land. 

This allows, or would allow, for example the Department of Highways to obtain burrow pits during the 

construction of a roadway. This again follows the recommendation of the Committee which recognizes 

the necessity for some administrative freedom in cases of this kind. The procedure for the actual taking 

of the land, whether it is the entire interest, fee simple or some limited interest such as an easement, or 

mere possession, is outlined in Sections 10 to 14 of the Bill. 

 

There has been, for the reasons I shall set forth, a substantial change from the Committee‘s suggested 

draft. The section basically follows the Committee draft in that the authority must file in the appropriate 

Land Titles Office a declaration of expropriation. The Committee had recommended that possession be 

denied the authority until such time as title to the property had been vested in the authority. The purpose 

of such a provision is obvious. It is to protect the owner and any person claiming as a subsequent 

purchaser. As in the past, the authority could take possession and there could be long delays before the 

title was issued. Now this Section 11 has been altered from the Committee‘s draft in that the right of 

immediate entry before title has not been retained in all cases. To do so would work again administrative 

hardship on many Crown agencies. For example, in the planning and construction of highways it is often 

difficult to determine with absolute precision where a road will be located sufficiently far enough in 

advance to allow all titles to be secured before construction starts. If the Department of Highways had to 

in all cases obtain title before entry, considerable delay would result or the Department would have to 

employ a greatly increased number of employees. It is estimated that binding the Department of 

Highways to this procedure would cost the Province hundreds of thousands of dollars 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1754 

and could delay projects up to two or three years. The provision would mean that more surveyors and 

draftsmen would have to be employed. It is not difficult to see that some projects would lie idle until 

such time as the Department could bring in a qualified surveyor. The agency might have encountered 

some problem in the field that required relocation of the highway. Having to do this survey and prepare 

and file a plan of the survey in the Land Titles Office would stop the construction for weeks. This 

procedure has been attempted in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, and has been discarded. I am thinking 

of some American jurisdictions where we have looked at the situation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the owner could not be protected in any other way, then I think perhaps the 

provision, as it has in the draft Act, would be justified, but, if some compromise position is possible, 

then I think the Government is justified in altering the Committee‘s recommendations so long as it 

provides the same or virtually the same protection to the owner and purchaser. Mr. Speaker, I suggest 

that the draft Act, this Act, does provide the necessary protection while at the same time providing 

administrative flexibility. Section 11 and in particular subsection (2) thereof, allows, where the statute 

authorizing expropriation permits, entry before title, but immediately upon entry the authority must file a 

notice in the Land Titles Office of such taking, which notice is entered upon the title as warning to all 

that there has been a taking. The title must be obtained under this section within one year. This will 

allow any subsequent purchase to contact the authority for information on the extent of the taking before 

he deals further with the land. I would suggest that neither the owner or anyone else can suffer the 

prejudice that the Committee saw might occur if these provisions are followed. Of course many 

authorities already are by their authorizing statutes precluded from entry until title has been received, 

some even until compensation has been paid. This section will not alter those provisions in those Acts. 

 

Another change which has occurred in the proposed legislation is in the manner of the authority making 

an offer to the owner. The Committee recommended that the offer be made when the notice of 

expropriation is served on the owner, while the present proposed Act allows the authority four months to 

make an offer for the land taken. Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the intent of the Committee was to start the 

proceedings immediately to ensure that the owner suffered no delay in obtaining his rights. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, severe consequences could occur, we believe, if the expropriating agencies were bound to 

follow this suggested practice. For the agencies involved in many acquisitions it would, I am afraid, 

result in hastily prepared offers and ill-considered offers being made, since it would be virtually 

impossible to consider the complicated matters that go into the determination in some cases of the 

compensation payable. It requires a skilled appraiser and many of the Departments of Government have 

to employ a private appraiser who may not always be available on a moment‘s notice. Where the 

Departments does employ their own appraisers, as is the case with the Department of Highways, the 

problem would be to employ sufficient appraisers to comply with the spirit of the statute as well as the 

black letter of the statute. Such people are hard to come by and it would be impossible to employ 

sufficient numbers to satisfy the requirements of such a suggestion. For this reason the authority is given 

by Section 20 of the Bill four months in which to serve its offer of compensation on the owner. This 

period, I suggest, is not so long that it will cause undue 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1755 

prejudice to the owner and it does give the authority some elbow room with respect to time in which to 

carefully assess the offer. 

 

These then, Mr. Speaker, are the general purposes of the Act. To make uniform the procedure for taking 

and to ensure that the owner is justly dealt with, the authority must do a number of things and I would 

like to list them. First of all the authority must negotiate in most instances before acquisition. Secondly, 

the authority must file a declaration of expropriation in the proper Land Titles Office or, in some 

instances, at least a notice of expropriation with a declaration filed at some later date. Third, the 

authority must make a carefully considered offer of compensation that is served within four months of 

occupation of the property. Fourthly, the authority must provide the owner, and I think that this is a good 

one, with a detailed breakdown of the evaluation of the compensation that the authority thinks is 

warranted. Now where the authority has taken the land in some cases this may effectively destroy the 

owner‘s rights as to minerals. The statute prevents any authority from taking the minerals unless 

expressly authorized to do so in its own statute. Recognizing the fact that minerals may be effectively 

denied, the owner at his initiative may seek compensation for such taking where the authority of course 

has not acquired the minerals in the first place. This, Mr. Speaker, is a marked departure from the 

existing legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going into more detail than usual because I think this legislation is an important Bill 

and is relatively complex. Due to the existence of the Report of the Legislative Committee on 

Expropriation I believe it is well that I should explain in some detail where and why the proposed Act 

differs from the suggested Act. 

 

The fundamental change in the formula from present procedures for the determination of compensation 

occurs in two ways. Firstly, the formula for awarding compensation, which is in Section 49, is now 

proposed to be that the authority shall make, and I quote: ―due compensation.‖ May I point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that this phrase ―due compensation‖ has been used in various expropriation statutes in Canada, 

and I would observe that there is a wealth of judicial authority defining what is involved in this term. I 

agree with the Committee that it would be impossible to present a better formula, since no one could 

contemplate all the circumstances that must go into deciding how much damage to the owner has been 

caused by the taking. This phrase ―due compensation‖ allows the discretion of the court to be applied to 

ensure that the owner received adequate and just, but no more than adequate and just compensation. The 

proposed Act in this regard follows the Committee‘s draft. The second major change in the matter of 

procedure for determination of compensation, and this follows the recommendation of the Committee as 

well, is that the action is placed in the District Court. From now on it will be a court action subject to the 

rules of court except where expressly altered by the statute itself. Heretofore many statutes used the 

technique of arbitration, with a District Court Judge as the arbitrator. In all instances the matter took on 

the appearance of a court action without gaining the benefits of the rules of court and without being a 

court action. 

 

Now the last matter that I wish to refer to, Mr. Speaker, is one other change, and it is a rather 

fundamental change from the Committee‘s Report, and that is in the matter of damages for injurious 

affection where no land is being taken. This has been deleted from the proposed Act. The Committee 

recommended that 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1756 

the authority pay compensation for any injurious affection done by the authority whether there has been 

an expropriation from that owner or not. The circumstances in which such a claim is to be allowed are 

difficult to state. Rules imposed by the Court have restricted severely the circumstances where a claim 

may be made. Of course, where land is taken injurious affection is always awarded under the phrase 

―due compensation.‖ Let me give you an example. A farmer who, because of the highway cutting 

through the middle of his property, is awarded severance damage because it makes his farming 

operations more difficult. This is injurious affection where land is taken from that farmer. On the other 

hand where the statute makes provision for it, and only then, injurious affection where no land has been 

expropriated can be a matter for compensation. This can occur for example where an authority has 

created what at law would otherwise be a nuisance, but the nuisance is not actionable due to the statute 

authorizing the nuisance. Most of the cases that have gone to court involve some right of access. In one 

case the city lowered the level of a road so that access to the adjoining property was more difficult. The 

statute in that case prescribed damages for injurious affection where there was not land taken, and the 

landowner was able to collect damages. It must be admitted that the courts have not been called upon to 

define with any precision the limits of this concept. I understand that when this matter was raised in the 

Expropriation Committee‘s deliberation that they were advised, as I have been, that it is impossible to 

determine how far this principle will run. In a recent Ontario decision decided in 1966, the Court of 

Appeal in that province found that injurious affection to land where no land was taken had occurred 

when the highway authority installed traffic islands, and the adjoining owner was awarded damages. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, surely from this kind of an example the implication is clear that this would subject 

the expropriating authority to a vast number of potential claims that could involve millions and millions 

of dollars. For example when the Department of Highways decided to designate a controlled access 

highway, then it may be that the presence of the phrase in the statute would allow a damage action to all 

adjoining owners along the entire length of the highway. And it might not start there either. It might be 

that owners not directly adjoining the highway would have a similar claim. How far back from the 

highway the court will allow persons to claim damages is at this moment purely speculation. One mile, 

two miles, three miles? Obviously it will not allow clams where the land is only remotely connected 

with the highway, but we really have no way of knowing how much the purse of this Province would 

have to pay, if that clause had been left in the proposed Bill. The application of the principle of damages 

for injurious affection where no land is taken from an owner will occur primarily, I think, in access 

questions. And I am of the opinion that to maintain the balance between public and private interest we 

cannot at this time include such an action as a head of damage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken longer than I intended to. There are other important areas of the Act that I 

have not mentioned. However, I leave these questions to the Committee. I think they can better be 

discussed in Committee. I apologize for taking up the time of the House with as much of an explanation 

as I have, but I did want to acquaint Members of the House with the changes and the reason for these 

changes since the proposed Act, the draft Act, was based on an unanimous decision of a Committee of 

this House. 



 

April 9, 1968 
 

 

1757 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, as a member of the Committee whose work 

included a careful study of the expropriation legislation presently on the statute books in this province, I 

am very pleased to see this legislation being introduced by the Attorney General. I thought the 

Committee did some excellent work. I had the honor of being Chairman and the Hon. Member for 

Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) was the Vice Chairman. Two other members of the Committee are still in 

the House, the Hon. Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis), and the Hon. Member for Kinistino (Mr. 

Thibault). I think we held something like 31 meetings. I thought that every member of the Committee 

was objective and tried to write a report that would solve the problems of expropriation in this province. 

We came up with an unanimous decision. The Report that was submitted with a draft Bill, the written 

report, I suggest to all Members of this House, would provide good background for the present 

Expropriation Bill that is before this House. As a matter of fact, this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is very similar to 

the Bill that was attached to the Report submitted by the Expropriation Committee. But there is one area, 

one section, one recommendation that was unanimous that has been omitted. The Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) in introducing second reading spent some time explaining this to the House. That area is the 

section regarding injurious affection, or what is probably known as consequential damage. 

 

I recall the study that was made by the Committee looking at other jurisdictions. There was written in 

the legislation of Alberta, for instance, and several other Acts in the Province of Ontario and some parts 

of the United States, direct reference to injurious affection. For this reason we were inclined to think that 

it had some value. I was looking at the report of the Committee and I would like to draw attention to 

Members of the House what the unanimous decision of the Committee was at that particular time. Under 

the heading of ―Injurious Affection‖ the Committee said: 

 

It has long been a principle of compensation in Saskatchewan and elsewhere to allow compensation 

not only for the value of land taken in an expropriation, but also for the consequential damage to the 

remaining property. This consequential damage is termed injurious affection, and is an item of damage 

which the courts will consider under ―due compensation‖, and in their consideration of such damages 

the Committee understands that the courts will apply the following tests. 

 

The Committee is of the opinion, however, that damages to land can result when no land of a particular 

parcel is taken, but when neighboring land is acquired for a public improvement. In this case, however, 

compensation for injurious affection is not payable without statutory sanction. Thus, provision is made 

in the draft bill for the payment of compensation for injurious affection where no land is taken. 

 

I have looked at the present Bill in the hope that I might find somewhere in the legislation a section that 

could possibly cover injurious affection and might take care of this problem, should it arise. It seems to 

me that there is one section, Section 35, relating to the documents necessary for an action for 

compensation, specifically referring to expropriated land, which might head off a case for injurious 

affection where land was not taken. It is possible that a court could interpret 



 
April 9, 1968 
 

 

1758 

Section 35 to exclude an action for this reason. In any case if there was to be a claim for injurious 

affection, there seems to be a need for redrafting or changing some principle in the Bill to allow for this 

at the present time. 

 

I know that there are other changes in the Bill and perhaps we can look at these sections one at a time 

when we are looking at the Bill in Committee: right of entry expropriation by municipalities and school 

boards, compensation, and so forth. But the one that really worries me is the omission of the reference to 

injurious affection. 

 

I want to congratulate the Minister for including in his Bill a reference to a Public and Private Rights 

Committee. I think this is a novel idea. It provides a sounding board for the general public. It is 

something new and he called it an Ombudsman. It is the type of thing that people who appeared before 

our Expropriation Legislative Committee were asking for and I compliment him for sticking with it. I 

thought that it might get lost along the way. I think that it is something that we should try, and we should 

make it work. All Members of the Legislature will back up this idea. It gives the ordinary person who is 

being hammered by big government an opportunity to have his case heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would not like to move adjournment of the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. 


