



















































Hansard: March 15, 1968


1044 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

Friday, March 15, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. B D. Gallagher: (Yorkton) — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all Members will want to join me in 

welcoming a group of grade eight students from St. Mary‟s school in Yorkton. They are seated in the 

front two rows in the east gallery and accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Smith and Mr. Baliberda, and 

their bus driver, Mr. Rohatensky. Those students have already visited the Saskatchewan Telephone 

Building and the Natural History Museum, and after proceedings today they are going to visit the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation Building and the RCMP Barracks. I am sure that all Members will 

want to join with me in welcoming them and in wishing that they have a most enjoyable and educational 

day in the capital city. Seeing that Sunday is St. Patrick‟s Day I want to wish them all the luck of the 

Irish on their way home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt: (Rosthern) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce two high school groups from the 

Rosthern constituency. One is from the Rosthern consolidated high school and the other one from Beth 

Lake consolidated high school. They are sitting in the west gallery. I am sure that all Members want to 

wish them a welcome here this afternoon. We hope that their stay here will be informative and 

educational and we wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac: (Wilkie) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to you 

and to other Members of the House a group of students from Tramping Lake in Saskatchewan. I must 

say, Mr. Speaker, that it is the first time, since I have been here as a Member, that I have had a group of 

students down from the constituency to the procedures at the Legislature. Sister Alfreda, their teacher 

and a number of their parents have accompanied them, 29 in all. They have been here in the city since 

last night. They have toured some points of interest this morning; they are going to be in the House this 

afternoon and return home tomorrow morning. I am sure all Members will join with me in welcoming 

them to this House and wishing them a safe journey back home to Tramping Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1045 

Mr. A. Thibault: (Kinistino) — Mr. Speaker, I would like the House to join with me in welcoming a 

fine group of students from Humphrey high school in Kinistino. This is an annual event for the grade 

12s from that unit to visit the Legislature in the city of Regina. I am not going to give you a list of all the 

places they visit, but they certainly enjoy the trip down here. I hope that our conduct this afternoon will 

be such that they will have a very pleasant word to take back home. They are led here by their teacher 

Mr. Lorenz and their bus driver, Mr. Clifford Larson. I want to wish them the best of luck and a safe 

journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank: (Saskatoon Mayfair) — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity again to 

welcome to this Chamber through you a group of students from Henry Kelsey school in Saskatoon 

Mayfair. They are situated in the east gallery. It happens that a group of students from Henry Kelsey 

were down to the Chamber last weekend, Mr. Speaker. At that time they were accompanied by their 

Principal, Mr. Russell, and my seatmate had the honor of introducing that group of students. I just 

wanted to take a moment to say something about Mr. Russell. He is a person who takes a great deal of 

pride in the history of Canada and Saskatchewan and he has practical projects going on in his school that 

illustrate that he and his students are really interested in our historic past and our achievements. The 

students today, I understand, are accompanied by Mr. Russell, as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

GOVERNOR GENERAL OF CANADA 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce to the House that His Excellency 

the Governor General of Canada will pay an official visit to the Province of Saskatchewan, May 14th, 

15th and. 16th. The Government, co-operating with His Hon. The Lieutenant Governor, will be planning 

a suitable itinerary for His Excellency including a state banquet in Regina on May 14th (if the Hon. 

Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) doesn‟t object). While in Saskatchewan, His Excellency will be 

receiving an honorary degree from the University of Saskatchewan, Regina campus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ST. PATRICK’S DAY TRIBUTES 

 

Mr. E. Whelan: (Regina North West) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day it is almost heresy 

to wish an Irishman luck on March 15th, but since it falls on Sunday and we won‟t be sitting, may I say 

to all those lovable 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1046 

and peaceful and fearless and brilliant Irishmen, wherever they are, and to all those who would like to be 

Irish, may their St. Patrick‟s Day be happy and may their fortunes never fade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder: (Moose Jaw North) — Mr. Speaker, on this important day, I think it would be most 

appropriate for a Member who is not of Irish ancestry to say a word in defence of those who are not 

represented by the Whelans, the Gallaghers and the Steuarts in this House. I think there is little question, 

Mr. Speaker, about the numerous sterling qualities of Irish people, and there is little chance of our 

forgetting because they insist on reminding us on a regular basis. However, Mr. Speaker, they have 

never attempted to lay claim to the qualities of humility or tolerance of those who have roots somewhere 

else other than in the Emerald Isle. There is a story I believe, Mr. Speaker, which demonstrates this point 

and it seems that Patty O‟Rourke had been elected as Mayor of a town in southern Ireland on six 

successive occasions. On the last three elections he had been unopposed and received an acclamation 

vote. However, on the seventh occasion a relative newcomer to the town, Abe Finkelstien, had the 

audacity to contest the election for mayor and when the votes were all counted, Mr. Speaker, Patty 

O‟Rourke had received every vote except two and the populace immediately assumed· that he had 

received everyone‟s vote except those of Abe Finkelstien and his wife. When the newly elected Mayor 

was asked to comment to the press, the only comment to be made by the newly elected Mayor was in 

saying, “Sure and wouldn‟t you know those damn Jews would be clannish.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

HEALTH CARE FOR INDIANS 

 

Mr. A E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if I might. 

put a question to the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant). Yesterday he indicated that he was in touch 

with or was getting in touch with the Government at Ottawa with respect to the question of health care 

for Indians. I wonder if he could, in view of the unease about this and demonstrations in our neighboring 

provinces, both to the east and west I gather, give the House any indication of what the present situation 

appears to be? 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant: (Minister of Health) — Mr. Speaker, I have written a strong letter of protest to the 

Federal Minister of Health criticizing him for the lateness of this announcement and suggesting that if 

they are planning on proceeding along the course suggested that there should be a conference with 

Provincial Health Ministers. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1047 

SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a further question to the Government. I 

wondered if the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) had any word he could bring to the House with 

respect to the sales of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds. We‟ve ordinarily had fairly regular reports and we 

haven‟t heard anything except the announcement that they were going to be sold. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart: (Provincial Treasurer) — I haven‟t got an up-to-date report. The last time I talked 

to my officials there was something over $2 million. The lateness of the wheat payment has slowed them 

down, and I will have a report for the House on the first of the week. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant, Minister of Public Health, moved second reading of Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend 

The Saskatchewan Hospitalization Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, by way of an explanation of the amendment proposed, I would like to make some 

comments. Although the amendment is a relatively short one in words I think that everyone in the House 

will agree that it will give rise to some discussion and consequently my explanation may be a little fuller 

in consequence of that possibility. 

 

I think the most important provision of this Bill authorizes the Lieutenant Governor-in-council to 

prescribe amounts that hospitals may charge patients for services they have received. This amendment is 

directly related to the problem of the rapid rise in hospital costs. To view the costs of the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan in their proper light, it is I think advisable to examine the cost experience of this 

program since its inception in 1947. The total cost of this program including administration costs has 

risen very, very markedly in the last 21 years. This is demonstrated by the following figures: 1947 — $7 

million; 1951 — $14 million; 1956 — $22 million; 1961 — $36 million; 1965 — $53 million; 1966 — 

$58 million; 1967 — $63 million. Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to dwell upon the comparison of cost 

between 1967 and the cost incurred some 15 or 20 years ago. However, it should be noted that last 

year‟s costs are some $27 million or 75 per cent higher than the cost incurred in 1961, only six years 

ago. I should also mention that in the last two years the costs have risen about $5 million a year or close 

to 10 per cent. The comparison of costs on a per capita basis also indicates a remarkable increase. In 

1947 the per capita cost was $9.68 while in 1961 the per capita cost of $39.96; by 1967 the per capita 

cost had risen to $66.14. Mr. Speaker, I believe the Government has made clear its right to charge 

utilization fees on medical care based not only on the recommendation of authorities but also on 

legislation passed in 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1048 

the 1961 session. It is somewhat difficult in speaking on these proposed amendments not to get into the 

area of utilization fees on medicare and I trust the Members of the House will bear with me in this 

regard. I intend now to point out why it is imperative that we introduce utilization fees for hospitals as 

well as medicare utilization fees, if we are to give the principles behind these fees a fair chance. 

 

In fact indications are that the greatest abuse of health privileges is occurring in the use of hospital 

services. Utilization fees for medical care alone only encourage abuse of hospital services. Consider the 

Swift Current experience where utilization fees for medical care have existed since 1953 without 

corresponding utilization fees for hospitals. Hospital utilization per thousand population is 20 per cent 

higher in Swift Current than it is in the rest of the province, while physician services in that area are 

almost the same or lower per thousand population in all categories except hospital business. Hospital 

visits are 80 per cent higher. This points out that hospitals will be over-utilized even more, if utilization 

fees are applied to medicare only. Patients and doctors tend to consider a service free when they are not 

asked to participate directly in the cost involved. The Leader of the Opposition has accused us of not 

believing in people. We are merely recognizing that humans are capable of irresponsible actions when 

there is nothing to remind them of the consequences. We already have a problem of an over-supply of 

hospital beds. Why should we aggravate it by encouraging abuses? Possibly this is what the Hon. Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) wants. Our experience in Saskatchewan has been that where hospital 

services are available Parkinson „s law applies. Demand seems to always meet supply and often exceeds 

it. Utilization of Saskatchewan‟s hospitals amounted to 2,062 patient days per year per thousand 

population in 1966. For the same year the Canadian average was 1526. The difference is accounted for 

by demand rather than by need. The utilization fees we are asking is a token amount to remind the user 

that a substantially larger amount comes out of the provincia1 coffers. This is a measure which is 

intended to contro1 responsible demands. With our present open-ended scheme costs are rising at twice 

the rate of our national product. We must establish a relationship between need and supply and we must 

be realistic on the demands we will meet from the public coffers. With existing medical care and 

hospital schemes we have no demand controls on hospitals, patients or doctors. This encourages an 

attitude of “I pay my share so I‟ll make sure I get my money‟s worth.” Such demands have wreaked 

havoc in Britain have endangered Saskatchewan‟s health schemes and posed a threat to any new 

schemes where controls are not imposed. Compulsory participation in health schemes is a potentially 

dangerous situation. It is likely to create a resentment among those who have immediate health needs, 

and they can express their resentment in indiscriminate utilization. As long as this compulsion exists it 

must be coupled with responsible controlled measures. 

 

The whole question of compulsion is an important one to this Government. Utilization fees allow a 

beneficiary to know that 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1049 

he is participating in his recovery. The very fact that many of our citizens object to utilization fees 

shows that they feel that they have already paid for their health with their premiums, yet that premium 

provides only 20 per cent of the revenue required. We must realize that the right to help is not the same 

as the right to see a doctor because you have paid for it. Whenever a Government undertakes to assume 

responsibility for providing a service for people, abuse and overuse seem to be almost automatic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from a publication prepared by J.E. Powell, the former Minister of 

Health in Great Britain, reading as follows: 

 

From the point of view of its recipients Exchequer money is for all practical purposes unlimited. The 

consequences elsewhere of an increase in a particular expenditure are infinitely remote and 

unascertainable and no sense of responsibility for justifying even the present level of expenditure is 

felt by those concerned. The natural limitations on any expenditure that it is in competition with all 

other objects of expenditure are transformed for those using or operating on Exchequer finance service 

into the arbitrary decision of identifiable politicians. 

 

Reading from another section of this same publication: 

 

The fact that demand for medical care is potentially unlimited does not distinguish it from demand for 

most of the other good things of human life. In those other cases, however, limits are placed on the 

fulfilment of the demand by the impersonal forces of circumstances. It is noticeable and significant 

that human needs become good things in this sense only when or in proportion as public responsibility 

is taken for supplying them. For example food and clothing, though surely as basically good as 

medical care or education, are not regarded in the same light. It is a sad fact that whenever someone 

else provides for our need there appears to be a lack of responsibility on the part of some citizens. It is 

an unfortunate state of affairs at our age that we all do not exercise the same caution and care of 

services and property provided or owned by others, as we do where we pay directly for the services or 

the product ourselves. The new generation is continually looking for new fields to conquer. I suggest 

they have a good area to work in, namely the task of instilling in humans the need for responsible 

action, whether it is in the area of respect for other people‟s property or in the area of respect for 

services provided by Government through taxation. It is regrettable that when a Government program 

is used unwisely by some, all must suffer. We are all restricted in our activities by the inconsiderate 

action of small minorities. 

 

Let‟s not be so naive as to feel that the Saskatchewan 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1050 

Hospital plan is immune from overuse or misuse. It has been, is now and will be in the future unless 

steps are taken to involve users in some degree and thereby enhance responsibility. 

 

It is very easy to excuse ourselves by saying that only a doctor can admit or discharge. This is true, but 

because there is no demand control there is no patient resistance to doctor over-utilization. I am sure that 

the medical profession recognizes some of their members do not exercise the degree of control on 

admissions and discharges recognized as being of an acceptable standard. I am hopeful that the doctors 

will also demonstrate additional responsibility. If there are any doubts in your mind about utilization, let 

me point out and remind you of the statistics quoted earlier, namely the Saskatchewan patient days per 

1,000 — 2,062, the average for Canada 1526. The nearest competitor, the province of Alberta — 1611. 

These are the provinces with the highest utilization rates in Canada, Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

Saskatchewan is using hospital beds at a rate 25 per cent higher than our nearest competitor and one-

third above the Canadian average. Let me also point out that, if every patient hospitalized stayed just one 

extra day, the cost to the taxpayer would be an extra $6 million. If we can effect real savings we must do 

so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government‟s concern with respect to rising cost relates not only to the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan but to all other programs being financed by the province. If we are to be realistic 

we must agree that there is a limit to the capacity of our Province to pay for services. The Government 

has examined the Saskatchewan Hospital Services plan and has decided that some measures must be 

taken to curb the continuously increase of cost. It was concluded that the person utilizing the service 

should assume a further financial responsibility for the program. These amendments therefore provide 

the authority for hospitals to impose utilization charges against patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some other amendments but I will finish my remarks concerning utilization fees. 

I feel that it is only right and proper to give to this House the main contents of regulations that are 

anticipated and in doing so I trust the Members will bear with me while I also refer to medical care 

utilization fees. These will be as follows: $1.50 for all office visits irrespective of whether more than one 

visit occurs in one day, and whether the patient is referred except where the cost of the service is listed 

at less than $3 in the fee schedules; $2·for home and emergency visit by a physician including visit by a 

physician to a patient as an outpatient in a hospital, except where the cost of the service is listed as less 

than $3 in the fee schedule. These utilization fees will apply both in the province and outside the 

province. There will be no utilization fee for physician services rendered to inpatients in hospital. Under 

the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan the proposed charge is $2.50 per day for the first 30 days, 

$1.50 per day from the 31st to the 90th day. No charge will be levied for inpatient days in excess of 90 

continuous hospital days. These charges will apply irrespective of whether the 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1051 

patient is transferred from one hospital to another hospital, provided that hospitalization is on a 

continuous basis. The utilization fee will be charged on the day of admission but not for the day on 

which the patient is discharged. These charges will not be levied for hospital service rendered outside 

Saskatchewan. 

 

With regards to cancer care, utilization for cancer patients having physicians attend them will be 

provided by the Government. In other words cancer patients will not be responsible for picking up these 

utilization charges; they will be paid as they have been in the past, all costs by the Government. The 

same applies to Saskatchewan Assistance Beneficiaries. As for Treaty Indians and War Veterans‟ 

Allowance recipients, these will be handled in the usual way we hope, in spite of the recent 

announcement on the responsibility of the Federal Government. No co-insurance charge will be levied 

for x-ray and laboratory service irrespective of where these services are rendered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks about this portion of it by pointing out that the amendments 

and the Bill authorizes that the Minister of Public Health pay the authorized charges on behalf of certain 

classes of patients and that the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council may exempt certain classes of patients 

from the authorized charge. 

 

The Bill contains two other amendments. One amendment relates to a tax collection matter involving a 

husband and wife who are both in receipt of income. The amendment is merely intended to clarify the 

point that in such a case the husband will be liable to pay the hospitalization tax on behalf of both 

himself and his wife. In the past there has been some confusion in this regard. 

 

The other amendment extends by one month the date by which the Annual Report of the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan is to be tabled. It will now be required to be tabled by the end of March rather 

than by the end of February. This amendment will give the staff of the Department an additional month 

in which to prepare a somewhat more comprehensive report. This amendment will not in any way 

jeopardize the position of the Members of this Assembly because it will be tabled by the end of March 

and the session is usually still in session by that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this covers the remarks that I wish to make at this time and I move that this Bill be read a 

second time. 

 

Hon. W S. Lloyd: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, before the Minister takes his seat, is he 

going to table the proposed regulations? 

 

Mr. Grant: — Yes, I will be pleased to table these, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1052 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank: (Saskatoon Mayfair) — Mr. Speaker, could I ask the Minister a question 

before he takes his seat? You mentioned in regard to hospital utilization fees that the fee would be 

discontinued after 90 continuous days. Now do you make no provision for the aggregate total over a 

period of a fiscal year? 

 

Mr. Grant: — No, there is no provision. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) — Mr. Speaker, would the Minister before he takes his seat make 

a comment on newborns. There has been some talk about that. 

 

Mr. Grant: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, I should have clarified that point. There will be no charge for 

newborns. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis: (Melfort-Tisdale) — The Minister made the statement that the date of admission 

would count. Does this mean that if the patient comes into the hospital at 10 o‟clock at night he is 

charged $2.50? If he goes out the next day, he is charged $5 for those two days? 

 

Mr. Grant: — The Hon. Member wasn‟t listening, Mr. Speaker, I said they would be charged the day 

of admission but they would not be charged for the day they were discharged. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek: (Regina North East) — Mr. Speaker, perhaps in starting debate on this Bill, one 

might go to no more important body and health organization than the world Health Organization which 

in the preamble to its constitution states: 

 

Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of 

disease or infirmity. The health of all peoples is fundamental to the attainment of peace and security 

and is dependent upon the fullest co-operation of individuals and the states. 

 

The achievement of any state in the promotion and the protection of health is of value to all. 

 

Unequal development indifferent countries in the promotion of health and control of disease, 

especially communicable disease, is a common danger. 

 

The extension to all people of the benefits of medical, psychological, and related knowledge is 

essential to the fullest attainment of health. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1053 

informed opinion and active co-operation on the part of the public are of the utmost importance in the 

improvement of the health of the people. 

 

Governments have a responsibility for the health of their people which can be fulfilled only by the 

provision of adequate health and social measures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this is an appropriate basis for us to start discussion on this vital question of 

health services. Friday, March 1, 1968 has been described by many citizens of Saskatchewan as the 

Black Friday. This is so because this Saskatchewan Liberal Government announced on that day the 

crucifixion of two of the most humane public health plans, the Hospital Services Plan and the Medicare 

Plan. We on this side of the House are very sensitive, Mr. Speaker, and very much concerned about 

these Plans, not just because it was the CCF Government that gave birth and allowed these plans to grow 

and develop, but for a much more fundamental reason; because these public health plans saved 

thousands and thousands of lives and we value life very dearly; because they prevented human suffering 

and pain; because they prevented bankruptcy and life-long debts; because they gave hope, life, and 

dignity to all people regardless of their means; because every pensioner knew that he could go for a 

medical check-up, get all the necessary medical attention, get the services that were required in the 

hospital without being burdened with large medical bills. But no more, Mr. Speaker. From the old age 

pensioner who now receives a cheque of $75 and who happens to go to the hospital for a period of 30 

days, this Government is going to take his old age security cheque away. Every mother was given the 

security that, if her child got sick, she didn‟t have to worry about taking money out of the family‟s food 

budget in order to pay the medical and hospital bills. She knew that her family would not have to go 

without milk, because milk dollars would have to be saved for hospital and medical care. She had 

security, Mr. Speaker, but no more! With the $2.50 or $1.50 daily hospital deterrent fee just elaborated 

on by the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant), when a member of a poor family becomes hospitalized they 

will not be able to have that Sunday roast any longer. Johnny will have to wait longer to get his new pair 

of shoes and Mary will have to wait for a longer time to get her dress. No treats for the kids, no toys for 

the children, because if a family member just happens to be hospitalized for one month, Mr. Speaker, 

that $75 is one week‟s pay for a great number of Saskatchewan workers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, today is a sad day for the people of Saskatchewan. That black curtain 

was drawn lower. The Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) who just moved second reading of Bill No. 39, 

really played a funeral march. It was a gravedigger‟s chant. It is a day that will be remembered in the 

history of Saskatchewan, when the Liberal Government put an end to an era 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1054 

of over 21 years of free hospital care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our society, we have accepted that when a man reaches the age of 21 he is extended full 

rights. We say to him you are grown up. We say that you are now a man. You have proven yourself. But 

in the Saskatchewan Liberal society, at 21 years of age, you are deterred, retarded, sent back to the 

kindergarten. One year from now, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals will be celebrating their 50th anniversary of 

the time when they included in their election platform an item that the Liberal party stands for a prepaid 

public health service plan for hospitalization and medical care. It was in 1919 they made that decision. 

Almost 50 years have gone by, but no Liberal Government in Ottawa or in any province has yet to move 

first with the implementation of either a medical or hospital plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — It took a CCF Government to lead the way. It took a Conservative Government in 

Ottawa to agree to Federal sharing of hospital plans. Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that once the national 

leadership contest is over, next month, I predict that shortly after we will have an announcement that on 

July 1st, 1968 which has been set for· the introduction of the national Medicare plan, it will be scrapped. 

The Federal Minister of Health gave Canada a reassurance of that yesterday when I watched him 

confirm on a television broadcast that the Federal Government is dropping the Treaty Indians from the 

Federal Government‟s responsibility from health services. That‟s the way the Liberals treat our native 

Canadians. Mr. Speaker, I want to remind this Government of the promise it made in 1964. The Liberals 

said this, that they would maintain medical care and hospital insurance and would extend it to cover 

drug care. There was no mention of deterrent fees. There was no mention of undermining of these plans, 

either in the 1964 campaign or during the 1967 campaign. They promised to maintain them. You know 

some 20 years ago, an elderly gentleman told me never to trust a Liberal party promise. How true, Mr. 

Speaker, how true. On March 1, the people of Saskatchewan read in the newspapers and heard on the 

radio and television that the Government would be introducing the so-called utilization fees for hospital 

and medical care of $2.50 and $1.50 per day in the hospital. The utilization fee for medicare would be 

$1.50 and $2.00, and the Minister has just repeated that. I am sure that there was a freezing chill running 

through everybody‟s mind and through everybody‟s body, when they heard those announcements. It was 

a crucial and inhuman blow to the people of Saskatchewan, not only because it was a major tax 

imposition on the people, but because it was a major erosion of the two most humane plans legislated by 

the former Government. The introduction of deterrent fees is a deliberate attempt to undermine these 

two health services. 

 

I want to commend my colleagues for their sharp criticism they have already extended during previous 

debates on this proposal of the Government. You know, Mr. Speaker, for many 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1055 

years public health services, their administration cost and their extension have been of special interest to 

me. I am convinced and I am sure that many are convinced here, that without good health there is 

nothing. There is no life. We in the New Democratic party believe that the provision of health services is 

a public responsibility. We believe they should be made available without any restrictions to all citizens. 

We subscribe to the belief that the provision of the best possible health care, equality of opportunities for 

education, and good homes for all of our citizens are fundamental freedoms which must be extended to 

all, not eroded and not deterred, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the years 1960, „61 and „62, I had the opportunity of serving on the Advisory Planning Committee of 

Medical Care, better known as the Thompson Committee. The other day the Hon. Member for Regina 

South West (Mr. McPherson) reminded this House that both he and I had the privilege of serving on the 

Advisory Planning Committee on Medicare. He represented the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

and I represented the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. So as to. place the records straight in the light 

of last night‟s debate, his name was submitted by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce to the 

former Government. and he was accepted. Similarly my name was submitted by the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour and I was accepted to act on that Committee. It was a Committee composed of 12 

people. We had many meetings. We had many discussions. There were several major differences 

between the views that he held and I held in respect of public health services. He opposed medicare, I 

supported medicare. He supported deterrent fees, I opposed deterrent fees. I can tell this House, with 

some personal satisfaction, that I moved the motion which read this way: 

 

The Medical Care Plan shall provide for universal coverage and require all Saskatchewan residents 

who are able to do so, to pay premiums or taxes to finance the Plan. The Plan should not require 

residents or providers of services who do not wish to avail themselves of the benefits of the Plan to do 

so. 

 

Really it was this motion that set the tone of our discussions and the development of the Plan that was 

eventually recommended. I‟m pleased to be able to tell this House that I was the mover of that motion. I 

can also tell you that it was Dr. Houston representing the College of Physicians and Surgeons who 

seconded that motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — You know there was another major difference between the position and the actions of 

the Hon. Member from Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) and me. He purports to be an expert in 

health services. He has been a member of the Regina Hospital Board for many years. He has been 

chairman of that Board for many years. The other day when he took part in a debate he stated that he 

favored deterrent fees, it didn‟t surprise me. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1056 

It didn‟t surprise me at all, because while he purports to be an expert, I wonder whether he really gives 

the matter of health services as much attention as he purports to. The difference when we served on the 

Thompson Committee was that I attended all but one meeting and participated in pretty well all the 

activities in the Committee. The Hon. Member was a kind of a sporadic member, he was on and off. 

 

I want to refer again to the report of the Thompson Committee. You will note that in chapter one of the 

second part of the Report on page one, the Committee documents the number of meetings that were 

held. The Committee‟s sources of information and advice and its method of study are outlined in the 

interim report. Prior to submission of that Report on September 25, 1961, we held 23 meetings for a 

total of 43 days, conducted 33 public and seven private hearings for a total of nine days, examined 49 

briefs which had been submitted by professional organizations, community agencies and individuals and 

studied more than 50 documents. The Report goes on to say that part of the Committee travelled to New 

Zealand and to Australia. Some of us went to the Scandinavian countries and to Britain. This was in 

connection with us trying to find out what services are available in other countries and how they are 

administered, how they are financed and how they are received by the people. This section goes on and 

says that since the interim report was submitted we have held 14 additional committee meetings 

covering 27 days. We have met with representatives since then of other organizations and considered 

their representations. In the beginning of the Report there is a notation in reference to all Committee 

members. It is interesting to note that the representative of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, 

Mr. Donald McPherson, who signed the minority reports has an asterisk showing that this member did 

not attend Committee meetings after the submission of the interim report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to draw the attention of this House that, after the interim report was submitted, the 

Committee gave studies to many, many programs we nave in Saskatchewan, the Mental Health program; 

we studied Dental Health; we considered drugs; we considered special aspects of eye care; the cancer 

services; tuberculosis; rehabilitation; home care; medical care under WCB; provisions of health services 

under the Automobile Accident Insurance; nursing education and services; medical education and 

training; medical research; national health grants; and we also had a cursory examination of the 

provision of hospital services. At the same time there was the Hospital Survey Committee considering 

its report. I draw that to the attention of this Legislature to tell you that the Hon. Member‟s interests and 

the expertise position he tried to portray, are somewhat lacking, and therefore the representations he has 

already made, are subject to question, because his knowledge is not as broad as the impression he would 

try to leave with this Legislature. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, after the Provincial election, it was rumored the Premier was considering 

appointing the Hon. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1057 

Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) as the Minister of Public Health. You know, if 

deterrent fees are based on, size or weight of men who occupy the portfolio of health, all I can say is that 

we should be thankful that the Hon. Premier didn‟t appoint the Hon. Member from Regina South West 

as the Minister of Health, because we would be having much heftier deterrent fees than are proposed 

now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Regina South West claims that hospital admissions 

and hospital stays are abused. Well, I, for one, would like to ask him as chairman of the Regina Hospital 

Board, what kind of abuses there are, and I would also like to ask him what has he done about correcting 

the abuses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Is he suggesting that the doctors of the city of Regina and community are 

irresponsible? Is he suggesting that the people want to stay in the hospital just for the sake of staying in a 

hospital? For free meals and free rooms? Mr. Speaker, I do not accept that kind of an argument. I don‟t 

believe that the people of Saskatchewan are irresponsible. I don‟t subscribe to the idea that 

Saskatchewan doctors are irresponsible, even though there are times when I might differ with them on 

their approach. However, I reserve the right for them to have their views, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, during the three years of study on medical care, I became keenly aware of the importance of us 

establishing a publicly administered financed comprehensive health service. It was during that study I 

became conscious that you cannot have a good health service which has built into it deterrent fees, that 

were advocated by some. It was for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I submitted a dissenting report on that 

particular item. Reference has already been made that there were recommendations by the Thompson 

Committee to implement deterrent fees. Well, Mr. Speaker, there was the pro and the con argument 

presented and certainly if anybody has been led to believe that the Thompson Committee recommended 

deterrent fees, on a holus-bolus, unrestricted basis, I suggest that you read pages 70 and 71 of the 

Thompson Committee Report, and it will tell you that the Thompson Committee didn‟t recommend 

unlimited deterrent fees. In my submission, in my dissent I said this: 

 

It is my firm view that deterrent charges have no place in a public program of health insurance. Their 

introduction violates the principles and objectives of health which are to promote good health, to 

prevent illness, to provide early diagnosis and treatment of disease and to promote rehabilitation. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1058 

Deterrent charges are characteristic devices of the private insurance companies. Insurance companies 

apply these measures in their sickness policies essentially to protect their insurance funds and safeguard 

the profits. One expects this. One does not expect a public program to utilize these measures. It is argued 

that deterrent charges are intended to prevent over-utilization, that is to deter insured beneficiaries from 

making unnecessary or frivolous demands for service. This, in turn, implies that the average citizen is in 

a position to judge in every situation whether or not he should seek the advice or care of his physician. 

The physician as well as the patient has a contributory responsibility to ensure that his services are 

wisely used. Deterrent charges, if they are to succeed in achieving their intended effect, are also liable to 

produce the opposite effect. They can lead to under-utilization by discouraging patients from seeking 

advice in the early stages of illness when symptoms may appear inconsequential. It is well known that 

early detection of illness and the prompt introduction of effective treatment can often prevent 

complications and chronic disability. The early seeking of medical care when any departure from the 

normal stay occurs is of importance for all ages. Thus, parents, for example, should be encouraged and 

not deterred from seeking prompt advice and care for their children whose illnesses are usually acute 

and of short term. Similarly in middle aged and older persons among whom chronic disease is more 

prevalent and often starts more insidiously, early care is vital. It is illogical and unsound from a health 

point of view to deter care in the early stages of chronic illness, but to cover all costs once disease has 

become chronic. 

 

While it is recognized that these charges, by being shifted to the patient, could represent a certain 

protection to the insurance fund, it must be clearly understood, Mr. Speaker, that they do not protect the 

insured patient in· any way. On the contrary, the costs for the patient and the total medical bill for the 

population are increased. 

 

The Minister, in moving second reading of the Bill, made reference to the irresponsibility and 

inconsiderate actions by some. Mr. Speaker, it is my opinion that a proper and effective use of the 

service can be encouraged in many positive ways. Of great importance in achieving this result is the 

education of the public to appreciate the possibilities and the limitations of medical services and to 

understand how to co-operate with the doctors and the hospital. Both the administrative agencies and all 

participating physicians have a major responsibility in this task, Mr. Speaker. This Government is 

prepared to spend thousands of dollars on election propaganda out of public funds, but it is not prepared 

to spend sufficient money in the health education field. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — And because of their failure it proposes to attack the problem through the imposition 

of, utilization fees, Mr. Speaker. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1059 

What I said in 1961 in my dissenting report is just as true today, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial Treasurer 

(Mr. Steuart) tried to disguise the deterrent fee and so did the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) by calling 

them utilization fees. The term is simply an euphemism to disguise the fact that the person using the 

services has to cover a part of it entirely out of his own pocket. The purpose of deterrent charges is 

obvious from its very name, Mr. Speaker. It is to discourage the would-be patient from availing himself 

of the service. It has already been proven and pointed out that what is a deterrent for one person is not 

for another. The well-to-do can indulge in their whims, while those financially less well-to-do are not 

able to. Deterrent charges tend to concentrate on the low-income groups. Yet it is these very low income 

groups which are in the most need of medical care, Mr. Speaker, according to the Canadian Sickness 

Survey. You know, Mr. Speaker, I told earlier that I was proud of serving on the Advisory Planning 

Committee on Medical Care. Not only was it a personal experience, an experience that I shall never 

forget, it gave me a better appreciation of how important it is for the public to assume the responsibility 

for the health services of its people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I was very proud when the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour whom I represented 

on that Committee submitted to the Thompson Committee one of the two most important documents, 

most important briefs that appeared before the Thompson Committee. One of the main submissions was 

that of the Saskatchewan College of Physicians and Surgeons; the other main submission was that of the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. This was acknowledged by the Committee; this was acknowledged 

by people outside the Committee. I was glad that organized labor despite the accusations that are being 

made by Members opposite, was able to give that type of leadership .  . . 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre: (Minister of Labour) — Louder! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — .  . . was able to give direction in what I believe to be one of the most important areas 

of action that followed from the Report of the Thompson Committee. We said this, as a Labor 

movement, “that the health needs of Canadian people can best be served by a public health care 

program.” We said that it is our principal position that such a public health care program should be 

comprehensive in scope, that is it should provide health care in the fullest sense of the term. Services 

should include the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of illness, the rehabilitation of those disabled and 

ill and the provision of drugs and appliances. The services of the program should be universally 

provided without regard to means. It should seek to provide health care of the highest quality. It should 

be so organized as to provide optimum distribution and co-ordination of the various 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1060 

types of health services agencies and personnel. It should take the necessary step to fill existing needs 

for health care, personnel, professional as well as technical and facilities so that comprehensive health 

care can be made available to everyone in Canada. It should be administered by the Department of 

Health at the Federal, provincial and local levels with the objective that all existing and new health 

services will be effectively co-ordinated. It should provide for an advisory council as part of its 

administrative structure, such council being representative of the interests of those who benefit from as 

well as those providing health services. It should include an appeal procedure — and finally, Mr. 

Speaker, it should be equitably financed and free from any co-insurance, deductible or other financial 

deterrents against its full use. Mr. Speaker, these principles that were annunciated by the Federation in 

its submission to the Thompson Committee became part of the guidelines that we followed. Naturally, 

there were different views that were expressed by other people. They were also taken into consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other day my colleague from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) described these proposed 

deterrent fees as a „sick tax‟. It is a tax that falls most heavily and unfairly on those least able to pay. The 

Provincial Treasurer is going to gouge millions of dollars of additional taxes from the poor. If the 

hospital deterrent fees are going to be adopted, as they were outlined earlier by the Minister of Health, 

then those people who are unfortunate enough and need hospital care will be required to pay between 

eight and 10 per cent of the total hospital bill of the Province, directly out of their pockets., and almost 

twice that amount or twice that percentage in respect of medical care, Mr. Speaker. It should be noted 

that these extra direct hospital charges, despite the statistics the Minister has given us as being charged 

on the patient, are being imposed at a time when in this province we are experiencing a decrease in 

hospital use. Between 1965 and 1966, there was a reduction of 37,000 hospital days. The average day 

stay for adult and children groups dropped from 9.6 to 9.5 in that one year period. In a15-year period 

between 1951 and 1966 the hospital days of stay have declined from 11.1 days to 9.5 days. In the case of 

infants it dropped in that same period from 8.6 to 6.5, Mr. Speaker. So when the Minister of Health 

alleges that there is a substantial hospital over-utilization, I submit that there is something lacking in the 

figures that he is quoting to us. The truth is that over the years there has been a substantial reduction of 

hospital stay, utilization is on the decrease and will continue to decrease as the health of our people is 

improved, because we have had a Medical Care Plan available to all the people without any deterrent 

charges. 

 

I ask the Minister of Health (Mr, Grant) and I ask the Government to advise this House of whether it has 

received any recommendations, any proposals in recent months to impose these deterrent fees that have 

been placed before us. Have any hospital boards asked for them, has the medical profession asked for 

them, have other groups directly interested and associated 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1061 

with health services asked for them, have the people of Saskatchewan asked for them. I ask the 

Government to table in this Assembly any specific briefs and representations it has received in recent 

months in respect of deterrent fees so that we can properly examine them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I have already reminded the Members of the Government that in 1964 they made a 

promise that they would extend health services to provide drug care. Three years later in this House the 

Premier told us that before a drug plan is introduced there would be a plebiscite. The Premier also told 

us that before any new health or welfare services are implemented by this Government, it would hold a 

plebiscite. Mr. Speaker, I submit this Government is proposing to introduce in this Province two new 

health plans, a deterrent hospital plan and a deterrent medical care plan. Deterrent health plans are new 

and foreign to the people of Saskatchewan. Let‟s have a plebiscite before they are introduced. Let‟s give 

the people a chance to express their views on whether they want these exorbitant deterrent charges, on 

whether they want these additional inhuman taxes imposed upon them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other things that concern me about this Bill. One of my concerns is: how will it 

be administered? We need a clarification whether deterrents apply in a similar way, as we now have in 

private wards or semi-private wards where a person has to place a deposit with the hospital. As a result 

of the deterrent fees will the patient, before he is admitted to the hospital, have to place a deposit with 

the hospital. I ask the Government to give us an answer. I want to know, Mr. Speaker, whether this 

Government can give us an assurance that these deterrent charges that have been announced by the 

Minister today, are going to be $2.50 this Friday and on Monday are they going to be $3 and by next 

Friday are they going to be $5, because really what this Government is asking in this Bill is a carte 

blanche policy. They can by Order-in-Council establish the deterrent fees at $2.50 and $1.50 today and 

tomorrow they can increase them. This is not acceptable. The people of Saskatchewan should know 

specifically and this Legislature should be given an opportunity to vote on specific deterrent charges. 

This Legislature has a right to review them from time to time. They should not be introduced and 

implemented by Order-in-Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last few days I have been receiving telephone calls, I have been receiving letters, 

telegrams and petitions from people urging me to do everything possible to resist the introduction of 

these vicious deterrent fees that are before us. I shall do everything in my power to prevent their 

introduction, Mr. Speaker. There is one piece of information that I think is very vital for this House to 

have before we carry on with the discussion and that is the Annual Report of the Hospital Services Plan. 

We have had tabled the Medical Care Report, we 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1062 

have had the vital statistics Report filed with us, but we still don‟t have the Annual Report of the 

Hospital Services plan. 

 

Mr. Grant: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, the Report that the Hon. Member refers to was tabled 

some time ago. I pointed out at that time that the printed copies were not available at that time, but will 

be distributed to them as soon as they came from the printers. A copy has been tabled with the House. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Well, the Minister might be right that it has been tabled here, but we certainly haven‟t 

got copies and certainly it is important for us to be able to study that Report before any future 

discussions. It is for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I would like to examine the Report, because I would like 

to see what is in it. I‟d like to make some further remarks at a future time, but in closing the discussion 

for today, Mr. speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the Government Members the remarks of 

a person whom I think they regard quite highly as I think most of the people in the world thought of him 

as a great leader, in many areas, I quote no other but the Hon. Winston Churchill who in 1944 said: 

 

The discoveries of healing science must be the inheritance of all, that is clear. Disease must be 

attacked whether it appears in the poorest or the richest man or woman, simply on the ground that it is 

an enemy. It must be attacked in the same way that the fire brigade will give its full assistance to the 

humble cottage as readily as it will give it to the most important mansion. Our policy is to create a 

national health service in order to assure that everybody in the country, irrespective of their means, 

age, sex or occupation, shall have equal opportunity to benefit from the best and most up-to-date 

medical and allied services available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have more to say in respect to this Bill, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General and provincial Secretary) moved second reading of Bill No. 16 — 

An Act to Facilitate the Enforcement of Maintenance Orders. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this proposed new Act entitled The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders is proposed to replace the present Act which is known as The Maintenance Orders Facilities for 

Enforcement Act. The change in name necessitates minor amendments to two other statutes, The 

Deserted Wives and Children‟s Maintenance Act and The Attachment. of Debts Act. The amendments 

to these two statutes are included as sections 23 and 24 of this Bill. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1063 

The purpose of the proposed new Act is to revise, consolidate and update our present legislation 

respecting enforcement of maintenance orders to bring the legislation into conformity with the model 

Bill which has been prepared by the Conference of Commissioners on the Uniformity of Legislation in 

Canada. The present Act is the Uniform Act which was prepared by the Uniformity Commission in 1946 

and enacted in this province in 1946. Since 1946, the conference has made several amendments to the 

Uniform Act and one of the purposes of the present Bill is to include these recent amendments. Mr. 

Speaker, all Provinces in Canada at the present time except Quebec are reciprocating states. In addition 

to the Provinces of Canada, the following other territories are reciprocating states; the Yukon 

Territories; the Northwest Territories; New Zealand; the Isle of Man; Queensland, Australia; Victoria, 

Australia; New South Wales, Australia; Australian Capital Territory; the states of Jersey and Guernsey; 

Colony of Southern Rhodesia; the Territory of Papua and New Guinea; England, and Ireland. Existing 

reciprocating states will continue to be reciprocating states under the new legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, 

these deserting husbands, which happens very often have increasingly fewer places that they can go, 

where the reciprocating status does not apply to them, and I hope that we can continue to expand the 

number of states that are reciprocating states in the world. Now the new features of this Bill are: first of 

all there is an expanded definition of maintenance order. This is in Section 2. (d), and it will include now 

such additional things as divorce decrees which were not included before, that‟s maintenance as part of a 

divorce decree, my friends will know what I‟m talking about; secondly, a provision that a maintenance 

order does not fail to be a maintenance order within the meaning of clause (d) of subsection 1 solely by 

reason of the fact that it maybe varied by the court by which the order was made. Then there is a 

provision for enforcement of the order. An order may now be enforced, as if it were an order made 

under The Deserted Wives and Children‟s Maintenance Act which would include provisions for 

imprisonment in the case of default. Then there is a section dealing with lack of jurisdiction in the court 

of a reciprocating state. The court in this province may refuse to register a maintenance order made by 

reciprocating states that lack jurisdiction to make the order. This is Section 4. The provision that a 

resident may apply the words and I quote: “On the application of the dependant who is a resident in the 

province” has been added to Section 6 to make it clear that the court in the area of the residence of the 

applicant has jurisdiction to grant an order. Then a new appeal provision has been added. Those are the 

salient differences in the Bill. A general comment would be that it updates the old Act, puts it in 

conformity with the uniform legislation which has been recommended by the Conference of 

Commissioners on Uniformity and improves to some extent at any rate the rights of a wife or a deserted 

wife and deserted children, who have a maintenance order and the husband or the ex-husband has left 

the jurisdiction and has gone to another jurisdiction. It puts her in a little better position than she‟s been 

heretofore to have this order enforced, so that she will get maintenance and 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1064 

that her children will get maintenance from her husband or ex-husband. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow: (Saskatoon Riversdale) — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to commend the 

Attorney General on the Bill that most of us, in fact all of us, I‟m sure on this side feel is a very fine Bill 

in principle. I want to make it very clear at the outset that we are not going to be opposing the principal 

features of this particular proposed enactment. However, in rising on second reading, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to point out what some Members on this side of the House feel is a recurring and continuing 

problem, not only with respect to this Bill, but other Bills in related areas, The Deserted Wives and 

Children‟s Maintenance Act and any other Bills that may have some jurisdiction or control over these 

problems, and that is this, that once (I‟m applying it just to the Bill that we are discussing here, Mr. 

Speaker) there is a reciprocal enforcement of a judgment, the experience has been so many times that 

it‟s almost impossible or absolutely difficult for a wife to actually gain some degree of monetary support 

from the delinquent or defendant husband. In other words, what I‟m really saying to the Attorney 

General is this. We feel it ought to be a matter of public policy that this Bill and the other present related 

Bills, if I may be given some latitude by the House to discuss them very briefly, ought to set out 

legislation that would permit a wife who has found to be deserted or has had a judgment reciprocally 

enforced in the Province of Saskatchewan, after reasonable efforts to obtain the monetary support from 

her delinquent or defendant husband, to be able to assign the judgment or to refer the judgment to the 

Department of Welfare or the Department of the Attorney General for payment of the amount as ordered 

by the reciprocally enforced judgment or in the case of the deserted wife the amount ordered by the 

deserted wife‟s judge. In other words, we are saying to the Attorney General that frequently in practice 

non-support becomes a very real thing. Academically speaking we have a very fine Bill, practically 

speaking for deserted wives; there are many problems in being able to get to the root and to the source of 

the financial support they seek. And so they may get a judgment, reciprocally enforced, but then are 

really left powerless and ineffective because there is no ready means of enforcement or no ready means 

whereby they can get their support and maintenance. So it‟s our view that legislation in this Act and The 

Deserted Wives ought to permit — and perhaps the Hon. Attorney General will consider some 

amendment in the Committee of the Whole — that a wife, after a reasonable period, should be allowed 

to transmit the judgment and assign it over to the Department of Welfare (I believe that‟s the appropriate 

Department or agency) so that the said Department would then make the payments to the wife in the 

amount of the order. The Attorney General‟s office or the Department of Welfare would then be 

responsible for going after the delinquent husband in getting the money that they are paying to the wife. 

I think this is a much desirable aspect. It really shifts the onus onto the Department. After all, they do 

have, despite austerity and other 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1065 

programs of date, more financial sources at hand in which to pursue this matter. I think it‟s particularly 

important when you have children involved in the cases that we are talking about here. I‟m not going to 

take much more time of the House other than to point out to the Members I have photo copies here of 

some of the relevant provisions in Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba and British Columbia. I‟ve taken the 

liberty of reviewing them and, in essence, all of the jurisdictions that I‟ve talked about, apart from 

Ontario, seem to me to have stronger teeth on the question of some sort of public backing and support 

for the deserted wife, the question of posting a bond, certainly to at least one-half of the total amount of 

the order that has been reciprocally enforced. I‟m not going to take up the time of the House to review 

this, but I commend it to the attention of the Hon. Attorney General. So as I say in conclusion, Mr. 

Speaker, I certainly think the legislation is a good piece of legislation, and I‟m sure Members on this 

side of the House will approve it in principle; but I would hope that the Hon. Attorney General will in 

second reading take notice of some of the observations I have made and perhaps some amendment might 

be made whereby a judgment so reciprocally enforced could be assigned over to the Department of 

Welfare or to the Department of the Attorney General. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t disagree with the observations made by the Hon. Member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). This is a hardy perennial of course — the matter of putting the 

law into practice. The law is a good law and we‟ve tightened it up as the Hon. Member has said. There 

are problems of course in the administration of an Act of this kind because what happens is — and Hon. 

Members will be aware — a chap deserts his wife and dependant children, leaves the Province of 

Saskatchewan. The wife gets an order for support of herself and her children against this man, when he 

goes to Newfoundland, or he goes to British Columbia or he goes to the Northwest Territories, or he 

leaves Canada altogether. Then there comes the practical problem of trying to find him and trying to 

register the maintenance order which you have in the Province of Saskatchewan in the jurisdiction that 

he‟s gone to. Many times when you find him, we‟ll say perhaps in Prince Rupert or some place in the 

mines or in the woods in British Columbia, you just find him and you just get the judgment registered 

there when he takes off again and goes to Alaska or goes to Newfoundland, and it becomes a sort of a 

trip across Canada from one jurisdiction to another. These are the frustrations of trying to enforce these 

kind of maintenance orders. Now my friend from Riversdale has suggested an assignment to my 

Department or to the Department of Social Welfare. We‟ll look into this, I‟m not sure that that‟s 

practical and I‟m not sure that it is necessary and I‟ll tell you why. As a matter of practical operation of 

this Act, we do at the present time, one of my solicitors does engage in this business of registering 

judgments in other jurisdictions. Mr. Gebhard in my Department is engaged now and has been for some 

time in the attempt to register these maintenance orders from Saskatchewan in other jurisdictions, so, if 

these ladies who have 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1066 

these orders for themselves and their dependant children, get in touch with our Department, we do take 

steps in co-operation with the Departments of the Attorney General in the other provinces to register 

these maintenance orders. But as I say, many, many times we are frustrated. By the time we get the 

order registered in British Columbia, they‟ve gone some place else, and I don‟t think that any amount of 

changing the Act is going to improve that situation. I think we have a mobile society, it‟s a free country. 

People can leave and can go from one place to another. This is one of the problems. 

 

Insofar as assigning it to the Department, I‟m told that the Department of Social Welfare does provide 

legal assistance to these ladies in getting their court orders in the first instance and certainly my 

Department insofar as registering these maintenance orders in other jurisdictions is concerned. I will 

look into it some more, and we will have another discussion about it when we get into Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart moved second reading of Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as I announced in the Budget Speech, the Government proposes to increase the 

tobacco tax on cigarettes, cigars and tobacco products effective March 2, 1968. On cigarettes, which 

account for over 90 per cent of the tobacco tax, we propose to increase the rate from 1/5 of a cent per 

cigarette to 8/25 per cigarette for regular and king size and 9/25 per cigarette for super or extra length. 

Tax on a package of 25 cigarettes, regular or king size, which accounts for about 95 per cent of cigarette 

sales, will increase from 5 cents a package to 8 cents per package. In comparison with other Provinces, 

Manitoba imposed the highest taxes in cigarettes equal to 10 cents per package of 25. Ontario recently 

announced an increase three times the former rate, the tax to be 7 1/2 cents on a package of 25. In 

Newfoundland the tax on a package of 25 is 6 1/2 cents; Quebec 6 cents; Prince Edward Island and New 

Brunswick is 5 cents; and Nova Scotia 2 1/2 cents. Alberta and British Columbia did not levy a tobacco 

tax, although British Columbia collects a 5 per cent sales tax on tobacco sales. The tobacco tax on cigars 

and tobacco products will be doubled. We estimate the additional revenue will be $1.8 million from this 

increase. We also propose to amend the Act to include in the definition of tobacco, tobacco substitutes 

which have been marketed lately. We propose to exempt medicinal substances used for the relief of 

respiratory conditions, which are taken in the same manner as tobacco. These substances fall in the 

category of drugs and medicines which we exempt from the sales tax. With this brief explanation, Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) — Mr. Speaker, when the Treasurer was introducing this Bill he 

said that he announced in his Budget Speech that 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1067 

there was going to be an increase in the tax on tobacco products. I think my only observation would be 

that he did indeed announce it in his Budget Speech. It is a pity that he didn‟t announce it a little earlier 

when he was making so very many public announcements to the press and to the public back in August 

and September. I think the public would have appreciated some more frankness from him at that time. 

They would have appreciated the announcements of the many taxes that were going to be increased. 

This is just one of a long series of taxes which we heard enumerated in the Budget Speech, and which 

we are now going to see enacted by one piece of legislation after another. 

 

Given the fact that some tax increases are necessary — and certainly we don‟t concede that all the tax 

increases to be introduced by the Treasurer are necessary — but given the fact that some increases are 

necessary, I suppose that this tax is the least objectionable or one of the least objectionable of the taxes 

to be increased. I wish my former colleague, the former Member for Cutknife were here, as he could put 

enthusiasm into the dastardly nature of a tax on tobacco products. I can‟t work up his enthusiasm for this 

and if we accept the fact that we have to have some increases in taxes, this is probably one of the 

increases which we will object to least. Accordingly I don‟t have anything further to say about it, except 

to say that it is a pretty sad commentary on the Government opposite that they have to bring in seven or 

eight major tax increases in one session. This Bill indicates once again, the, shall we say, disingenuous 

basis upon which they were elected in October. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Steuart moved second reading of Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products 

Act. 

 

He said: Well, I didn‟t think that I should disappoint the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney) so I thought I might as well bring in another one this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1968-69 we estimate total Government highway spending including grid road grants 

will increase about $70 million. The yield from the tax under The Fuel Petroleum Products Act, if we 

assumed no change in the rate, would be $37.8 million in 1968-69. Even if we add to this total estimated 

motor vehicle licence fees based on 1967-68, fees of $11.5 million, total revenue from these two sources 

would fall short of total highway spending by $20.9 million. We do not suggest that the yield from these 

sources of revenue should equal total Government highway spending. We recognize that the 

Government receives other tax revenues that are related to the use of the highway system such as the 

sales tax. On the other hand, not all the receipts from the gasoline tax are received from users of the 

highways. However, we believe that most of the costs of our highway systems should be directly borne 

by the users of the system. For these reasons I announced in the Budget Speech, that effective March 2, 

1968, the tax under The Fuel 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1068 

Petroleum Products Act, would be increased from 15 cents to 17 cents per gallon in the case of gasoline, 

and from 18 cents to 20 cents per gallon in the case of diesel fuel. We estimate that this increase will 

yield $4.8 million. Effective April 1, 1968, this 2 cents per gallon tax will be extended to all fuel 

petroleum products currently non-taxable, which are consumed in internal combustion engines. This will 

maintain the present differential between taxable and currently non-taxable fuel petroleum products of 

15 cents per gallon on gasoline and 18 cents per gallon on diesel fuel. Fuel petroleum products which 

will be used for any heating purposes and fuel petroleum products which are used for manufacturing and 

drilling purposes, except when used in internal combustion engines, will be exempt from the 2 cents per 

gallon tax. The following fuel petroleum products which are currently non-taxable will be subject to the 

2 cents per gallon tax on April 1, 1968: 1. aviation fuel when used in aircraft; 2. all purple fuel 

petroleum products used in internal combustion engines; 3. propane or other liquid petroleum products, 

bunker fuel and crude oil, when used in internal combustion engines. The following fuels will be exempt 

from the above mentioned tax: 1. heating fuels; 2. kerosene or coal oil when used in the operating of 

domestic appliances or for lighting or heating purposes; 3. liquefied petroleum gases including propane 

and butane when used exclusively for cooking, heating and domestic purposes; 4. solvents and any 

similar products manufactured and sold for the same purpose; 5. fuels for manufacturing and drilling 

purposes except when used in internal combustion engines. 

 

We estimate that the 2 cents per gallon tax will yield $3.2 million in 1968-69. Of this amount we 

estimate the cost to the farmers will be about $2.5 million or some $2 million less than the estimated tax 

saving on the use of purple fuel in farm trucks. The cost of the 2 cents per gallon tax on other users of 

fuel petroleum products will be partly offset by the exemption of all taxable fuel petroleum products 

from the education and health tax. We estimate that the total net additional revenue from this proposed 

amendment to The Fuel Petroleum Products Act will be $8 million in 1968-69. Five provinces will have 

higher taxes on gasoline than Saskatchewan; Newfoundland at 20 cents; Nova Scotia 19 cents; Prince 

Edward Island, New Brunswick, and now Ontario at 18 cents;. Manitoba‟s tax will be the same as 

Saskatchewan‟s at 17 cents. Three Provinces will still be lower: Quebec at 16; Alberta at 12, although 

this will be increased to 15 cents on June 1st; and British Columbia 13 cents. Four Provinces will still 

have a higher tax on diesel fuel than Saskatchewan: Nova Scotia 27; Ontario 24; New Brunswick 23; 

Quebec 22. Newfoundland and Manitoba will have the same rate of tax as Saskatchewan which is 20 

cents. Three provinces wi11 have a lower tax on diesel fuel: Prince Edward Island 18 cents; Alberta 14 

cents, but this will be increased to 17 cents on June 1st, British Columbia 15 cents. 

 

I understand in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, that on June 1st, the 3 cent per gallon tax will be extended to all 

fuel petroleum 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1069 

products, including purple fuel to farmers which are not now subject to tax, except fuel used for heating 

purposes and used for secondary manufacturing and drilling purposes, except when used in combustion 

engineering. British Columbia collects a 1 cent per gallon tax on aviation fuel and on colored fuel. In 

spite of the fact that Saskatchewan has a far greater mileage of highway per capita than any other 

province in Canada, our gasoline tax will be about the national average. May I remind Members 

opposite that, while they were in office, the tax on gasoline increased by 7 cents, from 7 to 14 cents, and 

on diesel fuel increased by 10 cents, from 7 to 17 cents. At the same time the gasoline tax was doubled. 

The CCF party when they were in office refused to exempt the farmers from this tax on gasoline used in 

their farm trucks. The Liberal party took office and not only did we allow the farmers to use purple fuel 

in their farm trucks, but we have also increased highway spending from $24.2 million in 1963-64 to 

$59.1 million in the current year, an increase of 144 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I feel that this tax increase is equitable and it is necessary. I now move that the Bill be 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff: (Turtleford) — I just want to ask the Minister a question. Am I right that oils and 

greases are taxed? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They are exempt. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) — Mr. Speaker, we have heard from the Treasurer a second of 

his tax increases. After hearing them, this will be called Black Friday the second. We have just heard 

from the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) and he has announced a particularly unsavory tax increase. We 

now have the second one from the Provincial Treasurer. The first one was, as I indicated, more savory or 

aromatic but this one is definitely unsavory and unaromatic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Because what the Treasurer is doing here is increasing the gasoline tax and applying 

it for the first time, I believe, in the history of Saskatchewan, on fuels burned by farmers in combines, 

tractors and other motorized equipment used on their farms. I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that there 

could hardly be a more unpropitious time to apply an additional tax on the cost of farm production than 

in March, 1968. I think that all of us know the very difficult circumstances under which farmers are 

laboring. We have had for 10 or 15 years a sharpening cost-price squeeze. We have seen farm costs rise 

and continue to rise, and we have seen farm prices rise much less rapidly and in some instances not rise 

at all. Mr. Speaker, the full impact 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1070 

of this cost-price squeeze has been masked, has been hidden, by two or three events. Firstly, there has 

been the increase in the price of wheat, which over the last four, five or six years has increased from an 

amount in the $1.80 or $1.90 range up to $2.17 or thereabouts. Secondly, we have had very large 

overseas sales for the past five years particularly to Russia and China. Thirdly, we have had five 

successive better-than-average crops. And these three events have hidden the full impact of the cost-

price squeeze in which the farmer found himself. But, Mr. Speaker, during the past 12 months, each of 

these three features which hid the true situation, has fallen away. I indicated, Mr. Speaker, that we had 

five successive better-than-average crops. Now I can‟t speak for what the 1968 wheat crop will be, but 

its prospects are about normal. We had good sub-surface moisture in fall, but I think that everyone is a 

little uneasy about this early spring. It is obviously far too early to say what the 1968 crop will be, and I 

am the last one to offer a prediction. We have several on this side who can do that rather better than I. I 

see the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) chuckle and when I get into the field of crop predictions 

he has every right to chuckle. 

 

But at any rate we are far from having a good crop in the bag. The 1967 crop was just above average, 

and we, therefore, haven‟t as much wheat on hand as we would have had, had we had a crop such as 

characterized the early 1960s. Secondly, overseas sales are definitely cloudy. I believe that it was only 

today that Mr. Gibbings of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, speaking to the SARM Convention, gave 

figures which indicated that the overseas sales in this crop year are just about half of what they were in 

the last crop year at the same time. Certainly nobody can be anything but alarmed by figures such as 

that. Thirdly, the price which previously was around the $2.17 mark has dropped to around $1.95 1/2 or 

thereabouts mark. So we have seen a sharp drop in prices. We have seen a contraction of markets. And 

we have seen the possibility of a crop which is only average. Each of these is going to mean, and is 

meaning, that farmers are suffering a growing cash shortage. This hasn‟t been evident up till now, or it‟s 

only been partially evident up to now, but I think that all of us know that there is in fact less cash in the 

country than there was last year at this time or the year before at this time. This is illustrated in part by 

the comments earlier today in this House by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) in indicating that 

sales of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds aren‟t what they might be. We know that quotas are very much 

down. I don‟t have the figures before me, but all of us know that the quotas are very much lower than 

last year at this time. A large number of delivery points have quotas, which are much lower than they 

were at this time last year. All of this means, Mr. Speaker, that our farmers are going to be short of cash. 

We are all hoping that the final payment comes through fairly soon, but even that will only pay for the 

necessary spring expenses of getting a crop in. I am not saying anything that most Members of the 

House are not fully aware of. I am saying, Mr. Speaker, that, if this is true, if the farmers are suffering 

from a growing shortage of cash, this is hardly 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1071 

the time to impose upon them an additional burden on the costs of production. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In particular, it is hardly the time to pick out an area for taxation which, so far as I am 

aware, has never before been taxed in Saskatchewan; the taxation of fuels on tractors and combines and 

other motorized equipment used on the farm. I know that Members opposite attempted to defend this on 

the grounds that the 2-cent tax on fuel burned in tractors and combines, is counter-balanced, by the 

exemption from tax on fuel burned in farm trucks. And for many farmers that will be true, although it 

might be noted that even for those farmers it will be a substantial withdrawal of this plum of tax-free 

purple gas, on which the Liberals campaigned, They ought, I think, to have had the courage, if they were 

going to pull back that plum, to have simply withdrawn the tax exemption on purple gas. But instead the 

Government has gone at it by the back door and it is going to pick up from those farmers substantially 

equivalent amounts of tax. For many farmers it will not be equivalent. I am not accepting the Treasurer‟s 

figures but I am accepting the direction of his figures, that in many cases the amount of tax imposed on 

fuels burned in tractors and combines will not yet equal the exemption of taxation on purple gas in farm 

trucks. However, Mr. Speaker, we earlier had in this House an indication of the Government‟s thinking 

in this regard. It proposes to maintain which was termed a differential between the cost of gasoline 

burned in ordinary vehicles and that burned in farm vehicles; a differential of 15 cents a gallon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a little mathematics will show you that, while the Treasurer can get away with his 

explanation now that a 2-cent tax on tractor fuel doesn‟t add up to as much as the exemption of 15 cents 

on farm trucks, it will not be true if this tax goes up from 2 cents to 3 cents, to 4 cents, as it inevitably 

will. See where the balance of advantage lies then. As that tax keeps going up and the differential of 15 

cents is maintained, the farmer goes further and further in the hole. With a tax of 4 cents, the farmer 

would be far better off to have no purple gas at all in his farm truck and no taxation on fuel for his 

tractor and his combine. 

 

This is just a foot in the door. I don‟t think that the farm people of Saskatchewan will welcome this foot 

in the door. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — This is entirely the wrong tax, entirely at the wrong time. Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) was at pains to say that a good deal of money was being spent on highways as 

opposed to the ordinary citizens. Why people who operate aircraft should be called upon to pay for 

highways is a 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1072 

little obscure. I would have welcomed an explanation of why people who burn fuel in many of these 

vehicles, which are never going to see a highway, should be called upon to pay taxes which the 

Treasurer indicates are related to the cost of highway construction. We didn‟t get this explanation. We 

didn‟t get it because there isn‟t any explanation. This is simply a tax imposed on the age-old basis of 

imposing taxes by the Liberal party. You get it where you can. Never mind whether it is fair, never mind 

whether it imposes an equal burden, never mind these little factors, if you can get your hands into a 

man‟s pocket, get it in there and don‟t ask any questions. And this is what is being done. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, some of us didn‟t have a full opportunity to consider this matter. We didn‟t really expect the 

Provincial Treasurer to put in all his tax Bills on this one day, on this Friday. I don‟t know whether he 

has a sort of an arrangement to put in all the black news on Friday or not. But there are one or two other 

things with respect to this tax that I want to raise, and accordingly I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of public works) moved second reading of Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend 

The Water Rights Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to this Bill No. 25 are of a minor nature and can probably be best 

handled in Committee. As Members know The Water Rights Act embodies two basic principles: that all 

surface and ground water in the province is the property of the Crown and the right to use of this water 

may be obtained by persons complying with the provisions of the Act. 

 

At the present time the Water Resources Commission is in the process of implementing new 

administration procedures for the processing of applications for water rights; These procedures are 

designed to speed up the process and to pave the way for recording and retrieving the urgently needed 

water data that are available. These amendments are required to clarify the intent of the Act to admit the 

adoption of these more-precise administration procedures and to provide for the licensing of storage 

projects built for a multi-purpose use. I think probably most of these things can be better discussed in 

Committee. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Minister is right when 

he says that it can best be dealt with in Committee. I wonder, however, in order to facilitate that 

discussion, if he could provide us with either before or after that time, preferably before, a full schedule 

of charges with respect to licences which may be contemplated in this regard. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I can do this. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1073 

Mr. Guy moved second reading of Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Ground Water Conservation 

Act. 

 

He said: Yes, Mr. Speaker. in this Act also, the amendments are of a minor nature. The basic purposes of 

The Ground Water Conservation Act are to collect, analyze, and disseminate the quantitative and 

qualitative data on ground water resources of the province and to aid the public in developing this 

resource. Also the second purpose is to establish procedures whereby prospective users of ground water 

can develop and use the water and establish certain rights in order of precedent and so on. Now to 

accomplish the first objective it is necessary to have pretty well continuous contact with the well-

drillers. The present Act calls for the licensing of the well-driller. The amendment calls for the 

registration of well drilling machines or rigs. Now the purpose for this is that, under the present Act, the 

original wording has led to the suggestion that we were licensing the competence of these men to drill 

wells, which of course wasn‟t the intent. The amendment corrects this and also helps to provide and 

maintain a list of drilling machines in the province that would be available to the public. The second 

objective to establish procedures is pretty well outlined under regulations. Regulations have been passed 

under the Act providing for a system of licences for ground water use and the second amendment brings 

the Act into line with these regulations. The Act now provides that every person must notify the 

Commission prior to drilling a well. We are proposing in the amendment a clause that indicates that, for 

all uses except domestic, anyone who uses ground water must first of all comply with the regulations 

pursuant to the Act. Again, I think most of the questions that the Members may have could be answered 

better in Committee. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes: (Touchwood) — Could I ask the Minister a question? Did you say except domestic 

use? 

 

Mr. Guy: — Except domestic use. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 27 — An Act to 

amend The Local Improvement Districts Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with amendments to The Local Improvement District Act and is an 

attempt to bring this Act in line with the provisions of The Rural Municipal Act. The Act deals with the 

assessing of hamlets without a Minister‟s order. Other amendments deal with the point which I 

mentioned in connection with The Rural Municipality Act last night of assessing property leased in the 

station ground area and the lessee would be taxed as the assessed owner. We are also amending the Act 

so that the operator of oil and gas wells does not need to give such detailed information to the LID office 

for assessment 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1074 

purposes. There is also an amendment to the Act providing for the establishment of a Court of Revision 

as we find in the other urban Acts and the RM Acts. This is being brought in due to the fact that at the 

present time an assessment appeal is to the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission insofar as an LID is 

concerned. The Saskatchewan Assessment Commission, we feel, is receiving too much work of this 

nature. It would be more advantageous to establish a Court of Revision in the LID for two or three 

reasons, not only to relieve the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission but to establish the procedure of 

courts of Revision in the LIDS, so that, when they do come into an RM, they will be acquainted with the 

procedure. There is also an amendment dealing with the disposition of the proceeds from cultivation 

leases covering lands in a LID. Mr. Speaker, I think the balance of the Bill can best be dealt with in 

Committee and I move that Bill No. 27 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis: (Melfort-Tisdale) — There are some comments which Members on this side of the 

House wish to make regarding this Bill at a future time and now I would like to have discussion of this 

Bill adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Mr. Estey moved second reading of Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Industrial Towns Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this deals with amendments to The Industrial Towns Act. I might point out that at 

the next session of the Legislature we hope to bring in a consolidated Urban Act, as I mentioned 1ast 

night, and it is quite possible that The Industrial Towns Act will then pass out of existence. The Bill 

which is before the House provides for the establishment of an industrial town in an LID or a northern 

administration district. We feel that such an amendment is necessary in the case of Jan Lake. Another 

amendment to this Act is to give the Minister authority to make grants or loans for the general 

development of industrial towns, as we feel at the present time the Act only provides for grants for the 

purpose of administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 28 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis: (Melfort-Tisdale) — Mr. Speaker, for the same reason, I would ask permission to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 29 — An Act to provide for the 

Licensing of Real Estate Brokers and Real Estate Salesmen in Cities and Towns. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Act replaces The Real Estate 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1075 

Agents Licensing Act which was enacted in 1953 and which has not since undergone a general revision. 

The purpose of this legislation, of course, is to regulate the sale of property by the licensing and bonding 

of people who are engaged in this type of business. Members of the public are often inexperienced in the 

buying or selling of their property and to this extent depend on real estate agents for the proper handling 

of their transactions. This Bill is designed to eliminate problems experienced over the past years by 

spelling out more clearly existing principles and by incorporating some new provisions. The scope of the 

Act is being extended to include persons selling their own property where they complete over five such 

trades in the calendar year, Persons therefore engaged in the business of buying and selling real estate 

will be required to be licensed and bonded. A few years ago there were some contractors who had taken 

deposits on property on which they were to build, and they went into bankruptcy. We know of one 

particular case where a young couple who borrowed the money to make the deposit on a new home lost 

most if not all of their deposit. So the Act is being extended to include people, like contractors for 

example, who are building on their own lots, but we have exempted the casual trader and we‟ve made an 

arbitrary decision in the Act that anybody up to five is really not in the business of buying and selling 

real estate, so we‟ve exempted five trades. The Act is further extended to apply to persons trading in real 

estate anywhere in Saskatchewan, if such persons are not residents of Saskatchewan and have not 

resided in the province for a period of one year. At the present time, for example, a person residing in 

Calgary may and does in fact — this happens. These people do come into Saskatchewan to trade in 

ranches and farm land, particularly in the west part of the province. Under the existing Act they don‟t 

need a licence or a bond, while a person residing for example, in Regina, is by reason of his place of 

residence required to be licensed to do the same thing. So it is really unfair competition for a real estate 

agent under the existing setup to come in from Alberta and not have to get a licence or a bond. So we‟re 

changing that. 

 

Now additionally, the Act is being extended to cover people selling subdivision lots outside 

Saskatchewan. A person selling subdivision lots is now required to be licensed, only if he lives in a 

Saskatchewan city or town. We‟ve had some abuses of this particular situation where we‟ve had people 

coming into our province and selling lakefront lots. One, I think of, is in Alberta; another one, I think of, 

is lots down in Florida — this type of thing — and some of them I‟m told are flooded out. We are trying 

to close the gap here and provide that these people must be registered. The Act also provides that a 

salesman of a licensed broker, that‟s a salesman of a licensed real estate agent, must be licensed, even 

though the salesman does not live in a city or a town and does not trade in real estate in a city or a town. 

It is our view that the public is not adequately protected, unless the salesman of a licensed broker also 

must be licensed. 

 

Section 14 of the new Bill is new. It permits terms, 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1076 

conditions, and restrictions to be attached to a licence and therefore makes the licensing requirements 

more flexible. This is a similar provision to a provision which we have in The Direct Sellers Act, Motor 

Dealers Act, Securities. Act and The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 

 

Section 21 is new. It will provide for a hearing by the superintendent, that‟s the superintendent of 

insurance — he‟s also the superintendent under this Act — and provides for a hearing where a person is 

dissatisfied with his decision. This provision is designed to give a dissatisfied person further opportunity 

to state his case. This provision has been copied from The Motor Dealers Act. Now the bonding 

provisions have been amended to facilitate the carrying out of the intent and purpose of the bond. 

 

Now under existing legislation, a bond is forfeited where a judgment based on the finding of fraud has 

been obtained against the agent. This Bill will eliminate any reference to fraud and provides for 

forfeiture where judgment is obtained in respect of a claim arising out of a trade in real estate. Under 

existing legislation, also, it is necessary in the case of bankruptcy that proceedings be taken under The 

Canadian Bankruptcy Act to forfeit a bond. This Bill eliminates this requirement, provides that a bond 

may be forfeited where the agent commits an act of bankruptcy, whether or not proceedings have in fact 

been taken. Of course an act of bankruptcy is defined in The Bankruptcy Act. This will eliminate, we 

believe, the expense of appointing a receiver in bankruptcy and the difficulty, which arises when there 

are no assets of any value to cover the expenses of the receiver. This happens many times. You get 

people in bankruptcy who have committed acts of bankruptcy, but there are no assets to administer. Still 

the way the Act is now you‟d have. to go through the expense of getting a receiver appointed, appointed 

in bankruptcy — that‟s usually at least $500 and sometimes $1,000 — so we have eliminated the 

expense of appointing a receiver in bankruptcy. Any bond proceeds not expended in settling claims, 

arising from real estate trades or payment of the expenses of the superintendent, will be refunded 

through the bonding company. 

 

Sections 25 to 42 of the Bill which have to do with the regulation of trading have undergone extensive 

revision in order to clarify the intent and purpose of the Act. For example, the type of information to be 

contained in an offer is stated in Section 29. The Bill also deals with the matter of an agent‟s 

commission where a deal is not completed. This has been quite a clause and I‟m sure Hon. Members 

have had cases like this brought to their attention. I‟ll give you a simple example of a chap who is 

selling a house through a real estate agent and we‟ll say that a $500 deposit is put down by the purchaser 

with the real estate agent. When the purchaser changes his mind and decides not to go through with the 

deal, now the vendor, the person selling their house, may have gone to a great deal of trouble, may have 

moved out of the house, may have on the 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1077 

strength of the sale of his house bought another house, put a deposit on that, and he is subjecting himself 

to a great deal of loss possibly. The way it is in the existing Act, it is not altogether clear as to who is 

entitled to retain that deposit. And I know of many cases where the agent has retained the whole deposit 

because he says, “Well I‟ve earned the commission; it‟s not my fault that the purchaser welched on the 

deal.” It is true that the agent of course is probably entitled to something because he‟s done a lot of 

work. He is maybe entitled to something, but also the vendor has been put perhaps to a great deal of 

expense and inconvenience. Now in this Bill we are providing that in these circumstances an agent is 

limited in the amount of his commission to not more than one-half of the forfeited deposit, so that, in my 

example, if there was a $500 deposit to be forfeited, one-half would be retained by the agent and one-

half would be given back to the vendor. We think this is a reasonable kind of adjustment of this kind of 

situation. It is not satisfactory the way it is. 

 

Now Sections 46 to 50 call for a prospectus and the delivery thereof to every purchaser in the case of the 

sale of subdivision lots situated outside Saskatchewan. I talked about this a minute ago in another 

context. The trading of subdivision lots has resulted in many abuses in the United States and other parts 

of Canada. We‟ve received many inquiries by people outside our province as to requirements in the 

province. So far we haven‟t experienced too much difficulty, but we want to avoid these problems of our 

citizens buying flooded lots in Florida or sand dunes in Arizona. We think that by requiring these 

prospectuses — they have to put in all the details, they have to certify in much the same manner as 

prospectuses under The Securities Act — by making these provisions we will be closing the door, I 

hope, before anybody in the province gets defrauded by this kind of operation. So I think that‟s a good 

addition to the Act. 

 

Section 52 provides for heavier and more realistic penalties which may facilitate the enforcement of the 

Act. In preparing this Section, we have examined corresponding legislation in other jurisdictions and we 

have tried to carry on along the same lines of other Provinces. Now the Act will provide for a Real 

Estate Council, appointed by the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association, to act in an advisory capacity to 

the superintendent and to carry out certain other duties, which it is hoped will generally improve the 

services rendered by real estate brokers to the public. This has been asked for. As a matter of fact the 

new Act has been asked for by the Real Estate Association and they particularly asked for this Real 

Estate Council, and it will be a liaison body. I would at this point like to pay tribute to the Saskatchewan 

Real Estate Association, because I think in the years that I‟ve been here I think they have demonstrated a 

genuine concern and interest in improving and upgrading the practice of real estate in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. And I think their desire to appoint this council to advise the superintendent, the Deputy 

Provincial Secretary, Mr. Beaudry is a real desire on their part to upgrade the profession, not only in 

their own interests but in the public interest. Therefore, I think 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1078 

this is a desirable addition to this Act. 

 

With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading. We can go into details when we 

get into Committee. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan: (Regina North West) — Mr. Speaker, my remarks shall be brief. I think the changes 

that have been outlined are good for the real estate industry. The Bill is in reality bringing the legislation 

for real estate brokers up-to-date, and the legislation is based on the experiences that the real estate 

industry has had over the last 10 or 15 years. We on this side of the House endorse the Bill and the new 

sections that are being introduced, I think will be beneficial to both the industry and the general public. 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker: (Regina South East) — One question if I may. You mentioned the deposit that 

may be made by a person buying a home, is that spelled out clear enough in the Act so that what is 

refunded would be the percentage that real estate brokers are to charge. Now a man may be entitled to 5 

per cent of $10,000 — $500. Suppose there is a deposit of $600, is the person protected to that extent 

that he would get that $100 back? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Very clearly, Mr. Speaker, in the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 30 — An Act providing for 

Certain Temporary Changes in the Law respecting Agricultural Leaseholds. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill which comes up every three years in the Legislature. It becomes 

necessary because of the fact that in our province over the last good many years — I suppose 20 or 25 

years — and due to the quota system of marketing grain in the province, farmers carry over grain from 

one year to the next. Actually it is a new Temporary Act, we have to pass it every year, not every three 

years. Let‟s say a tenant has had a three-year lease and the lease expires on December 31, 1968, and then 

he doesn‟t get another lease. The owner of the land gives the lease to somebody else or he sells the land. 

On December 31, 1968 under the normal law of landlord and tenant, the tenant no longer has any right 

to enter into possession of this property, this farm, and yet he still has his share of the crop there. This 

Act provides that, notwithstanding the fact that he may have lost his legal right to enter into these 

premises for the purposes of getting his share of the crop, he has the right to continue to enter into 

possession to market his share of the crop. That‟s provided. We passed this Act every year I think for the 

last 15 or 20 years. Section 3 says: 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1079 

Notwithstanding anything in any Act or law but subject to the provisions of this Act, where upon the 

termination of his tenancy any crop grown by a tenant in the year 1967 on land held under his tenancy 

is threshed but the grain is not removed from the land owing to a shortage of grain storage 

accommodation or impossibility of sale thereof, the tenant may, after giving three days‟ notice to the 

owner of the land, enter upon the land with necessary assistants, vehicles, etc. and remove the grain 

that belongs to the tenant; and the owner of the land shall afford the tenant every reasonable 

opportunity to remove the grain. 

 

So this is simply a repetition of the same kind of Act in previous years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky: (Prince Albert East-Cumberland) — I was going to ask the Minister before 

he sat down just a question. It seems that we‟ve been passing the said kind of Act for so many years. 

Now I was just wondering if it couldn‟t be possible to make it a permanent Act or at least something that 

would be more or less permanent, so we wouldn‟t have to go through this procedure each year? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose we could. I suppose it‟s conceivable that circumstances might 

change to the point where you didn‟t need this kind of Act. It has been the procedure, it was the 

procedure of the former Government to pass it every year; we‟ve just simply carried on the same way. 

But I‟ll have a look at that. It might be all right to put it in there and leave it there. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan: (Regina North West) — Mr. Speaker, this legislation represents routine departmental 

housekeeping and none of us would challenge the value of it, the necessity for it or the legal reasoning 

which instigates it. Legislation which protects the storage of grain beyond the term of a lease is realistic 

and practical particularly when grain deliveries are restricted. For many years it was my responsibility 

and privilege, and I have always considered it as a particular honor, to have been delegated the 

responsibility for administering this legislation and other similar security legislation. The security 

contained in the Land Contracts legislation, Limitation of Civil Rights, Farm Security Act, Mediation 

Board Act, Tax Enforcement, and debt negotiation procedures, represents the wishes of the farm 

population of Saskatchewan. They express a need written by three different political types of 

government and each was striving to place on the Statute Books laws that would promote the best 

interests of rural Saskatchewan. The principles and the procedures and the security and the legislative 

expression based on actual experience should not be compromised one iota. But I 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1080 

think, Mr. speaker, we may have arrived at a period in the history of farm security legislation, when it 

should be updated, modernized and re-written to meet modern times and to solve today‟s problems. 

Farming has changed. To protect a quarter section is hardly practical today. Methods have changed. 

Financing has many new wrinkles. Perhaps we are afraid to study and readjust and update, but one day 

soon, and it could be anytime, we might need modern, versatile, practical legislation to cope with rural 

economic problems, instead of bringing in a bit of legislation each time we meet. I think we should look 

at the overall picture. As a Legislature, I would like to see us prepare for such an emergency. How? 

Well, no Legislator should proceed in this overhaul of security legislation and modernization of 

procedures without consulting all parties concerned and particularly our rural residents at every step. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to see this Legislature set up an all-party committee to write, after careful study, 

what might be known as The Farmer‟s Charter. No more worthwhile undertaking and no more 

appreciated legislation would exist on our Statute Books, Mr. Speaker, if such a committee did its work 

diligently, and well. I recommend it to the consideration of Members of this House, regardless of what 

riding they represent, for we are taxed with the responsibility of representing Saskatchewan. Good 

legislation in this field — and we might. call the new legislation as I say, The Farmer‟s Charter — 

would be in the best interests of all of us. Such legislation in one package, bringing security to rural 

residents, would indicate our full-fledged interest in the economic welfare of the agricultural industry of 

our province. I think this Bill is necessary and certainly we are in favor of it. But we should review all 

the legislation, because at this stage it is very much out of date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Messer: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to comment further to my colleague of 

Regina North West. This Bill is certainly a good Bill. It hasn‟t been altered from what it was under the 

previous Administration, but the agricultural situation has changed considerably since the time that this 

Bill was introduced. We find that there are much, much more volumes of money being borrowed and in 

much greater quantities, and the entire economics of agriculture is no longer the way it was when this 

first Securities Act was brought into this Legislature. I think that it is with merit that a committee should 

be set up, so that we would have an entirely new Bill in regard to this problem that would keep in pace 

with the present agricultural needs of this province. I would again urge the Government to look into such 

a committee and proceed with this. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all Hon. Members realize that this Bill deals only with 

specific problem, not with the whole gamut of farm security. I‟m sure that all Hon. Members 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1081 

will also realize that the legislative competence of a Province with respect to many of the most 

important matters of farm security is very, very restricted. I refer of course to the matter of interest, the 

matter of bankruptcy and many, many things we can‟t do as a Province, and my Hon. Friends when they 

were the Government found this out. The Government of Alberta found this out, so that while it‟s highly 

desirable to do everything we can for farm security — and of course Hon. Members on both sides of the 

House are interested in the security of our farmers — but I would only point out that many of the things 

that are sort of inferred in the remarks of the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) and also 

inferred in the remarks of the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) are not within the legislative competence 

of any Province under our Constitution. But of course this particular Act is only a specific matter which 

needs to be continued from year to year. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the motion of Hon. W.R. Thatcher (premier) that Bill 

No. 31 — An Act to amend The Liquor Act (No.1) be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault: (Kinistino) — Stand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, we stood this last night. I think that this debate should proceed. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When a Member moves the adjournment of the debate, he is by practice entitled to 

speak first to the motion when the debate on it is resumed. Erskine May puts the point in this way: 

 

On resuming an adjourned debate, the Member who moved the adjournment is, by courtesy, entitled to 

speak first on the resumption of the debate .  . . (17th Edition p. 444). 

 

In this Assembly a Member who adjourns a debate has traditionally been allowed to exercise a measure 

of choice as to when the debate is resumed. I would emphasize, however, that this tolerance remains a 

matter of courtesy; it is not a right. Once a motion has been proposed from the Chair, it is technically in 

the possession of the Assembly, not of the Member adjourning the debate thereon. Thereafter it must be 

for the Assembly to decide whether and on how many occasions that motion should stand, that is, have 

its consideration deferred to a later sitting of the House. If a Member indicates that a request for an 

adjourned motion to stand is not acceptable, debate on that motion must be resumed, but I might add that 

the Member who had previously adjourned the debate does not thereby lose 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1082 

his right to participate in the debate later. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, I think this debate should continue. However, since the Hon. 

Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) is not prepared to continue perhaps, we should let it go by for one 

more day. But I would hope that on Monday we could proceed with this. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The 

Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, 1967. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments set down in this Bill to amend The Criminal Injuries 

Compensation Act deal with certain procedural matters of the Crimes Compensation Board established 

under the Act and are to provide that the program under the Act is retroactive in nature to September 1, 

1966. At present the Act provides that the Board may award compensation to certain persons injured as 

a result of certain crimes of violence. The Act was brought into force in September 1, 1967. By the usual 

canons of statutory interpretation, awards could only be made in respect of injuries occurring after that 

date. The amendments proposed will provide that awards of compensation may be made by the Board in 

respect of injuries suffered under the circumstances set out in the Act on and after the 1st day of 

September 1966. The proposed amendment will also provide that service of notice of certain documents 

on persons under disability maybe served by substitutional service, and this shall be sufficient for the 

purposes of the Act. The retroactive application proposed by these amendments requires a consequential 

amendment in the provisions of the Act dealing with recovery of amounts of awards from persons 

convicted of offences. It is proposed that the right of the Board to order a convicted person to reimburse 

the Board will be limited to those cases of persons convicted after the Act was actually brought into 

force. I think that is the only fair thing to do. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say that I think that the 

amendments proposed by the Attorney General are good ones. I think that we hadn‟t anticipated when 

the Act was passed the need for its retroactive application in the sense that the Attorney General has 

described. What really happened is that we made it too far prospective. I agree with his proposals for 

making it retroactive, and I agree with his handling of the situation with respect to subrogation. I think it 

is only right that people not be made subject to penalties in a retroactive manner. I think that‟s rather a 

bad principle. People act on the basis of the law as they know it and not as it may be changed. I think it 

is particularly undesirable to make penalties 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1083 

retroactive as would have been the case, had not the Attorney General provided in the Bill that the 

subrogation provisions would date from 1967, whereas the recovery provisions would date from 1966. 

We on this side of the House commended the Minister last year for bringing in his Bill, as it is an 

imaginative piece of legislation. We thought it was a good idea then. This amendment appears to make it 

apply to some people to whom it will not otherwise apply. We continue to support it and accordingly 

welcome the changes proposed by the Attorney General. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting Collection 

Agents. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a new Collection Agents Act entitled The Collection Agents Act, 1968 and 

will replace the present Collection Agents Act which has not been amended in a material way in the past 

25 years, at least and maybe longer. In the past year it has been found that four associated companies 

had failed to pay over collections to the creditors entitled thereto. These are collection agencies, to 

whom, if you are in business, you give your accounts for collection. We are having some problem with 

four associated companies in the province. Although convictions have been obtained, it was found that 

the Act was in many respects inadequate in that the bond of $2,500 specified in the old Act was much 

too small to reimburse creditors and to pay the expenses of an audit. The bonding provisions have been 

re-drafted in the new Bill to bring them up-to-date and in line with other similar licensing Acts which we 

have passed in the last three or four years. The amount of the bond made may be determined by the 

registrar. Also the circumstances, under which a bond might be forfeited, have been re-drafted to 

facilitate the obtaining of the bond proceeds and the payment thereof to those persons entitled thereto. 

 

I will give you an example, Mr. Speaker. A bond may be forfeited if a collection agent is convicted of an 

offence under the Act or of an offence involving theft or fraud under the Criminal Code. It will also be 

forfeited where a judgment is given against the agent in respect of his business or where he commits an 

act of bankruptcy. Provision is also made for forfeiture of the bond in certain cases where the collection 

agent leaves the province without having paid all the monies collected to the creditor, and he takes off. 

Several collection plans have come to our attention, which do not appear to come within the scope of the 

present Licensing Act. For example, there is a plan coming along now these days where the agent does 

not collect any money from the debtors but sends out collection letters urging the debtors to pay directly 

to the creditor. The agency promotes this plan by engaging in the sale of coupons, usually in books of 50 

coupons. Each coupon entitles the creditor to submit one account to the agency for this collection 

service at any time within five and in some cases ten years. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1084 

The price of a coupon usually varies from $2 down to $1.50 depending upon the quantity purchased. 

Now some merchants, Mr. Speaker, have paid $500 and even more in advance for these coupons. It‟s an 

advance fee, sort of and we don‟t like this kind of proposition. Being an advanced fee plan there is no 

reassurance that the services will be available when required. These people get the money. Maybe they 

will be around, and maybe they won‟t when you start to turn the coupons in. Now generally these 

agencies are incorporated to avoid personal liability in the event that, after the sales campaign is over, 

the company finds itself insolvent or bankrupt. To deal with this situation, Mr. Speaker, the Bill includes 

in its definition of a collection agent, a person who mails the debtors or offers to undertake to mail to 

debtors on behalf of a creditor, collection letters. This way the licensing and bonding provisions will 

apply to these people. Another plan in operation, another new one, is the credit card plan, whereby an 

agency undertakes to pay merchants for goods and services sold to a third party on credit. The definition 

of a collection agency is extended in this Bill to include a person who engages in the business of 

providing this kind of service. Experience in other jurisdictions with this kind of a plan suggests the 

need for regulation and bonding, so we have included it in this new Act. Debtors have complained about 

the nature of collection letters received from what appeared to them to be a collection agent. We get 

complaints about some of the activities of some collection agencies, not all of course. On investigation it 

was found that the writer of some of these letters was the creditor who had adopted a trade name for use 

in collecting overdue accounts. To enable some regulation over this method of collection, the definition 

of collection agent has been extended in this Bill to include a person who collects debts owed to him 

under a name which differs from that under which he is a creditor. 

 

In this way his collection letters will be subject to filing and to rejection by the registrar, if found to be 

objectionable. We are going to exercise control over the kind of letters that can be written. These 

threatening letters get pretty rough, if you have seen some of them. The Bill contains the usual licensing 

and regulatory sections including provisions for a hearing before the registrar by a dissatisfied applicant 

or licensee and also provision for appeal to a judge in the court of Queen‟s Bench. And you will note, 

Mr. Speaker, that in all of these Licensing Bills we are providing for an appeal from the decision of the 

registrar, who after all is a civil servant, and we think that our citizens should have the right to appeal to 

a judge, if they disagree with the decision of the registrar. 

 

We are making an effort to keep these provisions uniform in the various Licensing Acts administered by 

the Department of the Provincial Secretary. Now under this Bill, a collection agent must maintain 

adequate records which are required to be audited by an auditor satisfactory to the registrar. The auditor 

is required to prepare a financial report which the 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1085 

collection agent must file with the registrar within 90 days of the close of his financial or fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suppose that it is true to say that the need for collection agents has become greater in 

recent years, due to the amount of credit extended. Persons are of course expected to pay their accounts 

where they can. Collection agents, I am sure, perform an important and useful function in this regard by 

assisting creditors to obtain monies to which they are lawfully entitled. In some cases they assist debtors 

in arranging negotiations with his creditor. It is, however, a fact that the operations of a few, and I say a 

few, collection agents in regard to debtors have to say the least being questionable. For this reason we 

think that it is necessary, not only to bring in legislation to protect the creditors, but also to protect 

debtors from undue harassment and hardship. A collection agent is therefore prohibited from collecting 

any more than the actual amount owing to this creditor, in this Bill. His expenses cannot be added to the 

account, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary between the debtor and the creditor. A 

collection agent is also prohibited from sending a telegraph or making a telephone call at the expense of 

the debtor — and they have tried that too. The form that he uses must not resemble any summons notice. 

You have seen this, I am sure, those of you who practise law. The form that he uses must not resemble 

any summons notice or other documents used in any court. These forms, of course, tend to deceive and 

confuse the debtor. So, Mr. Speaker, those are the general principles incorporated in this new Act. I 

think that we have worked at it very carefully. We have tried to correct the abuses that have been 

brought to our attention, and we have tried to update it in the light of the sophisticated new gimmicks, if 

you like, that are being used in connection with the collection agency business. I commend this Bill as 

being an honest attempt to correct abuses which have been brought to our attention in an honest attempt 

to update this Act. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow: (Saskatoon Riversdale) — Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all commend the Hon. 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald) and the Government on what most Members on this side of the House, I 

am sure, will agree is a very desirable piece of legislation. 

 

As pointed out by the Hon. Attorney General those of you who have had .  . . 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher: (Premier) — We‟ll have to look at this Bill again. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I‟m only beginning, Mr. Premier. I just want to say that I hope that the Bill isn‟t 

used in the collection of deterrent fees and the like. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1086 

Mr. Romanow: — Nevertheless I want to say that the general principle of this Act, Mr. Speaker, is one 

that is very desirable. As the Hon. Attorney General has pointed out, from time to time those of us, who 

have had some dealings in the question of collection agents in the course of practising law, will really 

support the Attorney General‟s statement that some of the methods used by collection agents can be, to 

use his term, rather rough. There are just two comments that I do want to make, however, and I don‟t 

know really what can be done by the Attorney General. Perhaps he can have his law officers look into it 

and we can discuss it further in Committee. And that is in connection with Section 24, which I consider 

to be a very desirable section, that is the regulation of the form letter which is sent out by the collection 

agent. I think that this is a particular desirable aspect of the Bill. 

 

It seems to me that the full intent of Section 24 is to make sure that no misrepresentations are presented 

to the respective debtor and that he is not harassed by false claims or by contact through the mails at any 

rate. The only comment that I want to direct here — it may be difficult for the Government to 

incorporate this in legislation — is the question of personal harassment and harassment by telephones 

and the like. From my reading of the Act it doesn‟t seem to take that into account and I hope that 

perhaps some .  . . 

 

Mr. Heald: — There are problems. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That‟s right, there are problems here. Perhaps maybe the Attorney General could 

look into it, and we can discuss it further in Committee. 

 

The second comment, generally speaking, the way I read the Bill, Mr. Attorney General, is that I am a 

little bit worried that this Bill doesn‟t take into account the quite legitimate and lawful aims of financial 

institutions. Now part of the projects of financial institutions of course is loaning money and is one we 

all accept. However, my experience has been that from time to time when the debtor falls into arrears 

pursuant to a loan by a major financial institution — and I am not talking about banks, now under 

Federal legislation, but those who are operating in the confines of Saskatchewan — that their collection 

methods can also be as difficult and as equally rough as the type of institution that the Bill here is 

designed to deal with, namely, the independent person who is setting himself up in business as a 

collection agent. Now I notice in Section 2 (b)·that collection agent is defined as a person who collects 

debts on behalf of others. I think that is a fair summarization, and I don‟t know how it can be done 

legally; but I would again commend it to your attention that some provision be made to bring the 

financial institutions under this general provision. In my experience they have been equally as ruthless, 

and to use a rather difficult phrase, heartless as some of the 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1087 

people whom the Attorney General has covered so very ably by this proposed piece of legislation. 

 

So in summary, I bring those two points to the attention of the Government. I commend the Government 

for what I think is a very worthwhile piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) — Mr. Speaker, I endorse the sentiments expressed by the 

Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). There are just a couple of aspects of this Bill that I want to 

raise as advance warning, as you might say, of points to be raised in Committee of the Whole. I am a 

little concerned about how this will operate with respect to some organizations and I think particularly of 

credit unions. They have been in the habit, and other organizations have also been in the habit, of 

entering into agreements, wherein the borrower agrees that he will pay the collection charges if legal 

action is necessary in order to collect the loan. As I read Section 29, subsection 2, this type of business 

arrangement, which the credit unions have carried on for a great number of years, might well be 

prohibited. I will be raising this when we get into Committee. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Not if they collect the charges themselves. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well the credit unions use the Credit Union League and this is a bit of tricky point as 

to whether this central organization for credit unions is a collection agency. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Collections are in your own name. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Yes. So I think this is the issue I will be mentioning. Basically I couldn‟t agree more 

with this Bill. Collection of accounts is an area where there is a continuing and perhaps a growing level 

of abuse. I don‟t think there is more abuse per credit item outstanding than before; it is just that credit is 

being much more widely used. It is being granted to people who 25 years ago wouldn‟t have thought of 

asking for credit and wouldn‟t have been granted credit. Accordingly we have a new problem, and this 

looks like a very forthright approach to the problems which are being raised. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

BUSINESS OF LEGISLATURE 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher: (Premier) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that the House do now adjourn. 

But before doing so, might I say that on Monday we will go first into Committee of the Whole and try 

and finish off those Bills. Then we will go into second readings again, concentrating on Bill No. 39, 

having to do with utilization fees. 



 

March 15, 1968 

 

 

1088 

And when we have finished that Bill, we will go into Estimates, Telephones and Highways. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:21 o‟clock p.m. 


