



















































Hansard: February 15, 1968


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Sixteenth Legislature 

1st Day 

 

Thursday, February 15, 1968 
3:10 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the second 

day of January, 1968, for the meeting of the First Session of the Sixteenth Legislative Assembly of the 

Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the Throne. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Provincial Secretary): — I am commanded by His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor 

to inform you that he does not see fit to declare the causes of the summoning of the present Legislature 

until later today, when the Legislative Assembly shall have elected a Speaker, according to law. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor then retired from the Chamber. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Thatcher, addressing himself to the Clerk, moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Heald, that 

James Edward Snedker, Esquire, Member for the constituency of Saltcoats do take the Chair of this 

Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The question being put by the Clerk, it was resolved that James Edward Snedker, Esquire, do take the 

Chair of this Assembly as Speaker. 

 

The Clerk having declared James Edward Snedker, Esquire, duly elected, he was conducted to the Chair, 

where, standing on the upper step, he returned his humble acknowledgements to the Assembly for the 

great honor they had been pleased to confer upon him by choosing him to be their Speaker. 

 

Thereupon he took the Chair and the Mace was laid on the Table. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor re—entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honour to the following effect: 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR; 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil the 

important duties thus assigned to me. 

 

If, in the performance of those duties, I should at any time fall into error I pray that the fault may be 

imputed to 



 

February 15, 1968 

 

 

2 

me and not to the Assembly whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable them to 

discharge their duty to their Queen and Country, hereby humbly claim all their undoubted rights and 

privileges, especially that they may have freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person at all 

seasonable times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the most favorable consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald (Provincial Secretary): — I am commanded by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

to declare to you that he freely confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her Majesty’s 

person and Government, and not doubting that their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper 

and prudence, he grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and allow their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honour upon all 

seasonable occasions, and that its proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly receive 

from him the most favorable construction. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: 

— 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the First Session of the Sixteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

ECONOMIC GROWTH 

 

In the past year, the people of Saskatchewan were fortunate in seeing our industrial growth continue at a 

high rate. 

 

More industries continued to come into production. Work is progressing on a number of others. 

 

The mineral incentive program has so encouraged mineral development in our north that 92 mining 

companies are presently doing exploration work. 

 

There has been relatively full employment throughout our province. 

 

Crops, on the other hand, were substantially below the level of the previous year. This fact will tend to 

slow down the over—all Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Tight money and high interest rates have caused a number of industries to postpone their development 

and expansion plans. 

 

However, the over—all prospects are excellent. 



 

February 15, 1968 

 

 

3 

My Ministers will continue to press on with the widening of our economic base, so that the living 

standards of all our people may again be raised during 1968. 

 

AGRICULTURE 

 

The past year was one of the driest in the history of our province. 

 

Despite this difficulty, our farmers produced a near—average crop through the use of sound technology, 

skill and resourcefulness. 

 

My Ministers believe that only by increased agricultural diversification can our farmers be assured of a 

reasonable return for their efforts. 

 

During this Session, you will be asked to approve additional measures designed to expand 

Saskatchewan’s livestock industry. 

 

You will also be asked to approve expenditures to continue a program of assistance in construction of 

swine facilities. 

 

The Crop Insurance program will be expanded substantially. 

 

A new policy for the sale of crown—owned lands by tender is being instituted. 

 

You will be asked to approve expenditures to continue development of the gigantic Saskatchewan Delta 

project in the north—eastern area of our province. 

 

EDUCATION 

 

My Government continues to believe that our young people are the province’s most valuable resource. 

 

Accordingly, you will be asked to approve further increases in spending for education at all levels. 

 

My Government will continue to provide increased funds for the rapid expansion of the two campuses of 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

At the same time, they will propose certain measures which will allow you to better scrutinize both 

capital and operating expenditures of this institution. 

 

You will be asked to approve expenditures for the continued expansion of our technical and vocational 

training facilities throughout the province. 

 

My Government will also propose measures to facilitate the bargaining process between teachers and 

school trustees. 



 

February 15, 1968 

 

 

4 

FRENCH—LANGUAGE SCHOOLS 

 

In recent weeks, the Government met with representatives of the other provinces, and the Government 

of Canada, to discuss a number of matters which threaten our Confederation. 

 

In an effort to promote national unity, you will be asked to approve legislation permitting the use of 

French as the language of instruction in the schools of certain areas, where the number of French—

speaking students makes such a program economically feasible. 

 

LIBRARIES 

 

You will be asked to adopt further recommendations of the Library Enquiry Committee, including the 

establishment of one new Regional Library. 

 

INDIAN AND METIS 

 

The plight of our Indian and Metis people in Saskatchewan continues to be a major social and economic 

concern. 

 

Therefore, my Ministers are proposing increased investment in the education, training and rehabilitation 

of these people, so that their opportunities can be greatly enlarged. 

 

You will be asked to approve changes in The School Act, which will give to our citizens of Indian 

ancestry a greater voice in the administration of the schools their children attend. 

 

HEALTH 

 

My Government will ask again for large additional sums to improve the various health programs of our 

province. 

 

At the same time, my Ministers are concerned by the very rapid increase in the costs of our health 

program. 

 

These costs, if allowed to continue to rise so rapidly, could ultimately jeopardize these plans. 

 

Therefore, my Government will propose measures to better control the costs of these programs. 

 

COMMISSION ON ALCOHOLISM 

 

In order to combat a tragic social problem, you will be asked to approve legislation establishing an 

Alcoholism Commission in Saskatchewan. 

 

HUMAN TISSUES 

 

You will be asked to consider legislation which would permit persons to donate their body or parts 

thereof to the practice of medicine after their death. 



 

February 15, 1968 

 

 

5 

FRAZIER COMMISSION 

 

My Government, recognizing its responsibility and realizing the public concern of standards of 

psychiatric care, named Dr. Shervert H. Frazier, of Houston, Texas as a one—man Commission to hear 

representations, and make recommendations on the province’s program. 

 

My Government is pleased to report that Dr. Frazier has now presented a very detailed report with 

significant proposals of far—reaching consequences. 

 

This report will be tabled in this Session, with an indication of the recommendations that are to be 

implemented forthwith. 

 

THE VEHICLES ACT 

 

It is my Government’s intention to terminate the use of red and blue licences, and to remove the demerit 

point system which has proved costly to administer, and which has failed to take the bad drivers off 

Saskatchewan’s roads. 

 

My Ministers will place before you several proposals with respect to The Vehicles Act, to more 

effectively control problem drivers. 

 

These steps were recommended by an all—party committee of the Fifteenth Legislature. 

 

THE DRINKING DRIVER 

 

My Government is greatly concerned over the proven relationship between drinking drivers and traffic 

accidents. 

 

Accordingly, it is my Government’s intention to introduce legislation which will complement the 

Amendments to the Criminal Code in this field, presently under consideration by the Parliament of 

Canada. 

 

REAL ESTATE BROKERS 

 

My Ministers will place before you an Act respecting the Practice of the Real Estate business in our 

province. 

 

COLLECTION AGENTS ACT 

 

My Government will place before you an Act designed to better regulate the activities of collection 

agents in Saskatchewan. 

 

CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY ACT 

 

My Ministers will present to you a proposal to permit individual ownership of multiunit dwellings. 



 

February 15, 1968 

 

 

6 

EXPROPRIATION PROPERTY ACT 

 

My Ministers will present you with proposals respecting the procedure for expropriating lands, and for 

determining compensation for expropriated lands. 

 

HOUSING 

 

In order to overcome the problems that are associated with increased urbanization in a rapidly 

industrializing province, you will be again asked to approve measures designed to facilitate the 

construction of new housing. 

 

MUNICIPAL SHARING OF POTASH REVENUES 

 

My Ministers will present you with legislation for the consideration of the Legislature which will 

provide for the sharing of municipal tax levies on potash mine assessments. 

 

This program has been presented by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. It has 

received the general consent of all municipalities having potash mines. 

 

URBAN ELECTIONS ACT 

 

My Ministers will place before you a proposal designed to combine the many provisions embodied in 

the urban elections procedures. 

 

HIGHWAYS 

 

My Government will again seek your support for heavy spending on highway construction in all parts of 

our province. 

 

Particular emphasis will be placed on a paving and oiling program in rural areas. 

 

Major grants will once again be made to municipalities for the grid and feeder road program. 

 

SURFACE RIGHTS 

 

In order to ensure the fairest possible return to our citizens from development of our resources, you will 

be asked to approve legislation respecting surface rights and compensation. 

 

CHILD ADOPTION 

 

In order to overcome a difficulty of long standing, my Ministers will ask you to approve legislation 

permitting the adoption of children into homes where the religion of the adopting parent differs from 

that of the natural parent. 



 

February 15, 1968 

 

 

7 

SASKATCHEWAN FLAG 

 

My Government will propose that action be taken by the Legislature to adopt a Saskatchewan flag. 

 

THE CREDIT UNION ACT 

 

My Government will place before you certain proposals designed to assist the Credit Unions of our 

province. 

 

BEER AND WINE ADVERTISING 

 

My Ministers will present you with a proposal to permit advertising of beer and wine in the news media 

of our province. It will be proposed that the matter be decided by a free vote. 

 

LIQUOR OUTLETS 

 

The demand for additional liquor outlets in rural areas continues. 

 

My Government will continue the policy of closing some stores in small villages, where the size of the 

population does not justify the regular type of store. 

 

You will be asked to approve Amendments to The Liquor Act which will permit the establishment of 

additional agencies. 

 

AIRSTRIP IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM 

 

My Government approved assistance for airstrip improvements to 53 communities during the past year. 

This program will be continued and expanded during 1968. 

 

PARKS AND RECREATION 

 

My Government will continue to assist rural areas in developing local recreational facilities. 

 

A total of 70 regional parks will be in existence by the end of this year. 

 

During 1968, a start will be made on a park at Lake Diefenbaker. 

 

Over a five year period, approximately 50,000 acres of park and recreational lands will be developed at 

that site. 

 

By August, 1968, 900 acres of park land will be open to the public on the Black Strap Reservoir. 

 

LABOUR 

 

My Government will again make proposals to increase the Saskatchewan minimum wage. 



 

February 15, 1968 

 

 

8 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 

1968, will be submitted to you. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full confidence that you will favorably discharge 

your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:49 o’clock p.m. 


