



















































Hansard: April 18, 1968


2193 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

42nd Day 

 

Thursday, April 18, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would 

like to announce to the Members that an area in Knox Metropolitan Church has been reserved for the 

MLAs and their wives, if they are accompanied by their wives. This area will be on the left-hand side of 

the main aisle towards the front. It would be appreciated if the Members of the House could be in the 

church by 1:50 p.m. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

PATIENTS PAYING DIRECTLY TO DOCTOR 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I want 

to direct a question to the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) and invite him to make a comment on it. It has 

to do with this kind of a circumstance. A patient who is a member of an approved health agency and a 

doctor who is a member of an approved health agency, and the patient now being asked, as I understand 

it, to pay to the physician the complete bill at the moment of treatment. This is a particular hardship on 

persons of low income, people like pensions. I would draw the Minister's attention to Section 16(b) on 

page 5 of the Saskatoon Agreement which reads: 

 

From the patient's point of view, he will have four choices (b) He may enroll with a voluntary 

health agency to which he will pay an enrolment fee . . . He may then choose a doctor who has 

entered into a service contract with the voluntary agency. This doctor will then send the bill to 

the agency and there will be no further charge. 

 

This is incorporated in the Act which I will not read at this time. Section 19, subclause 9, in particular, 

says the same thing. Now what I ask the Minister to do is: will he investigate situations of this kind 

which appear to have been in violation of the Agreement and of the Act? I am asking that if the 

Agreement or the Act or the Contract appear to be broken, what action would he propose? 



 

April 18, 1968 

 

 

2194 

HON. G.B. GRANT (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I've already been in communication with 

the agencies pointing this out to them and asking them to take the necessary action. As a member of one 

of these agencies myself, I expect that my accounts will be, if I incur any, submitted to the agency. 

 

MR. LLOYD: — Would the Minister be a bit more explicit or would he in a few days' time be able to 

be more explicit as to what action he proposes specifically? 

 

MR. GRANT: — We will keep it under close scrutiny and deal with it as it comes to my attention. 

 

BOARD OF REVIEW RE INFLATIONARY PRESSURES 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER (Premier): — Yesterday, the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. 

Davies) asked me about certain correspondence, which the Government has had with the Prime 

Minister, in connection with a Commission or Board of Review to study inflationary pressures. I might 

say that several weeks after we received the correspondence, a small group of senior Federal officials 

came to Regina including Mr. A.W. Johnston, Assistant Deputy Minister of Finance; Mr. J.F. Grandy, 

Deputy Minister of Consumer Affairs and so on. They indicated to our Government what the Federal 

authorities had in mind to cope with these inflationary pressures. We officially offered them our full 

co-operation. We also told them very frankly that we didn't expect the Committee would be particularly 

effective unless they put more teeth into the proposal. However, we are going to co-operate with Ottawa. 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, may I just follow up on what the Premier 

has already said with a supplementary question to the one I put the other day. My question at that time 

was: has the Premier replied in writing to the Prime Minister's letter of March 7, I believe it was? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — No, I have not. I discussed the matter on the 'phone with the Prime Minister and 

told him we would meet Mr. Johnston and the Deputy when they arrived. We held such a meeting. 

 

RETURN NO. 78 

 

MR. A. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Hon. Provincial Secretary (Mr. Heald). When could I expect an answer to the Order for 

Return No. 78? 



 

April 18, 1968 

 

 

2195 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Attorney General): — I am filing some this morning, Mr. Speaker. That isn't 

one of them though. 

 

PETITION FROM PRINCE ALBERT 

 

MR. W.J. BEREZOWSKY (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct 

a question to the Hon. Premier. I have been asked to inquire whether he received a petition from some 

nearly 6,000 people from Prince Albert against deterrent fees? They want to know whether you received 

it or not. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Well, I have had quite a few petitions. I don't recall one from Prince Albert but I 

may have had one. 

 

MR. BEREZOWSKY: — But this isn't a small petition. It was 5,800 to be exact. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 159 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

He said: In connection with Motion for Return (No. 159) I would draw the attention of all Hon. 

Members to the fact that on February 29th, 1968, Motion for Return (No. 40) stood on the Order Paper, 

moved by the Member for Regina Centre as follows and I quote: 

 

That an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 40) showing: 

 

Copies of any agreements or contracts entered into between Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

and North Canadian Oils Limited since January 1, 1964. 

 

This motion was debated and defeated on a recorded vote. 

 

On Tuesday, April 9th, Motions for Returns Nos. 144, 145 and 146 upon the same subject, stood on the 

Order Paper in the name of the Member for Regina Centre and were ruled out of order under the 

repetition rule because they were essentially the same in intent and meaning as Motion for Return No. 

40 and would be productive in part of the same information which was previously refused. This ruling 

was appealed and sustained on a recorded vote. 

 

I would again draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the following rules of parliamentary procedure 

and I quote first from Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 194, in part as follows: 



 

April 18, 1968 

 

 

2196 

A motion or amendment cannot be brought forward which is the same in substance as a question 

which has already been decided, because a proposition being once submitted and carried in the 

affirmative or negative cannot be questioned again but must stand as the judgment of the House. 

 

I would particularly refer Members again to Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, Seventeenth Edition 

and I quote as follows from page 398: 

 

Repetition of motions which have been negatived. — The most frequent attempt against the rule 

is to seek to evade it by raising again with verbal alterations the essential portions of motions 

which have been negatived. 

 

Inasmuch as Motion for Return No. 159 is essentially the same, in part, in intent and meaning as Motion 

for Return No. 40 and would be productive in part of the same information which was previously 

refused and inasmuch as it again raises an essential portion of a Motion which has been negatived, I rule 

Motion for Return No. 159 to be out of order. 

 

WELCOME TO BOY SCOUTS, AIR CADETS AND ADULT STUDENTS 

 

MR. B.H. BJARNASON (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may introduce to the Assembly a 

group of Boy Scouts from the town of Invermay in my constituency. I ask this privilege especially 

because this is the first group that I have ever had the privilege of introducing from my constituency. We 

have 18 of the young Boy Scouts here from Invermay. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Peter 

Okreinetz, and I would inform the Assembly that it is my understanding that they are going to tour the 

Museum and the RCMP Barracks today, and the Legislature, and I am sure that I could extend to them 

from myself and all Members of the Assembly the wish that they have a real good day in Regina, that 

they enjoy their visit and have a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F.K. RADLOFF (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce through you, a group of 

Air Cadets from Choiceland. They are members of Squadron N: 3574. There are some 30 boys in this 

squadron under their officers: Steve Koral, Eugene Boehw, Steve Bieker and Albert Pfrimmer. These 

boys have come a long way and I hope that you will enjoy the meeting tonight and that your visit to 

Regina will be most fruitful. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome the Air 



 

April 18, 1968 

 

 

2197 

Cadets from that constituency. I am very closely associated with them in our city and I would also like 

on behalf of our community to also echo your welcome and to extend a welcome on behalf of Regina to 

these young men who are in this squadron. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. KOWALCHUK (Melville): — Mr. Chairman, by leave of this Assembly, I would like to 

introduce to this House a group of adult students in the Speaker's gallery. These students are a senior 

upgrading class of the Peepeekeesis Indian reserve just northeast of Balcarres. They are here under the 

direction of Mr. Townsend and Mr. Ed Penny. They have stopped to visit the Legislative Assembly and 

see it in action. They are on their way to the Moose Jaw Technical School where after completion of this 

senior upgrading class they will be able to enroll. We wish them every success in their endeavors and a 

safe trip home. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 o'clock p.m. 


