



















































Hansard: March 29, 1968


 
 

1574 

 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Friday, March 29, 1968. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o‟clock a.m. 

On Orders of the Day 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, you will 

recall, Sir that yesterday the Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) raised a question of privilege with 

respect to proceedings of the House being transferred outside of the House. I was wondering if you have 

a comment, Sir, or if you are going to make a report to the House on this question of privilege raised 

yesterday? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes. When the question of privilege was raised yesterday, I said that I would have the 

matter under advisement and under investigation. I can only report that I still have it under advisement 

and under investigation, and I hope to have something for the House by this afternoon when it sits at 

2:30 p.m. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

 The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart that Bill 

No. 43 — An Act to amend the Fuel Petroleum Products Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I hadn‟t intended taking part in this 

debate, but I feel that I can‟t sit idly by while this Government continues to betray the farmers of this 

province. I have a little cartoon here, Mr. Speaker, from a rather reputable newspaper in Saskatchewan 

and it‟s dated March 2, 1968. It shows the poor Saskatchewan taxpayer bent over almost double with a 

huge burden on its back. Little Davey is up on the stepladder and he is loading on another burden of 5 

per cent sales tax. In the container he has more to load on, medical care deterrent fee, driver‟s licence, 

gas tax, tobacco tax. And he is saying to the poor fellow who is bent over almost double, “Sorry old 

chap, but you are the only donkey we have.” It doesn‟t say who the chap is that is bent over almost 

double. I guess it leaves it up to the imagination of the observer. 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Table the cartoon for the benefit of those who don‟t get the 

Commonwealth? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — When a Member quotes from a newspaper or periodical publication it is necessary for 

him to give the date, the name of the paper and the date of the issue that he is quoting from. He doesn‟t 

have to table the material that he is reading from, 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1575 

because, if Members have the date and the name of the paper, it is available to all of them in the libraries 

or wherever you wish. The same thing doesn‟t apply to letters. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I would be the last one to even bend the rules of this House. And, 

for the Hon. Member for Moosomin, this is the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, March 2, 1968. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I‟d be delighted to table it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This tax, Mr. Speaker, is more insidious than it appears even at first glance. This is why I am speaking 

on this particular tax. With the new tax the Liberal Government will force an increasing number of 

Saskatchewan farmers to the wall. Then, Mr. Speaker, at the first election campaign that occurs in this 

province it will attempt to play the new financially desperate farmers off against the working people of 

Saskatchewan. It has done it in the past and it will do it in the future. Its strategy has been divide and 

rule. Mr. Speaker, it won‟t be as easy in the next election campaign as it will take more goodies passed 

out prior to the campaign, and it will take more public relations applied by MacLaren Agencies of 

Toronto than it did prior to the last election. 

 

This is a sad betrayal of the Saskatchewan farmers and will long be remembered by the Saskatchewan 

farmers. The party on your right, Mr. Speaker, bragged about how many farmers they had in their ranks 

in this Legislature. But this Bill has frightened those farmers down the gopher holes. I would be 

delighted to hear from the Member for Kelvington (Mr. Bjarnason) and the Member from Nipawin (Mr. 

Radloff). I realize that they are in a very awkward position, Mr. Speaker, with this Bill and other Bills 

that are before this House. I would suggest to them a procedure whereby if they are intending to face the 

electorate of this province in the near future, that they talk it over in their caucus, and they come to a 

decision with the caucus chairman that those two Members could vote against this Bill. They could 

stand up and protest this Bill in the House and they could resign and call for an election and take their 

chances. I think that they would stand more of a chance than if they brazen it through at this time. I 

realize, Mr. Speaker, this is a bit of deception that they would have to practise on the people of 

Saskatchewan. But this deception would only be a pimple compared to a mountain of deception that was 

practised on the people of this province before, during and after. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I am really quite sorry that this Government again has broken faith with the 

people of Saskatchewan, and I cannot in good conscience for the people in my constituency or in any 

constituency in Saskatchewan support this particular Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I only want to say a few words on this Bill. I won‟t 

waste the time of the House commenting on the remarks made by the Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. 

Willis) last night. 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1576 

I have never seen a woman, and this is saying a lot, that could say so little and take so much time. In 

fact, he must bore his own Members with his long, hollow speeches. Last night he didn‟t repeat his 

highway speech. It‟s the one that he usually makes. I won‟t take up the time of the House commenting 

on what he said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that some of the comments that came from the Member from Prince Albert East 

(Mr. Berezowsky) were comments that were worth making. I am, as a farmer, quite aware of the cost-

price squeeze of the farmers. I don‟t think from what I heard from the Member from Melville (Mr. 

Kowalchuk) that if he is left to solve the farmer‟s problems many of them will be solved. I want to 

remind him that he made the usual kind of Socialist speech we hear when they are talking about the 

farmer‟s cost-price squeeze, that the corporations are making too much profits, and that this is causing 

the farmer‟s cost-price squeeze. I don‟t suggest for one moment that the corporations are not making too 

much profits. But let me remind Members of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, that their bedfellows in the 

Seafarers International Union, in the Union of the Steelworkers of America, in the coal unions, in the 

railway unions and all the other unions, are also helping to cause the farmer‟s cost-price squeeze. When 

you consider, Mr. Speaker, that the fellow, who pushes the broom in the John Deere Plant in Racine 

Wisconsin and used to get $1.50 an hour 20 years ago when we were getting $2.00 a bushel for wheat, 

today gets $6.00 an hour, surely even the Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) must admit that his 

labor union buddies are helping to cause the farmer‟s cost-price squeeze. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am just as concerned about the cost-price squeeze of the farmers as my Socialist friends. I 

don‟t like this tax as many Members don‟t like this tax. I must say, Mr. Speaker, when we imposed this 

tax, at least the farmers of this province are going to get more from the Government than they got in the 

past. One thing I can say, Mr. Speaker, as a farmer, I estimate that I probably save $120 to $150 a year 

by being able to use tax-free gas in my farm truck. It is going to cost me about $100 extra because I am 

going to have to pay two cents a gallon more on farm fuel, diesel and gas. So I am still ahead of where I 

would have been under a CCF Government. Besides this, Mr. Speaker, the amount of money that we are 

collecting in this tax is going back to the farmers of this province. During the years that the CCF were 

the Government of this Province, they had no program to help the municipalities other than the grid-road 

program, which is a program which we still continue. They had no program for equalization grants that 

would substantially help the municipality. They had a bit of slush fund for their political friends out in 

the municipalities. We have increased by almost $2 million the amount of money that is being paid out 

to rural municipalities of this province to help them build roads; besides our equalization grant we are 

giving a grid-road grant. So there is some justification in us imposing this tax. We are losing the 

revenues that we would have collected had we not taken off the tax on farm truck fuel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to make a comment on something that the Member for Regina North West (Mr. 

Whelan) suggested yesterday. I believe that in speaking in the debate he suggested that the city of 

Regina is not getting its equitable share of the gas tax. Well, Mr. Speaker, this Government instituted a 

program to help the urban areas and it is spending a lot of 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1577 

money on this program. From under $1 million (I shouldn‟t say that it instituted this program), we 

increased the money that we are spending under this program over $4 million today. I want to advise my 

friends in the Opposition that the city of Saskatoon took advantage of this expanded program. They have 

taken advantage of it to the tune of about $2 million. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that the Member for 

Regina North West should be crying to the Government. He should be crying to the Member for Regina 

South East (Mr. Baker), the Mayor of the city of Regina. He was sitting on his hands, shaking hands 

with the voters and kissing babies, instead of looking after the needs of the city of Regina. If he had 

done his job, he would have done the same as the city council did in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I was a bit disappointed in the remarks by the Member 

for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) regarding the Member for Melfort (Mr. Willis) about the reference he has 

made to the women. I know that we had women in this House before, and we certainly appreciated their 

presence. I can see where the Member for Yorkton doesn‟t seem to have too much use for the talk of 

women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now if he has saved $150 by using purple gas in his farm truck, I believe that he must 

have used it a great deal for campaigning. If he went into the old Liberal pitch about farmer and labor, 

they still have hopes of keeping them apart, but the thing is finished. It‟s kaput alright! He starts talking 

about the labor bosses. I want to repeat what I have said before, I am glad that our party is getting some 

help from the labor unions. But why don‟t you talk about Hal Banks if you want to talk about labor 

leaders? If you want to talk about campaign funds and so on, study the Dorian Inquiry and that will 

settle the whole issue for you boys. Now I won‟t say any more. 

 

I want to say a few words and I hope that the farm Members across the way are going to vote against 

this Bill. I hope they won‟t do like some did yesterday and run out while the bell was ringing, I will 

refrain from naming the Members not to embarrass them too much. But this happened yesterday. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — I just can‟t believe that, Art! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — We talk about helping the municipalities. This tax has come right onto the farms, 

taxing farm fuel. This should bring some $4 million perhaps to the Treasury. Look at your Estimates. 

Last year you gave the Municipal Road Assistance Authority, $11,589,280; this year in the Estimates 

$11,605,270, an increase of $15,990. Big deal! $4 million bucks! That‟s what they are getting in return. 

You talk about extra programs, snow removal. You know very well that the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs (Mr. Estey) at the SARM convention said to tighten up on the amount of grid road mileage, on 

the access roads. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Raise the taxes. 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1578 

Mr. Thibault: — Raise the taxes to the farmers by $4 million and give them $16,000. I never saw such 

a skin game in my life. Now what are the farmers going to have to do to get money to build roads? The 

municipal council will have to go right back and tax the farmer over again. If you went out and gave a 

couple million dollars to their municipalities to help them with their roads, maybe the argument 

wouldn‟t be so great. I ask the Government to look at their Estimates. It‟s a dirty shame! 

 

What about farm expenses? I‟ll go back to the Farmers‟ Union‟s brief presented to the Government. I 

am beginning to wonder if it ever looked at this thing. What about the costs of operation? Table three on 

page four. 

 

Cash operating expenses in 1962 — $7.51 per acre (I am referring to cultivated acreage). The cost in 

1966 is up to $9.31. We could go on and talk about depreciation on farm per cultivated acreage at $1.84 

in 1962, $3.14 in 1966. Investment costs — $3.29 in 1962, $5.16 in 1966. Operating and family labor — 

these people that try to put farmer against labor — what did the cost of labor do? From 1962 to 1966, 

$5.31 in 1962 and $5.87 in 1966 — an increase of 56 cents an acre. And these people have the audacity 

to come up and try to drive a wedge between farm and labor. That‟s all they know. Promote hatred. 

When you total the cost of farm machinery, $4.78 per acre in 1962, $6.77 per acre in 1966. Now what is 

being done about farm machinery? We hear very little about it from the other side. The total farm cost of 

operation from 1962 went up from $17.95 an acre to $23.48. I cannot understand how farmers can keep 

on going the way they are. We hear a lot about the big payment that is coming now. The big payment is 

being swallowed up by the interest that these farmers have to pay at the bank and on their loans. It is the 

wrong time to slap on another 10 per cent on the farm fuel. 

 

Let‟s have a look at the increase in the price of wheat in all this time. You take the price of wheat in 

1950-51 in Fort William and Port Arthur — $1.85 a bushel, as compared to somewhere near $2.00 a 

bushel for the last crop that we are being paid for. An increase of about 15 cents. And here in one year, 

you are going to increase the cost of farm fuel to the farmers by 10 per cent. A few years ago I was one 

of the only Members that got up in this House and voted against purple gas. Now they were very sure 

that I‟d be defeated in my own constituency. The Liberal candidate had literature floating from one end 

to the other of the constituency saying, “Remember now that Art Thibault voted against purple gas.” I 

never hid it. I said it was getting the farmer‟s head into the guillotine to get chopped off because it 

would open the door to taxation on farm fuel. Many farmers went out and bought trucks to try and take 

advantage, only to take advantage of the purple tax. I know of one farmer who had six quarters of land 

and sold his car, a Cadillac, and bought himself a half-ton truck. Now I don‟t quarrel with that. Some 

bought trucks to campaign with in the election campaign. This added another cost to the farmers. I 

would have gone along with three months of purple gas during harvest. I am speaking for myself and not 

for the party, because I had some mad boys on this side when I voted against purple gas, with the 

instruction of the people in my constituency who could see a little further and say, “We‟ve got a pretty 

good deal now. Let‟s not open the door to taxation on farm fuel.” 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1579 

And that‟s what it did because it was said in this House, “Well you know the farmers are using their 

trucks on the road and we‟ve got to get a little money for it.” It‟s two cents now, 10 per cent now, what 

is it going to be next time? They have been suckered in, that‟s what has happened to them. Promises! 

Oh, remember, look what we have given you. Yes, that was just the bait in the mouse-trap, that‟s all it 

was. 

 

I would certainly hope that the farm Members across the way will stay in the House as there will be a 

standing vote. I can assure you of that. 

 

Mr. F. Larochelle (Shaunavon): — I‟ll be here, Arthur. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — And we‟ll see how things turn out. I think that the farmer is going to think a great 

deal. For the Member for Shaunavon (Mr. Larochelle) that Frenchman, I still feel a little more for them 

too, you know. I feel sorry for them. But when the farmer is going to fill that 500-gallon tank, it‟s $10 

every time and believe you me, these 500-gallon tanks get filled up pretty often during the summer. I 

think that we are going to see some of these tanks with „Vote CCF‟ written across them this summer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I think you are going to see some reminders right on the farmer‟s fuel tanks right 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

I don‟t want to take too much time of the House. I usually make my remarks very short. But we talk 

about mineral rights. We heard that, oh, the farmer got his mineral rights, but in our country we never 

hear about them. Whether there is a mineral tax or not we are not concerned. What we are worried about 

is the crop, if it rains, and how much municipal taxes are we going to pay. As I said a moment ago, this 

is going to be a double shot on the farmers because you have let the municipalities down. At the same 

time you have taxed the farm fuel. Don‟t kid yourselves. This is going to hit home pretty hard. And just 

talking about the municipalities building roads, where is it going to end? 

 

I think the Members across the way should do some serious thinking. There isn‟t such a thing as never 

making a mistake. But I am convinced that this is one mistake, and I am sure that the Members across 

the way in caucus are telling you that it is a mistake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I am sure that if the Members across the way could have a secret ballot that you 

would lose it right on your own side. One thing I don‟t like about party politics is that everybody has to 

go like a bunch of sheep. This is why once in a while I break ranks, because I don‟t agree. I think that 

this is one case where maybe we should have a free vote on it and see who the friend of the farmer is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1580 

Mr. Thibault: — This little game of putting the labor against the farmer is up. It is worn out! You can‟t 

even overhaul it. With this, Mr. Speaker, you can see by my remarks that I am not going to support this 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I started to make some notes 

last night to reply as I wound up this debate. I started to make some notes on the Hon. Member for 

Melfort (Mr. Willis) and I made some on the Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) too but I lost track 

after his first complaint. The Hon. Member for Melville said first that he was complaining because his 

farmers only had a four-bushel quota and then in the next breath he complained they didn‟t have any 

grain to sell. I must say that he lost me somewhere along the line. The Member for Melfort, well he lost 

me early in the day. He was a little confused. When it was the gas tax, he spoke about health, and when 

it was about the health tax, he spoke about gas. I think he really got a little gas off his stomach or 

something off his brain and it isn‟t really worth commenting on. 

 

You know I noticed all the time that they were talking about what the Liberals had or hadn‟t done for the 

farmers. Not one of them mentioned that we had just been given the very welcome news of the highest 

final wheat payment in the history of this nation, of which $210 million will accrue to Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The Wheat Board. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh it‟s the Wheat Board when anything good happens. If anything bad happens it‟s the 

Liberal Government. You can‟t have it both ways. You know, Arthur Thibault was talking about farmers 

trading Cadillacs. I am sure it must be his brother-in-law or somebody, as I think he has a couple of 

relatives who voted Liberal, and I think that they are fairly well off. I hope they are anyway. I would like 

to say seriously, Mr. Speaker, that when we decided to put this 2-cent tax on the base of the gas tax, we 

recognized that it would place a tax for the first time on farm fuels. At the same time I think that 

Members should recognize that by placing 2 cents on the base, we are also collecting a tremendous 

amount of money from industry, from aviation fuel, from the pipe line companies, from the many 

industries that were formerly either not paying any tax on the fuel they burn, or were paying merely 5 

per cent. This will give us revenue from industry which will be in excess of $1 million, we estimate. 

 

Now it is true that the 2 cents will be paid, as I say, for the first time on farm fuels, but at the same time 

2 cents on the base is the equivalent of 4 cents at the other end. In other words, to raise the same amount 

of money which will be a little over $8 million we would have to put 4 cents on the present basis of 

gasoline tax. The money we will raise from this 2 cents on the base will be about $8 million. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The whole thing? 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1581 

Mr. Steuart: — We‟ll raise $8 million. The 2 cents increase on the gas tax at the base will raise about 

$8 million in the next year. I‟m told there are 80,000 commercial farmers in this province. We calculate 

this will cost them about $3 million, which works out to about $38 or $40 per farmer per year. Now I 

recognize that large farmers will pay more than this and hopefully large farmers have the ability to pay 

more than the smaller farmers. Our records indicate that purple gas saves them about $4.5 million. As 

Mr. Gallagher pointed out, they will still be $1.5 million better off than they would have been under the 

Socialists besides the extra money that we are spending in rural parts of this province. Make no mistake, 

this money will be used on highways for grid roads and for municipalities. Every dollar of it will be 

spent in rural Saskatchewan and then some. Let‟s just take a look at the records. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We all know that this year we will spend on highways alone, $58 million. Most of this 

will be spent in rural Saskatchewan. The last year of the CCF Government they spent $24 million on 

highways and they also spent most of it in rural Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — They did a better job. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — A better job — I don‟t think so, I remember the roads. $6.8 million was spent the last 

year of the CCF, that was the most they ever spent for municipal road assistance and direct assistance to 

municipalities. This year we will spend $11.6 million. 

 

Let‟s just look at the records. Assistance for grid roads, the last year of the CCF, they spent $4.3 million; 

we will spend $5.4 million, an increase of $1 million. Grants for re-gravelling, they spent $480,000; we 

will spend $600,000. Grants for the maintenance of grid roads, they spent $380,000; we will spend $1 

million. Financial assistance for snow removal on rural municipal roads, they spent zero; we will spend 

$300,000. Municipal assistance equalization grants, they spent $580,000; this year we will spend 

$2,400,000. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, on all forms of roads, grid roads, clearing, highways, 

assistance to municipalities, they spent $30.8 million, and that was the most they ever spent in their 20 

years of office, the last year they held office. This next year we are coming into, we will spend $69.6 

million, more than double the amount of money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — There is no question that this money will be raised all over the province by almost 

every taxpayer, and it will be in rural Saskatchewan. I agree, I don‟t expect the farm Members would 

like this tax on either side of the House or any part of the province. No one likes to pay taxes. At the 

same time, I think most of us recognize and it was recognized under the former Administration, I‟m sure 

that there should be some relation between the tax paid on gasoline and fuel burned in trucks and 

tractors and the amount of money spent on highways and grid roads. 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1582 

What about the working people? When I listen to the Hon. Members on the other side challenging some 

of our Members to stand up on this side and say where they stand, I never heard any of the Members on 

that side of the House that represent the cities standing up and say, “Well, we think that it should have 

been 4 cents and it should have all been put on the ordinary car driver; it should have been put on the 

working people, it should have been put on the small business man,” I never heard one of them. They‟d 

get up and they would cry for the farmer. I don‟t blame them. Agriculture is the backbone of this 

province. At the same time there is such a thing, Mr. Speaker, as equity in the taxation, and this was an 

effort to spread the gas tax on a more equitable basis across all the people. I don‟t think it is fair or 

reasonable to continue to charge all the gas tax on working people and the small business man, I think an 

attempt should be made to equalize the payment of this tax. Certainly the opportunities and the programs 

that are developed from the revenue that‟s brought in by this tax are spread in a way that I think is very 

fair to the rural people of this province. This is a necessary tax and again I urge the Members, the 

responsible Members in this House, to support this Act. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 32 

 

Thatcher Coderre Weatherald 

Howes Bjarnason Mitchell 

McFarlane MacDonald Larochelle 

Boldt Estey Gardner 

Cameron Hooker Coupland 

Steuart Gallagher McPherson 

Heald MacLennan Charlebois 

McIsaac Heggie Forsyth 

Guy Breker McIvor 

Loken Leith Schmeiser 

Grant Radloff  

 

NAYS — 21 

 

Lloyd Meakes Michayluk 

Wooff Berezowsky Brockelbank 

Willis Romanow Pepper 

Wood Smishek Bowerman 

Blakeney Thibault Matsalla 

Davies Whelan Messer 

Dewhurst Snyder Kowalchuk 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I beg leave to draw the attention of all Hon. 

Members to a fine group of students in the Speaker‟s gallery. They are the boys and girls from the 

Spalding high school under the direction of their teachers, Miss Nelson and Mr. Buten. I‟m sure that all 

Members will wish to join with me in extending to them a very warm welcome to this Legislature of our 

province. And may your visit to Regina be one of the highlights in your educational endeavor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1583 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the absence of Mr. Kowalchuk, the Hon. Member for the 

Melville constituency and in his behalf, Mr. Kowalchuk is in Melville this afternoon assisting in the sod-

turning ceremonies for Melville‟s Provincial public building. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

extend greetings to you, Sir, from this Assembly to a group of 70 grade 7 and 8 students from Balcarres. 

This school is the only high school in the Balcarres consolidated school district. They are seated in the 

east gallery. You will see among these a group of fine students, many of Indian ancestry. These students 

come from three Indian reservations, Star Blanket, Okeneese, Peepeekeesis, a joint effort by the native 

people of these three reserves and the Board of Balcarres Consolidated School District that has resulted 

in one of the finest integrated schools in Saskatchewan. The public school students from Little Black 

Bear Reserve immediately north of these reserves mentioned, attend Goodeve school and were 

welcomed in these Chambers about a week ago. The two teachers supervising this group of 70 students 

are Mrs. Onrait and Mr. Barlizen. The bus drivers chosen to get these students safely here and back 

home are Mr. Ward Dixon and Mr. Potter. May I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all of us here wish them 

a delightful and instructive day. It is our hope that they have a safe trip back home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Larochelle (Shaunavon): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to introduce through you to this 

Legislature today a fine group of 28 young boys and girls seated in the Speaker‟s gallery. This group is 

part of the Cadillac 4-H Club, one of the most active clubs in the Shaunavon constituency. Some of 

these young people, gentlemen, are our future farmers which will form part of our agricultural industry 

in this province, which is the largest industry. Last night these young people had the pleasure to attend 

the Winter Fair which they tell me was very educational to them and very amusing. They are 

accompanied here today by their organizer, Mr. and Mrs. Kyle, Mr. and Mrs. Bradley and Mr. and Mrs. 

Oliver and Mrs. Legros. I wish them a very, very safe journey home and a very, very nice day here today 

in the Legislature. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — And I just want to serve notice that a little bit later on this afternoon 

I‟ll be interrupting proceedings to introduce to the Legislature a group from my own constituency of 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Under what Standing Order? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — They are a little late, Mr. Chairman, but they are a real good group of students, and I 

want all Members to pound their desks when they come into the Speaker‟s gallery later on. 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, since the Member for Yorkton is forming a 

precedent, I think I may also utilize the privilege for the same reason. 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1584 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I find I am in the same position. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — We will proceed to introduce to Members of the Legislature a group of grade 7 and 8 

students from St. Alfonsus school in Yorkton. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Schumay. 

I‟m sure all Members will want to welcome them to the Legislature this afternoon and hope that they 

have a most enjoyable and entertaining and educational day in this capital city. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now see that the students from St. Joseph school in Saskatoon are 

now in the Assembly. They are accompanied here today by their teacher, Mr. Oliver and on behalf of all 

Members of the House, I welcome these students with us this afternoon together with Mr. Oliver, and I 

hope that they enjoy their stay in Regina and that the stay with us in this House will be very instructive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

LOUDSPEAKER IN MEMBERS’ LOUNGE 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

During the sitting of the House yesterday, the Hon. Member from Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) raised a 

question of privilege with respect to a loudspeaker allegedly connected to the sound reinforcement 

system in the Chamber and installed in one of the Members‟ Lounges. I have investigated the matter and 

found that this is in fact the case. 

 

I wish to advise the Assembly that I have made a careful search of the authorities on Parliamentary 

Procedure and I have been unable to find any citation which would sustain a ruling to the effect that an 

installation of this nature was an abuse of the privileges of the House. Therefore, I cannot rule that a 

prima facie case of breach of privilege has been established. 

 

However, I am of the opinion that an important question of propriety does arise in this case upon which 

the House could very well expect the Chair to express an opinion. It seems to me that the Legislative 

Chamber is the only proper place for Members to participate in the process of parliamentary debate 

which participation involves both the expression of a Member‟s own views and opinions and also that of 

listening to those expressed by others. 

 

If the House is prepared to provide one installation to transmit debates outside the Chamber it must be 

prepared to provide fifty-nine, for the principle involved is the same in both cases. Such a practice 

would in my opinion seriously detract from the process of parliamentary debate and tend to weaken the 

very foundations of parliamentary self-government. 

 

I have therefore suggested that the installation be dismantled pending a decision of the House by a 

substantive motion. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What about the loudspeaker in the Clerk‟s office? 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1585 

Mr. Speaker: — I had intended to say that the loudspeaker in the Clerk‟s office is in my opinion 

necessary in order to facilitate proceedings in that office. It is not there for any Member of the House to 

listen to but solely for the assistance of the office staff. That settles that part of the argument. As far as 

the loudspeaker is concerned in my office, there has been a speaker there for some considerable time and 

I listen to it when I am out of the Chair. I am out of the Chair because the House has moved that I do 

leave the Chair in order for the House to go into Committee. The reason for the Speaker leaving the 

Chair is because the Members want him out of the Chair so that he can‟t hear what they are saying. Now 

this is the reason for this ancient procedure. At one time before the Speaker left the Chair, the House on 

each occasion proposed a motion that he do leave the Chair. Now we dispense with the formal motion 

and the Speaker merely states, “I do now leave the Chair.” Now that is the ancient custom and the 

reason for it was the Members wanted him out of the Chair so that he couldn‟t hear what was being said 

in the House. For that reason my loudspeaker will go out of my office this evening. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mrs. Speaker, I‟m sorry but I failed to catch the last 

comment you made about this evening. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I said that for that reason the speaker that I have in my office will be disconnected and 

it will be removed from there. This evening is about the quickest time I can get around to doing it. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, we are in a somewhat difficult position with the Lieutenant Governor here. 

Do we have an opportunity to discuss this further with you, Sir, in the House this evening? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — What you have right now has been an informal discussion at the tail end of the ruling. 

Now the ruling is a formal ruling and certainly its discussion is being interrupted by the presence of the 

Lieutenant Governor and obviously we have to give way to him, but as soon as I resume the Chair this 

can again be a matter for discussion. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, may I just say while we are discussing this, I think it would be somewhat a 

pity if you were to interpret the present situation, the situation raised the other day as meaning or 

suggesting that you ought to remove the speaker from your office. To me these are quite different 

categories. May I say speaking on behalf of this group, Sir, we see no reason for you to take that action 

insofar as we are concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, in reply to that and again I speak informally I had never given this matter any 

consideration before the question was raised. But after the question was raised, I not only gave 

consideration to what speakers there might be elsewhere, but also to the one in my own office. I had 

cause to consider the matter, and in consideration I had to go back into the reasons as to why I was in 

that office and in the Chair in the House. Those are the reasons as I stated and therefore I 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1586 

consider it proper that I should follow the course that I have just outlined. I consider it the proper thing 

to do. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, again, we are all in a very difficult position, and I appreciate the 

opportunity of having a chance to talk in this way, but I take it that it will be possible for us in a formal 

sort of way to discuss the matter at 7:30 when you return to the Chair. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . if I ever get back here. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, may I comment, if it is your 

ruling and your desire that these speakers not be permitted outside of this Chamber, except in the Clerk‟s 

office, I don‟t think we require any form of motion or discussion. I think we are prepared on this side to 

accede to the Speaker‟s wishes in that regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — My reference to a formal motion in the ruling if you read it, implies that if Members 

wanted a speaker then the House itself would have to agree to it by motion. The House will have to 

make a decision on it. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I feel that I ought to just say a word. I asked you about the 

loudspeaker that is in the Clerk‟s office just as a matter of interest. On my part I have no wish to suggest 

that the speaker should come out of your office. I think probably it is serving a very useful function and 

this will be a matter for your conscience, but as far as I‟m concerned the loudspeaker in our Members‟ 

lounge will be taken out. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, before you make a final decision on your speaker I 

would like to have a chance to say a few words sometime on that matter. I know you don‟t have the time 

now, so I hope we can arrange it at 7:30 because I have a comment I‟d like to add. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well I think we can have a proper discussion on this at 7:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

ADJOURNMENT PROPOSED TO DISCUSS MATTER OF URGENT IMPORTANCE 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, when it was called 5:30 I suggested that because of the importance of your 

statement and some ramifications of it we ought to have some time at this very moment to discuss it 

further. As a result, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave under Standing Order 20 to move the adjournment of the 

House for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent importance. The matter of urgent 

importance which I bring to your attention and to that of the House, Mr. Speaker, is couched n these 

words: 

 

Mr. Speaker has brought to the attention of the 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1587 

Legislature a matter which he has described to be „an important question of propriety.‟ In concluding 

that proceedings in the Chamber are being transmitted to „one of the Members‟ lounges‟ he has stated 

an opinion that such a practice would „seriously detract from the process of parliamentary debate and 

tend to weaken the very foundation of parliamentary self-government.‟ 

 

Mr. Speaker, lest a dangerous precedent be set, it is important I suggest that all Members act and that we 

act now to expunge the dangerous implications of this action and that we do so by formal record. It is 

equally important that by formal record we support Mr. Speaker‟s wish in his statement that the matter 

be formally clarified. In order that we may do that, Mr. Speaker, I ask leave under Standing Order 20 to 

move the adjournment of the House for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent and public 

importance. 

 

I know the Provincial Treasurer doesn‟t consider these matters important but perhaps some people do, 

and we have a right to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I listened with care to what the Leader of the Opposition had to say in presenting his 

motion for the adjournment of the House. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 

Standing Order 20(1) (Adjournment of special purpose) reads as follows: 

 

Leave to make a motion for the adjournment of the Assembly (when made for the purpose of 

discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance) must be asked after the ordinary daily routine 

of business has been concluded and before Orders of the Day are entered upon. 

 

The citations in Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms must be read in the context of the 

Standing Orders of the House of Commons of Canada which are analogous to our own, and therefore 

also sustain my ruling that a motion to adjourn the House under Standing Order 20 cannot be entertained 

at this time. 

 

The Motion is therefore out of order. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — On the point, I draw attention of the House to and ask your further guidance with respect 

to two matters which, it seems to me, established some precedent in the matter. I could refer, Sir, to 

Debates in the House of Commons which took place in 1958, as I recall it, at which time during 

discussion of the Estimates of the Supply of the Department of Trade and Commerce, I believe, such a 

similar matter with respect to the Federal House was introduced and was discussed at that time. I further 

quote . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — On a point of order . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I am speaking to a point of order. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, are you appealing the 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1588 

Speaker‟s ruling? The Speaker has ruled your motion out of order. Are you appealing his ruling? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I am asking the Speaker for some further clarification and guidance because of a ruling 

which I want to quote. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to a point of order, as I understand 

it, you, Sir, made a ruling. Now as I understand it, the Leader of the Opposition is seeking to argue with 

that ruling. Now there is a well known procedure. If you don‟t agree with the ruling of the Speaker, you 

can appeal the ruling. But I don‟t think that you can stand up and argue about the ruling or try to appeal 

it. You appeal it in a proper way under Standing Orders and you appeal it in the normal procedure. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — If I may, Mr. Speaker, I thought I had made my position clear. I wasn‟t appealing or 

quarrelling, I was drawing to the Speaker‟s attention a citation and asking for his guidance with respect 

to interpretation of it. The citation I refer to is in Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms found on 

page . . . 

 

Mr. Heald: — Further to the point of order, the point of order was raised by the Hon. Provincial 

Treasurer and with deference, Sir, I think we should have a ruling on the point of order. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I haven‟t had a chance to raise my point of order as yet. Just sit quiet and I‟ll read it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I did state in answer to a point of order raised in the House before we rose for supper, 

say, that I would listen to discussion on the point of order concerning the ruling that I had made, but that 

the comments must be brief and they must be strictly to the point. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, all I am trying to find out is the method by which we can make what I 

consider to be appropriate comments with respect to a very important matter for this Legislature. I was 

attempting to quote a rule which provides a way I think of doing this and I wanted your guidance as to 

Forms, page 90 subclause (i) Citation 100 reads this way: 

 

The Speaker‟s duty with regard to a motion to adjourn the House for the purpose of discussing a 

definite matter of urgent public importance under Standing Order 26 is confined to determining as 

whether, in the first instance, a motion so proposed is in order. There his responsibility ends. There is a 

further question as to the propriety or desirability of discussing a matter of such great importance. That 

is for the House to decide. The Speaker having found the motion in order may submit the question: has 

the honourable member leave to proceed? If objection is taken the Speaker requests those members 

who support the motion to rise in their places. If more than 20 members support the motion, the 

Speaker calls upon the honourable member to propose his motion. 



 
March 29, 1968 

 

1589 

Our Standing Order differs from that of the Federal House. We require only 15 members rather 20 to 

support the motion to adjourn. The Speaker wished the 15 other members to indicate whether they 

support the proposal or not. I ask his guidance whether this procedure is acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . The Leader of the Opposition has referred to a Standing Order in the Canadian 

House of Commons. 

 

I would draw his attention to Standing Order No. 26, of the Canadian House of Commons as follows, 

quote. 

 

Leave to make a motion for the adjournment of the House, when made for the purpose of discussing a 

definite matter of urgent public importance, must be asked after the start of questions on Wednesdays 

or other days of the ordinary routine of business. 

 

I would again refer you to Standing Order No. 20 of the Legislature of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Leave to make a motion of the adjournment of the Assembly when made for the purpose of discussing 

a definite matter of urgent public importance, must be asked after the ordinary daily routine of business 

has been concluded and before the orders of the Day are entered into. 

 

On those grounds and on the basis of the citation from the Standing Orders of our Provincial House, I 

rule the motion out of order. The Standing Orders of the Federal House merely support in full the ruling 

that I have just made. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I take it then, Mr. Speaker, that your direction is and your order, which I respect, Sir, is 

that the production of 15 supporting members is not sufficient to enable you to warrant the debate to 

proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Just at the moment it‟s not. And if any further clarification may be needed let me draw 

the attention of all Members of this House to the fact that when a motion is moved for the adjournment 

of the House in order to discuss a matter of urgent public importance, the Speaker has to rule as to 

whether or not it is of sufficient public importance to warrant the putting aside of all the routine business 

of the House in order to give that particular motion complete right-of-way. If there be any ruling that I 

haven‟t previously made in the connection with the proper time to make this motion, if that isn‟t 

sufficiently binding on the Member who seems determined to argue about the matter, may I also tell him 

that I don‟t consider the matter of sufficient importance to warrant putting aside all the business of the 

House in order to give this motion right-of-way when it can be discussed on a substantive motion in the 

usual way, in the proper time, and the proper place by giving proper notice. This House has many 

important things to discuss. While it may be debatable whether or not they are more important than this, 

in my view, the view of the Chair, the matter is not of sufficient urgency to warrant the interruption of 

the normal schedule and business of this House. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was seeking to clarify the . . . 



 
March 29, 1968 

 
1590 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, now if the Member wishes to go into any further discussion, the correct thing to 

do is to challenge the ruling of the Chair, otherwise we continue with the normal business of the House. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I simply rose to thank you for the clarification as to the procedure. If I may, Sir, make 

one comment with respect to your ruling which has not to do with the procedure I just mentioned. I want 

to reiterate what I said earlier this evening, that I trust you will not find what has happened so far to give 

you reason to interrupt the arrangements which you have made for being able to follow the proceedings 

of the House in your office. That is the wish of this group. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


