



















































Hansard: April 20, 1968


2240 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

44th Day 

 

Saturday, April 20, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 89 — An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I thank the House for permission to proceed with this legislation today. We had 

the Bill printed as rapidly as was possible. Hon. Members will recall that before the last election I 

indicated to the Legislature on two occasions, if our party was re-elected we intended to increase the 

indemnities of MLAs and Ministers of the Crown to a more reasonable figure. The Bill which is now 

before us proposes to do precisely that. As Hon. Members know there has been no review of indemnities 

since 1962 or six years ago. I think we can all be very certain that there will be no further review for at 

least another four or five years. Thus we are taking about the only salary increase that will be made over 

the period of a decade. The question of Members’ salary is always a sensitive subject for Members to 

discuss, because we are of course dealing with our own personal interests. It was because of that fact 

that a special committee was set up early this session under the chairmanship of Chief Justice Culliton to 

make an independent comprehensive survey on the subject, and to bring recommendations back to 

Members of the Legislature. The report of the Culliton Committee has been circulated to all Members of 

the Legislature, and I don’t think it is necessary for me this afternoon to detail some of those 

recommendations. It is my understanding that there is a fairly universal feeling on both sides of the 

House that some action should be taken. Now in bringing in this Bill which is now before us, the 

Government has kept the Culliton recommendations in mind. Those recommendations form the basis of 

this Bill with some reductions in the increases proposed. Mr. Speaker, as Premier I make no apologies 

whatever for bringing forth this legislation. The management of the affairs of the Province is the largest 

and most important undertaking in Saskatchewan. If our people are to have good government, then it 

must be possible to attract to the Legislature citizens of ability and integrity. If we are to keep such men 

in public life they must be rewarded economically in a satisfactory, fair and competitive manner. I 

remind Hon. Members and I remind the people of Saskatchewan that since 1962 salaries of our civil 

servants have gone up from 20 to 30 per cent depending on the class you choose for comparison. As the 

Committee pointed out, salaries of a substantial number of civil servants, Crown corporation executives, 

university personnel exceed the salaries paid to the Premier or 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2241 

Ministers of the Crown, let alone MLAs. I also remind the House that salaries almost universally 

throughout industry and business have gone up very substantially in the last few years. Salaries of 

teachers have gone up very rapidly. The Committee pointed out that Saskatchewan Governmental 

indemnities were out of line with most other provinces across the Dominion. They are summed up on 

page 5 of the report and I quote: 

 

It is apparent to the Committee that the salaries paid to the Premier and members of the Executive 

Council are, on any proper basis of comparison, substantially lower than the salaries paid in the 

various fields to which reference has been made. 

 

Now as I mentioned earlier the Government is not recommending the full salary suggestions made by 

the Committee. This Bill provides for the following: 

 

MLAs’ indemnity will go to $6,000, the expense allowance will go to $3,000. The Members for 

Meadow Lake, Athabasca and Cumberland will receive an additional $500 annual expense cheque 

because of the geographical difficulties involved in visiting such huge areas. 

 

In addition to the changes in the MLAs’ salaries we propose, and it must be done by Order in Council 

and by Estimates, to increase the Speaker’s allowance to $4,500, the Deputy Speaker’s allowance to 

$2,500, Cabinet Ministers and Leader of the Opposition will be paid in future, $13,500, and the 

Premier of the Province will be paid $18,500. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you to recall that the Commission was set up by a resolution moved by myself and 

seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). I hope this means that the issue can be 

discussed in a non-political way. The Government is proposing that all provisions be made retroactive to 

January 1, 1968. I shall, Mr. Speaker, give further details and further explanations when we are in 

Committee. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, as the Premier has indicated to us that he 

has indicated to the Legislature prior to the election the intention of his Government in this respect, he 

has made it quite plain that the Act before us is as such Acts are, government legislation proposed by the 

Government. I am prepared to discuss and to endorse the general principle of the Bill. I’m not at this 

point making any comment with respect to the amounts proposed either for MLAs or for Cabinet 

Ministers. Like the Premier I have no hesitation in endorsing the general thesis that an increase in the 

remuneration for people who serve the public as Members of the Legislature is warranted and justified. 

May I add that I can full understand and appreciate the feelings of at least some of my colleagues who 

may wish to express opinions somewhat different from the one I have just expressed. I think 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2242 

that it is also easy to understand why a number of people throughout the province may not fully 

understand the good reason and justification behind a movement of this kind. It is probably the fault of 

many of us who have had opportunities to explain in more detail to them just what the responsibilities of 

a MLA are and just what the demands on the time and attention of a MLA are as well. It is sometimes 

overlooked I think that an MLA’s duties do not cease when we finish our business in this Legislative 

Chamber. I know that many of our MLAs who work hard at being good MLAs spend not two months or 

three months but four or five months at least. This is time taken away from their other occupations and it 

is sometimes forgotten that while time is taken away from other occupations, income in varying amounts 

is lost as a result. That income has increased substantially since that time in 1962 when the last 

adjustment was made. I don’t want to go into detail in that, Mr. Speaker, at this time, but I do think it is 

important that Members of the House and the public generally be reminded of the costs of paying 

attention to public business over a period of four or five months probably, that this is time taken away 

from earning in the ordinary occupation. I think it needs to be reminded also that this frequently 

interferes with the progress which would otherwise be made in one’s occupation. I think of people who 

are in the teaching profession who probably forego the possibility of being appointed as a principal 

because so much of their time is taken up as an MLA. I think of those of my colleagues who are engaged 

in building practices of various kinds, who simply can’t build the kind of practice they otherwise could 

because four or five months of their time are taken in respect to doing public business. On the whole, 

however, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to endorse the idea of an adjustment in these for this simple 

reason. I think that government is important. I think that the work of this Legislature is exceedingly 

important and that the people of the province and our economy generally must be prepared to carry a 

proper expense for doing an important business on behalf of all the people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North):  Mr. Speaker, it isn’t my purpose to speak at any length on this 

Bill. I don’t intend today to speculate about the proper level of remuneration for either Cabinet Ministers 

or the Premier or MLAs. My first comment must be with regard to the Premier’s statement when he 

made the motion to have an independent committee reassess Members’ indemnities. At that time and 

again today he recalled that he had given this House the assurance that the matter would be reviewed if 

his Government was returned to office following the 1967 general election. I personally, Mr. Speaker, 

don’t recall this statement, but I do distinctly remember his assurance that Members’ indemnities would 

be reviewed prior to a general election in order that Members would not be charged with raising their 

own stipend, but they would be setting a level of indemnities for those who were fortunate enough to 

survive that next general election 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2243 

campaign. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that proposition would have been looked upon with a good deal 

more favor at that time than it is today. We were at that time according to all Government sources in the 

midst of an economic boom. It was claimed that taxes were being lowered and the economy was thriving 

and that Saskatchewan people never had it so good. That’s a story, Mr. Speaker, that won’t wash today. 

We find ourselves in extremely unhappy circumstances in many ways as they relate to matters that have 

been discussed at length in this House during this current session. Without further explanation, Mr. 

Speaker, I intend to vote against the Bill on second reading. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East):  Mr. Speaker, since the Government introduced its Budget 

and since the Culliton Report tabled in this Assembly on the matter of MLA indemnities and Cabinet 

Ministers’ salaries, I have checked the matter with some of my constituents to get an expression of 

opinion from them on the matter of MLA indemnities. In general, their view is that an increase in MLA 

indemnities to the tune of say 25 per cent or something near to the rise in the cost of living since the last 

increase may not be out of keeping. There are those who oppose any increase at all at this time, and 

there are a few who have indicated support for the recommendations of the Culliton Committee or 

something close to it respecting MLA indemnities. However, the number is small. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the clear impression that is left with me is that an increase of say 50 per cent or adopting 

the recommendations of the Culliton Committee at this time in their opinion is much too large. Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that I know the arguments and reasons to justify an increase in MLA and Cabinet 

salaries and indemnities. I know from my personal experience that out of the present $6,000 gross 

indemnity, half or more than half is outright expense. Therefore the net amount realized is $3,000 or less 

and certainly in election years it is much less. Then in my own case my wages are reduced 

proportionately had I not been an MLA. 

 

But in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, a large proportion of the population are low-income earners. As I 

have indicated I have checked with them to get their views. I also know that a great majority of 

Saskatchewan wage earners, farmers, teachers, senior citizens and others have not had an increase of 50 

per cent in their income since 1962. The Saskatchewan minimum wage is only $1 per hour in cities and 

less than $1 per hour in the rest of the province. An increase in the minimum wage is slow in coming. 

Part-time minimum wages have not increased in Saskatchewan since prior to the 1964 election. There 

are many people in my constituency who are very much dependent on the level of the minimum wages 

that are established by the Province. 

 

I have asked the Government during this session to increase food and living allowances for welfare 

recipients but none is forthcoming this year. I well know the living standards of the people I represent in 

Regina North East. Many live under the 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2244 

poverty line. For almost 20 years, Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege, as a union representative, to 

work for employees in the service industries. Their wages, their standard of living is generally low. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the actions of this Government of sharply increasing taxes generally and 

imposing the deterrent fees for hospital and medical care, in particular, will have an adverse effect on 

the people I represent and will further reduce their standard of living. Accordingly Mr. Speaker, I find 

myself in a position of opposing this Bill. 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Hon. Members that I will endeavour to be 

very brief with my remarks, but I do feel in all fairness to myself, my conscience and my people to 

whom I am responsible in the constituency of Weyburn that I must make a few remarks and try to 

explain my stand on this Bill No. 89, which will, if and when it is passed increase the allowance of 

Members of the Legislative quite substantially. I will not debate or argue that a reasonable increase 

would not be welcomed by all Members, chiefly due to the increase in one’s cost of living, along with 

the many extra duties that a Member is responsible for within his constituency. After sitting as a 

Member for some four years, I believe I have had opportune time to recognize these responsibilities that 

one must look after if he endeavours to serve his constituency well. But I also realize, Mr. Speaker, that 

the general public is facing an increase in their cost of living as well, and particularly so since the 

Government sitting opposite chose to bring in such drastic tax increases this present session while 

introducing their Budget. This is affecting and will affect in no uncertain terms, Mr. Speaker, all the 

people of the province, and if I might again suggest, it is affecting in many cases those that are least able 

to pay. I feel that the timing of an increase in our allowance is very poor when you consider the whole 

situation. Voting for an increase in one’s allowance or indemnity is a very unpleasant thing to do at any 

time, but at this time, as I earlier mentioned after having spent hours of debate which has ended by 

increasing a financial burden on many of our citizens of the province by increasing their taxes in some 

six different fields of taxation, I find, Mr. Speaker, that I have no alternative other than to oppose this 

Bill at this time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  Mr. Speaker, I repeat again that before the last election I indicated in this House in no 

uncertain terms that we would take some kind of action along the lines that we are proposing today. I 

remember very well the former Attorney General (Mr. Walker) debating with me on this subject. He 

said that he hoped whichever side was in power, would take some action on salaries. I can understand 

the reticence of some Members in hesitating to proceed in the manner that we have been doing. If their 

conscience is such that they feel they shouldn’t take a raise in pay, then I don’t think they should take it. 

I don’t think that this House should oblige them to take it. May I 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2245 

suggest that in the weeks ahead, the acid test will not be the way that all Hon. Members have talked, but 

the way they act. I notice that the three Members, who have spoken and indicated that they felt we 

should not proceed, in no instance said they would not take the increase. Again I say, Mr. Speaker, I 

have no apology in bringing forth this legislation. If we want men in public life to serve the public 

generally, then we must pay them fair and reasonable salaries. I hope this motion can now be passed and 

we will get into details in Committee. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following Recorded Division. 

 

YEAS  44 
 

Thatcher Estey Lloyd 

Howes Hooker Wooff 

McFarlane Gallagher Willis 

Boldt MacLennan Blakeney 

Steuart Heggie Dewhurst 

Heald Breker Meakes 

McIsaac Leith Whelan 

Guy Weatherald Michayluk 

Barrie Mitchell Brockelbank 

Loken Gardner Baker 

MacDougall Coupland Bowerman 

Grant McPherson Matsalla 

Coderre Forsyth Messer 

Bjarnason McIvor Kowalchuk 

MacDonald Schmeiser  

 

NAYS  5 
 

Wood Smishek Pepper 

Davies Snyder  

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 90 — An Act to amend The 

Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as Hon. Members know many years ago a contributory pension scheme for 

Members of the Legislature was established. This scheme was somewhat along the lines of industrial 

pensions. there has been a feeling again, I think on both sides of the House, that changing conditions 

have rendered some of the provisions inadequate when compared to similar provisions in other 

jurisdictions. Thus at the beginning of the session, the Culliton Committee, an independent body was 

asked to look into this matter and report back to the Legislature. The Bill which is now before us is for 

the most part based almost completely on its recommendations. In the report, the Culliton Committee 

stated and I quote from page 9: 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2246 

That improvements can be made therein to the scheme without any appreciable increase in cost to the 

Province. 

 

the Bill before us proposes certain changes in the Superannuation Act. First of all the cost to all 

individual MLAs in contributions will go up effective January 1, 1968 from 5 per cent to 7 per cent. 

This will mean that MLAs’ contributions are the same percentage as Cabinet Ministers. The legislation 

provides that a Member will be able to qualify for a pension after eight regular sessions instead of 10 as 

at the present time. The legislation provides that in the future the basis of computation of the pension 

will be one-fortieth instead of one-fiftieth. The ceiling on the maximum pension is being set at $8,000 

rather than the present $4,200. This is one change we have made insofar as the Culliton 

recommendations are concerned. We have placed the figure at $8,000 because we intend to introduce 

shortly legislation not at the present session but early next session, which will increase the ceiling for all 

civil servants to that $8,000 figure. The Bill provides that any Member may contribute to the pension 

plan for service in the House of Commons. MLAs, who have been defeated, today must drop out of the 

pension plan. I think as an example the Hon. Member for Touchwood. when he was defeated he had to 

pick up his benefits, and he was out of the plan. Now we are suggesting that this Bill will permit such a 

Member if he is re-elected to re-enter the plan, make his back contributions, and become a paid-up 

Member immediately. On page 10 the Committee recommended the advisability of establishing a 

Premier’s pension and I quote from the report: 

 

This is a matter which has originated solely with the Committee and the Committee accepts sole 

responsibility both for its consideration of the question and its recommendations thereto. 

 

The Committee gave a series of reasons why such legislation should be provided. As they pointed out, 

there is now legislation by the Parliament of Canada providing a pension for any person who has 

occupied the position of Prime Minister. They recommended that similar provisions should be made for 

a Premier in the Province of Saskatchewan, and this Bill provides for this type of action. The Premier’s 

pension will apply to any individual who has held the office of Premier, who is presently in the 

Legislature or for future Premiers. It provides a pension of one-half of the annual salary to anyone who 

has served as Premier from two to four years. It provides for two-thirds of the annual salary payable to 

any Premier who has served in that office for four years or more. These pensions will commence at age 

60 or if the Premier is still in the Legislature whenever he should retire after 60. Again all provisions of 

the Act are made retroactive to January 1st. Mr. Speaker, I believe the appropriate place to discuss this 

Bill in detail would be in Committee. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre):  Mr. Speaker, I am in favor of the principle of this Bill 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2247 

and I believe that I speak for most of the Members on this side of the House. I believe that it is 

appropriate to adjust the pensions for Members of the Legislature and for Cabinet Ministers. I am 

personally aware of some retired Cabinet Ministers and Members of the Legislature — I am thinking 

here particularly of Cabinet Ministers some of whom gave substantially all of their working life to this 

Legislature, or all of their earning life, having started their service immediately after the war, who are on 

pensions of $250 per month. I wonder whether that is an appropriate pension for a retired Cabinet 

Minister and his wife. I realize that this Bill won’t particularly deal with that situation, and it may or 

may not be that this matter can be looked after. I am not raising this matter now. The purpose of this Bill 

is to see that this sort of thing doesn’t happen in the future, at least to some extent, and I think that that is 

an appropriate thing for this Legislature to do. 

 

I may say that there are one or two aspects of this Bill to which I take fairly sharp objection. I think they 

are largely in the drafting, and I won’t raise them here because they are the sort of thing that can be 

much better dealt with in Committee. I just wanted to give a little forewarning. But I don’t think they are 

questions of principle as I view them. 

 

With respect to the proposed Premier’s pension, I have discussed this matter with my Leader who has 

some reservations about this. I think his reservations are primarily based on the fact that he is involved, 

and I am sure that the Premier feels the same unease about discussing this aspect of the Bill. However, I 

think our job as legislators is to lay this aside and to ask ourselves whether or not it is appropriate for a 

person who has borne the heavy office of Premier of this Province to have some special consideration. I 

know that I personally discussed this with Judge Culliton and he put up a very strong argument in favor 

of it. His argument — I don’t need to repeat it in the House, he is able to make his own arguments — 

but the gist of the thing is that he who takes the office of Premier has to make a great number of 

decisions, not dissimilar to those that a judge has to make. They have to be decisions which sometimes 

will be very unpopular and will seriously affect his future ability to make a living. We know also that the 

life of the politician is an uncertain life. Some of us are well aware of that and there is, therefore, a good 

argument to be made for the fact that some minimum level of security ought to be available to someone 

who bears the heavy burden of Premier and who had to make these decisions that must, if our 

government is to operate properly, be made completely dispassionately and completely without thought 

of the personal welfare of the individual making them. This is the whole principle of the independence 

of the judiciary; it is the chief reason why we provide pensions for not only Chief Justices or Queen’s 

Bench judges but indeed District Court judges and magistrates. I think some of the same arguments 

apply with equal force to the office of Premier; in fact with rather greater force I think. I think that we 

can look at the 



 

April 20, 1968 

 

 

2248 

particular details of the pension in Committee, but with respect to the two main principles involved of 

providing a pension for Premiers who are retired Premiers and for adjusting the level of pensions for 

Members of the Legislature and for Cabinet Ministers, I find myself in agreement, and I will be 

supporting the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:12 o’clock p.m. 


