



















































Hansard: March 26, 1968


1369 
 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

29th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 26, 1968. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, seated in the east gallery are three classes of 

grade eight students, a total of about 90 of them from the Imperial school which is located in my 

constituency. They are accompanied by their teachers Mr. s. Lamb, Mr. Bartel, and Mr. Wittner. On 

behalf of this House I extend to them a warm welcome and hope that their stay this afternoon will be 

most pleasant and educational. I hope the experiences that they will gain here this afternoon will assist 

them in their social studies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker‘s gallery is a fine group of students 

from Massey school here in Regina under the direction of Mr. Jantzen. I believe you had the privilege of 

meeting them before the House went into session and I know you conveyed a good message to them 

because they asked a lot of very intelligent questions. We extend a welcome to them and along with 

other Members of this House I am sure you join with me in hoping that they will find this visit most 

informative and educational. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity through 

you to introduce a group of students from Saskatoon Mayfair constituency. I believe they have just 

arrived in the west gallery immediately behind me. It is Westmount school and I have a son going there. 

They are accompanied this afternoon by their teachers, Mr. s. Fenton, Mr. s. Sutherland and Mr. Adair. I 

am sure that all Members of the Assembly will take this opportunity to wish them a pleasant stay in the 

Chamber and an informative stay and a pleasant trip back to Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

BATTEN COMMISSION 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1370 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a question 

to the Hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher). A news report this morning quotes Consumer Affairs Minister 

Turner as saying that he had written the Prairie Premiers asking for permission to meet the research staff 

of the Batten Commission. I would like to ask the Premier, since two weeks have gone by, when this 

permission will be given from Saskatchewan so that the work of consumer protection may proceed. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Well I might tell the Hon. Member that I do not recall having 

received such a request from the Minister. However, we are looking into it, but I will say again that we 

plan no action as a Government until we have had consultation with Manitoba and Alberta. This was a 

three-Province Commission. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the Premier. 

Could the Premier give some indication to the Hon. Members of the House when this consultation with 

the Prairie Provinces might take place? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well I think it will be obviously not possible to hold that consultation until after the 

three sessions have adjourned. So there are no plans until after that time. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — A supplementary question to the Premier. Does this 

mean there has been no consultation either by telephone or correspondence with respect to something 

that the Commission urged as being rather necessary for immediate attention. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We have discussed this matter by telephone, but we feel that no decisions can be met 

or made until the Prairie Economic Council does meet again. As a matter of fact we feel that the 

recommendations were so nebulous that really nothing is being lost. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

LIQUOR ADVERTISING 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — While I‘m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to announce to the House that the 

Government will not proceed with legislation at the current session to permit liquor advertising on radio, 

television or newspaper. 

 

QUESTIONS 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1371 

RETURN NO. 4 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like again 

refer to Order No. 4. The Provincial Secretary (Mr. Steuart) has brought down Orders No. 102, 81, 80 

and 59. No. 4 was one of the first Orders passed by this House, ordered away back on February 28. The 

longer we are denied this information, Mr. Speaker, the more people have cause to question the 

expenses which were asked for regarding the Member for Nipawin. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — The information hasn‘t come down yet from the Department. 

I‘m sure they are doing their best to make it available as soon as they can. As soon as it comes into my 

hands, I will file it. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. The Premier was pointing out yesterday, 

improperly, that time was getting on. May I say to the Government that a number of these unanswered 

Returns are rather necessary for discussion of the Estimates. I do want to ask the Government if it can‘t 

push along the answering of a number of these relatively simple ones so that the work of Estimates may 

be expedited. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURNS 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 110 

showing: 

 

For each of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board stores closed since May, 1964, (a) the total sales figure 

and (b) the operating expense, in the fiscal years 1963-64; 1964-65; 1966-67, and 1967-68. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, for reasons which I explained about a week ago we cannot give the 

information in part (b) and I move an amendment as follows: 

 

That the words ―and (b) the operating expense‖ be deleted. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — An amendment has been offered, moved by the Hon. Premier, seconded by the Hon. 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald) that Motion for Return No. 110 be amended by striking out all the words 

after ―and‖ in clause (a). 

 

The Clerk has just drawn my attention to a problem in connection with the amendment and I think he is 

correct, because the amendment, if it was carried, would delete everything in part (b) which would 

include the number of years for which the 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1372 

question was asked in part (a) and I would presume that the intention of the amendment was to strike out 

the words ―the operating expense‖. The first part of the Motion asks for the total sales figure and if we 

strike this out in clause (b) we‘ll strike out the number of years, so what years would that relate to. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I got the advice of the Clerk in drawing this up and I thought I had it 

right. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now look, let me just read the Motion to the House as it would be if it was amended, 

as I think it should be amended. 

 

For each of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board stores closed since May, 1964, the total sales figure in the 

fiscal years 1963-64; 1964-65; 1965-66; 1967-68. 

 

That the words ―and (b) the operating expense‖ be struck out. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 113 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 113 showing: 

 

With respect to property required by the Department of Highways for construction of Highway No. 3 

from Crooked River to Chelan, (a) the description of each property along with the acreage of each; (b) 

the names of the owners of each property from whom the Department is acquiring or has acquired the 

property; (c) the purchase price of each property where an agreement has been arrived at, with each 

purchase price shown in its various components; (d) the date on which each agreement for purchase 

was signed; and (e) the amount paid to each owner for the removal of buildings from the said 

properties. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I believe the Hon. Member has made a mistake, 

it should read Highway No. 23, not 3. Am I correct? 

 

Mr. Messer: — Yes, that is correct, I am sorry. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I would think that he would have to withdraw the question, re-submit and we would 

answer it. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Just call that a typographical error and have it 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1373 

corrected here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . somebody else can amend it. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, I would move that Return No. 113 be amended by 

changing Highway No. 3 to Highway No. 23. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — ―That the numeral 3 in the second line be struck out and 23 substituted therefor‖ is the 

correct wording. We‘ll have it ready in a minute. It‘s moved by the Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. 

Willis) seconded by the Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) ―That the number ―3‖ in the third 

line be struck out and the number ―23‖ substituted therefor.‖ 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Point of order, Mr. Chairman, second line. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, second line. Didn‘t I say second line? ―That the numeral ―3‖ in the second line of 

the Motion be struck out and the number ―23‖ substituted thereof.‖ 

 

Amendment agreed to 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 116 

 

Mr. Messer: — Moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 116 showing: 

 

Copies of all Agreements entered into since January 1, 1965, by the Government of Saskatchewan with 

Anglo-Rouyn Mines Limited or with any other company subsidiary to Rio Tinto Mining Company 

Limited. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — I just want to point out to the Member that we 

have no knowledge of any Rio Tinto Mining Company. It is not registered here, so it is impossible to 

answer the question. Does he wish to drop it or re-draft it. 

 

Mr. Messer: — It probably could be redrafted but the question reads, with any Anglo-Rouyn Mines 

Limited or with any Company subsidiary to Rio Tinto Mining Company. If you do not have anything for 

the latter portion of the question, it doesn‘t delete the answering of the first portion. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I draw the attention to the Member to the fact that he 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1374 

spoke when he was moving the Motion and he can‘t speak twice, but never mind he‘s done it anyway. 

Now to get this thing in order. The Motion is now the property of the House and it can‘t be withdrawn 

save by unanimous consent. You either have consent of the House to withdraw it or amend it. 

 

Mr. Kramer; — Mr. Speaker, would it be in order to have a Motion to delete the subsidiary to 

everything after Anglo Mines Limited or . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It‘s not for the Speaker to answer a hypothetical question. But why don‘t you try it and 

see. I think it would probably work out alright. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfield): — Mr. Speaker, speaking on the Motion I have had 

questions answered where, and have seen questions that have been answered in the House, some section 

of the question was not, could not be answered and consequently the answer was noted on the reply. 

Could that be the same procedure here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well it is certainly within the competence of the House if the Members see fit to 

process a Motion for Return that can‘t be answered. That‘s their privilege. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 — CREATION OF A CONSUMERS’ AGENCY 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) moved, seconded by Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): 

 

That this Assembly, recognizing an urgent public need, recommend to the consideration of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the creation of a consumers‘ agency that would vigorously undertake 

the development of a broad and effective program of consumer protection, education and information; 

an agency which would also make every effort to work closely with the appropriate branch or 

department of the Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. Davies — In beginning this discussion on what I think is a most important Resolution on the Order 

Paper, I can‘t do much better than to refer to a recent speech of Mr. Eric Luxton of Ottawa, who is 

Director of the Consumers Association of Canada and who spoke recently in Regina. At that time he 

said, ―Canadians should not be serfs in today‘s market place.‖ Now plainly, Mr. Luxton was calling for 

changes that would release consumers from the bondage of which they are held in our commercial 

society. Mr. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1375 

Luxton spoke again on February 27th in Moose Jaw. At that time he said among other things, ―The 

consumer lives in a jungle, a vast, complex, mixed mess.‖ 

 

He observed then that advertising, purchases, displays, packaging and the like were costing the public 

very dearly. He cited a list of groceries in a shopping centre. The cost of these groceries came to $19.29. 

He said, ―The total food costs of that package come to $8.15 and the rest, not an ounce of which goes to 

nutrition, comes to $11.14.‖ 

 

Mr. Luxton spoke only a few days before on the Report on the Royal Commission on Consumer 

Problems and Inflation. This Report was tabled in the House. Members may recall what I think was 

somewhat ironic, that the Report, which told prairie people of the enormous extent to which consumers 

have become victims of big corporate practices, was laid on the Members‘ desks just as the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) was informing us of the large new tax burdens which would be their unhappy lot 

to carry during the coming year. Nothing could be more illustrative, Mr. Speaker, of the utter failure of 

this province than the fact that simultaneously with the filing of the Batten Report in this House the 

Government announced tax increases that will cost every family of this Province $175 a year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said that the Batten Report won‘t be put on the shelf. This is a good 

statement but it needs actions, and not words to justify it. I must refer to the question that was asked 

earlier this afternoon and the answer given by the Hon. Premier. I must first of all refer to the news item 

on the basis of which I asked the question. This was a news item in this morning‘s Leader Post — by the 

way, the one I am reading — saying that Consumer Affairs Minister John Turner had asked the Prairie 

Premiers for permission for his officials to meet with the research staff of the Batten Commission, but 

had received no reply. In this same item, Mr. Turner states that this letter had been sent some two weeks 

before. Now the reply we get from the Premier this afternoon is that there has not been a meeting of the 

Prairie Premiers, (the Economic Council of the Prairies), and he must consult with them first before any 

action whatsoever is taken. 

 

I find this an amazing statement. After all, Consumer Affairs Minister Turner is not asking at this point 

for any definitive action. He has only asked to meet with the research staff of the Batten Commission. I 

say that, if the Premier is anxious to take this Report off the shelf or to put some of the proposals into 

effect as I think they should be, this is not the quickest way of proceeding with action in that direction. I 

was also somewhat consternated to hear the Premier in passing, refer to the proposals of the Batten 

Commission as ―nebulous‖ provisions. This is odd, because if the Prairie Premiers have not discussed it, 

it would seem to be curious and peculiar that the Premier would pass judgment on it before he had 

discussed 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1376 

this matter with his fellow Premiers. But I must also say that many people of this province have read the 

recommendations of the Batten Commission, at least in brief form, and have come to the conclusion that 

they are not nebulous at all, that some of the proposals particularly are very sharp ones and very much to 

the point. If the Premier‘s reference is any indication of the thinking of this Government, then I would 

suggest that something be done by them very quickly to change his mind in this connection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Members of the CCF in this House presented their brief to the Batten 

Commission, the cost of living stood 4½ per cent lower than it did on January of 1968. If you add the 

enormous obstacles in increased living costs posed by the citizens of this Province, this Government has 

a very, very long way to go before any significant progress is made for consumers. While I am on the 

question of the brief that was presented by the Members on this side of the House to the Batten 

Commission, I am gratified to say that the Commission agreed in nine important proposals with the 

recommendations that our Members made at that time. 

 

I should also say here that the Resolution in front of you is one that I had prepared and ready on the first 

day of the sitting of this House. I withheld the Resolution thinking that the Batten Commission Report 

might contain material that would suggest an alteration. I‘m happy to say that I did not have to change 

one word in the Resolution and that it conforms almost exactly to a principal recommendation made by 

the Batten Commission. 

 

The Members on this side of the House have, for several years, been requesting that the Government of 

this Province, working with the Federal Government, should take steps to restrain the excesses of large 

corporate concerns of this country, as they affect consumers and to otherwise act in the interests of the 

consumer. Almost any suggestion that corporations might be guilty of dangerous activities seems to be 

hotly resented by the Liberal party of this province to undertake real action in the interests of consumers. 

 

The Batten Report has told us that prairie people are paying the highest food costs in Canada. What a 

travesty this is, Mr. Speaker! Here in the heart of the greatest food belt in Canada, the public is paying 

more than the most heavily urbanized areas of Canada. Excess profits, and excess capacity on the 

prairies on the part of the food chains, cost the average family $61.28 extra in 1966, according to this 

Report. The Report added that the concentration of control of the grocery market by the large grocery 

firms in the second largest city of this province, Saskatoon, is heavier than in any city in the United 

States. The Report went on to say in this regard that in Saskatoon, Regina and Calgary, the four largest 

food firms control more than 67 per cent of the entire market. Mr. Speaker, with the straightforward 

comment of the Batten Commission that 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1377 

excess profits are due in this region to monopoly power and that large prairie grocery concerns are 

earning profits 200 and 300 per cent above the American standard, that competition is actively curtailed 

by the operations of these great chains, we at last, have caused the Members on the Government side of 

the House to realize that they have been exceedingly behindhand in taking brisk and effective steps to 

counteract the situation and to create some degree of equality for the consumer in society. 

 

The Batten Commission, Mr. Speaker, has properly brought to our attention one factor that is sometimes 

ignored. This is that consumer legislation is not really a new consideration for governments but that 

governments have not responded either swiftly or adequately in bringing consumer legislation up-to-date 

to meet the problems of our more complicated modern society. Action to help consumers in some way 

or other is as old as society itself. What we are confronted with today is the necessity to create new, 

broad measures to aid the buying public, recognizing the powerful forces that oppose him in today‘s 

changed and more sophisticated market place. 

 

You know it was as early as 1950 BC, that Hammurabi, the King of Babylon, established strict laws to 

protect his subjects against short measures of grain and wine. The penalty for short weight in those days 

was the drowning of the offending merchant. Our own Magna Carta of the 13th century, as well as 

proclaiming certain well-known rights and liberties, also stated firm requirements for measures of food 

and drink. Legislation of Henry III of England defines standard yards, bushels, weights and containers 

that were all identified by the application of the King‘s seal. Numerous similar examples can be given 

especially in the 19th and 20th centuries dealing with weights, measures, goods‘ quality, food and drug 

safety, to name a few. But it is a far cry from feudal times and even 50 years ago in terms of the 

different environment and relationships existing between buyer and seller. In the Middle Ages for 

example transactions of sale between strangers were very few and rare. In these circumstances, the 

responsibility and the ability of the buyer to protect himself was a pretty reasonable proposition. But in 

1968, this situation has altered immensely because no longer is the consumer in the virtually even 

position of earlier times. Mr. Speaker, it has been estimated that by 1970, an estimated $25 billion will 

be spent yearly in all forms of advertising in the United States of America. A lesser amount of course is 

spent in Canada, but it is deemed to be roughly proportionate to the United States‘ expenditure having 

regard to our population. Conceding that advertising can and does on occasions play some useful role 

for industry for the consumer and the economy, it is in my view impossible to mount any rational 

defence of huge expenditures of this order. 

 

Some of the Members may know the book ―Waste Makers‖ by Vance Packard. He deals in one of the 

chapters with a report from an official of General Foods stating that a typical American family is 

exposed to 1,518 selling messages just in the 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1378 

course of one day. And this figure did not include the material stuffed into the nation‘s mailboxes, which 

was estimated at another 16 billion pieces a year. This incidentally at that time was just four times the 

volume of mail of a decade earlier. In passing, it should be known that the American public subsidized 

this mailing to the tune of $190 million seven years ago. The figure is probably much larger today. 

 

It has also been estimated that dealing only with television the average family hears an hour of television 

commercials every day. It has been calculated, and I think this is a very important fact, that more than 

half of all the advertising dollars go to promote cigarettes, alcoholic beverages, patent medicines, soaps 

and cosmetics. I don‘t perhaps need to urge that this can hardly be accepted as socially desirable. Lung 

cancer, a great deal of which is caused by the use of tobacco, is said to kill close to as many Canadians 

yearly as are slain on the nation‘s highways. One has only to listen for an hour or two of television, 

almost any evening, to understand the insidious degree to which tobacco advertisers have used this 

powerful mass medium to promote the sale of a product that is almost as lethal as the automobile. 

 

The Batten Commission has made some trenchant observations about advertising. The Commission 

recommended that the Governments of the three prairie provinces urge the Federal Department of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs to examine the feasibility of creating an agency similar to the United 

States Federal Trade Commission with power to force advertisers to restrain or modify their 

announcements, when these announcements are unacceptable in terms of honesty, adequacy, taste, or 

such other characteristics. 

 

I believe also that, in addition to this recommendation of the Commission, governments will need to take 

the type of action eventually that will restrain advertising through the medium of some other kind of 

action, such as a tax, especially where advertising is plainly becoming an onerous cost on the consumer 

and where it places the consumer in a more difficult position to make a sober judgement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention here today to examine fully the recommendations of the Batten 

Commission. I say that in my opinion it is a very worthy report and one that, if it is followed by the 

various Governments, can be of considerable assistance to the consumer. I am today dealing with what 

is, I think, the central recommendation made by the Commission and one that is most likely to benefit 

the consumer if this Government acts upon it. To put it another way, we must have effective consumer 

protection. If there is any main item that emerges from even a scant look at reports like the Batten 

Commission it is this, the consumer is a victim without adequate defences. One hears a great deal of 

criticism about the stupidity of the buyer, whether it is in the supermarket, or any other store, for that 

matter. I say it is little wonder that the buyer is 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1379 

confused, makes mistakes, often spends his or her money unwisely. Most of his mistakes are 

encouraged, aided and abetted by millions of ingenious appeals, put together in many instances by the 

best brains that can be hired and perverted for a price. A fraction of the huge funds spent on advertising 

would, if used to build consumer awareness, and to create some consumer protection, undoubtedly 

shield and arm the consumer better for the encounter. 

 

It has been said that the National Bureau of Standards of the United States created many years ago to 

test goods and materials that were used by the United States Government, initially cost the United States 

Government in 1927, $2 million for this first year of operation. But in that year the Bureau saved the 

United States Government $100 million; and of course this figure has risen since that time. This, 

incidentally, is the same agency that 40 years later has been largely responsible for forcing the 

automobile industry to undertake partial reform for safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another outstanding reason for helping consumers today through governments is the 

enormous change which has taken place in the market place itself. It has been reliably stated that after 

World War II, there were 1,500 items on the shelves of the average supermarket. But today it is said that 

the figure has risen to 8,000. The housewife is confronted with bewildering choices in the multiplicity of 

items that are offered for sale. These are often displayed in an array of cunning and deceptive packaging 

and sizing. The evidence about this is just overwhelming. She is also, of course, deliberately misled, 

confused and deceived in the whole process. The public in this country knows something about the great 

debate which has gone on in the United States over legislation and other means urged to meet the lack of 

consumer information and protection. Such organizations as the American Trial Lawyers‘ Association, 

representing 25,000 practising lawyers, vigorously supported the amount of control into the field of fair 

packaging and labelling. The recent Ottawa consumer hearings have also generally borne out the 

compelling need for action in Canada. I am happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that the party of which I am a 

Member has also been a steady and a consistent advocate of these and many other consumer measures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — A steady and a mounting demand is being built up in North America for some action on 

drug prices and the excesses of drug firms. Just a few days ago there appeared an inconspicuous item in 

the Regina Leader-Post, announcing that three of the largest drug firms in this country and the United 

States had been fined almost $100,000 for monopoly practices in the manufacture and sale of drugs. 

This kind of information is depressingly familiar. The Kefauver hearings in the United 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1380 

States several years ago substantially confirmed what Canadian Government investigations have 

determined in a more recent time. These findings have caused shock and indignation among all that have 

become acquainted with them. 

 

Drug advertising compared to drug development is one of the many examples often quoted. It‘s well 

known that four or five times the amount of money that is spent on drug research is spent on drug 

promotion and advertising. The evidence before the Kefauver hearings produced facts to show that drug 

companies in the USA spent more than $5,500 a year on sales and promotion, for every doctor in the 

United States, $5,500 for every physician in that country. The huge discrepancies that exist between the 

prices of certain essential drugs, often those that were researched and discovered in other countries and 

the exorbitant returns on invested dollars in the bulk of the drug industry, all come together in a picture 

of rampant and unseemly monopoly commercialism in a field that is vital to the relief of illness. 

 

In my opinion, there would appear to be only three solutions to this social evil. The first is early action 

by governments to regulate the industry in the public interest. The second, would be the creation of 

public drug industry to supply a genuine ingredient of control, competition and progressive change. The 

third, and the more drastic of course, is the nationalization of the private drug industry itself. 

 

Now, the Batten Commission Report does not, in my opinion, deal adequately with this sector. 

However, whatever one‘s views are on the general subject, there are few who won‘t agree that the public 

is badly informed about drugs, that it needs protection in this field and would benefit by a program 

designed to acquaint citizens with the facts to better enable them to confront the powerful drug bloc that 

exists in this country. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I turn for a moment to another of the Batten Commission recommendations, namely 

that with respect to housing. I was gratified to see the direction of the Batten Commission‘s thinking on 

this matter. For many years (and I can recall myself making a speech on this matter some ten years ago), 

Members like myself have been urging action with respect to housing, housing directed to public 

planning, research, and overall responsibility for those large sections of society that cannot afford to buy 

or rent accommodation in today‘s market. I think the Batten Commission has made a real contribution in 

recommending that the Federal Government develop an effective framework to gather data, collect 

statistics and undertake research in housing. An even more significant recommendation perhaps is that 

housing authorities should be created in all of the three prairie provinces to concern themselves with the 

―broad range of problems raised by all aspects of housing and the demand for it.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — The authorities again are 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1381 

asked to take strong initiative in ―conceiving, proposing and planning housing developments and 

research into housing problems.‖ Mr. Speaker, I think we have finally come to the time when everyone 

in this Province must realize that the question of housing is one in which the public as a whole has to 

take a pre-eminent responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — We should not lose sight of the fact that in public activity designed to construct new 

homes and apartments, and other buildings there is great value in other ways. For example, there is 

probably no other kind of industry today that creates as many direct and indirect benefits to employment 

as does the housing and construction industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken with approval of the need for far more aggressive activity in research and 

housing design. The Batten Commission, in common with a number of other authorities, has remarked 

that we have been very tardy and very remiss in North America, in making investigations in this field. I 

am personally convinced that research on the part of construction experts, as well as independent experts 

— and I emphasize that the latter are needful — can produce some very vital reforms that will reduce 

the cost of home building and in general, stimulate building in all its manifestations, everywhere else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what has been done in Canada towards the objectives suggested in the Resolution that will 

be placed before the House today? May I first of all refer to the Consumer Bureau Act that was passed in 

New Brunswick effective on May 19, 1967. Under this Consumer Bureau Act, the Provincial Secretary 

becomes the responsible Minister of a bureau that is headed by a director. Necessary staff may be hired 

by the Minister as he deems fit. The duties of the Bureau include the maintenance of the liaison with 

consumer groups, and the collection and distribution of information to educate and advise consumers on 

consumer protection. The Bureau also has the task of promoting and assisting counselling services in 

respect of consumer problems. The Bureau is to receive and investigate complaints involving the 

protection of the consumer. The Bureau, in addition, shall perform any duty imposed by the Act, or 

which is prescribed by the Act or the Minister. This is a pretty broad field of reference. The Director of 

the Bureau is appointed a Commissioner under the Inquiries Act whenever he needs to exercise those 

prerogatives. 

 

In the light of the Batten Commission Report, the Federal legislation is perhaps the most important item 

for our consideration here today. The Federal Act is known as The Department of Consumer and 

Corporate Affairs Act and this was passed by the Canadian House of Commons on November 27, 1967. 

The new Act creates a Minister and a Deputy responsible for the Department. The kernel of the law is in 

Section 6. This gives the Minister instructions to initiate, recommend or undertake 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1382 

programs designed to promote the interests of the Canadian consumer, co-ordinate programs of the 

Government of Canada that are designed to promote the interests of the Canadian consumer, promote 

and encourage the institution of practices or conduct tending to the better protection of the Canadian 

consumer, and note this, Mr. Speaker, co-operate with Provincial Governments or agencies thereof or 

any bodies or organization or persons in any programs having similar objects; and to undertake, 

recommend or assist in programs the Canadian consumer to become more fully informed about goods 

and services that are offered to the consumer. 

 

Section 6, subsection 2, of this Act is interesting. I‘m going to quote very briefly from it. It says: 

 

For the purpose of carrying out his duties and functions under the Act, the Minister may undertake 

research into matters to which the powers, duties and functions of the Minister extend, co-operate with 

any or all provinces, or with any department or agency of the Government of Canada or any 

organization or person undertaking such research and publish or cause to be published or assist in the 

publication of, so much of the results of any such research as the Minister deems appropriate and in the 

public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a look at the Resolution that I shall move before this House, will reveal that it is admirably 

designed to fit in with the Federal legislation. You will note that the Federal legislation, as well as 

charging the Minister with powers to begin activity over a broad territory of interest and of assistance to 

consumers, properly envisages this taking place in co-operation with provincial governments. Indeed I 

think it‘s hard to see how any good and effective consumers‘ program could operate without that 

essential unity of approach. Mr. Speaker, the Batten Commission on page 365 makes this 

recommendation. I‘m here quoting verbatim: 

 

This Commission recommends that each of the governments of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta 

establish a consumer section to safeguard, inquire into, and advance the consumer interest in all 

spheres. This section should, in each case, take the form of a civil service body but have the status of a 

crown corporation reporting to the legislature through the Attorney General. The section should be 

given a formal title which unambiguously indicates its duty to protect and advance the consumer 

interest. The section should be so organized that when and if desirable or necessary it could be 

transformed into a complete department, with a minister of its own, thereupon taking over for its own 

administration the relevant consumer oriented sections of other departments. 

 

If I may pause here, Mr. Speaker, this has some interest for us here today after the remarks of the 

Premier, because it is not necessary, as one will see by the recommendations of 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1383 

the Batten Commission, for us to await any meeting of the three Premiers of the Prairies, because the 

Batten Commission recommends the establishment of consumer sections in each province and 

ultimately, that each Province should have its own consumer department with a Minister. So I suggest 

it‘s hedging to a considerable degree, to say that it is necessary to put off the consideration of outright 

action for consumers until the three Premiers have met. 

 

The Batten Commission goes on to recommend that the newly organized section on consumer affairs 

will be given the following responsibilities: 

 

First the section should be made responsible for the supervision of trade and professional associations. 

Second, the responsibility for the licensing and regulation of corporate and business affairs should be 

exercised by the section. Third, the supervision of consumer credit legislation should be the function of 

this section. Fourth, the section should be required to initiate proceedings designed to provide the 

consumer with known and enforceable standards of quality and performance over a much more extended 

range of products than at present. Additionally the Commission recommends that a senior officer of the 

section should be provided by a sufficient and well-trained staff to enable him to conduct functions such 

as the following: The section should be given power ―to collect and collate all legislation pertaining to 

the consumer, and all complaints arising from the consumer, and to initiate through the minister 

recommended legislative extensions, modifications, or contractions‖ where this is considered necessary. 

 

In the second instance the consumer section, it is recommended should have powers to obtain on a 

temporary basis staff from other departments where the section considers this desirable and needful to 

the carrying out of an inquiry or the initiation of legislative proposals. Thirdly, the consumer section, the 

Commission says, should have powers to conduct its own independent inquiries, where it should be able 

to employ expert staff from wherever such can be obtained. The section should also be properly 

authorized in the opinion of the Commission to function as a liaison with the Federal Department of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs. The Commission feels that the senior officer of the section would 

obviously have to be of sufficiently professional institutional stature to be able, as required, to discuss 

various matters directly with the Federal Minister. 

 

As well as these duties, the Commission feels that the section should be specifically instructed to 

concern itself with the many matters that affect provincial consumers and whether solutions lie at the 

Federal or the Provincial level. This general instruction should specifically require the section, the 

Commission thinks, to keep industrial and commercial practices under scrutiny and to report to the 

Director of Combines Investigations suspected violations of The Combines Investigations Act. The 

Commission clearly feels that the 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1384 

consumer interests in each of the prairie provinces need to be, in the language of the Commission, 

―clearly and vigorously represented to the relevant authority in such a way that the institutional or other 

lethargy should be minimized.‖ Up to this point it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the lethargy has been 

expressed by the Leader of the Government party. 

 

The Commission in its proposal No. 6, states that the consumer section should have powers to join 

forces with other Provincial consumer sections of the Federal Department, whenever such would be the 

most effective and efficient method for carrying out inquiries. The Batten Commission has also 

suggested that the consumer affairs section be created, should be advised by an Advisory Council of six 

persons, one of which, but not the Chairman, who would be ex officio, the senior officer of the section. 

The Council would be made up of persons professionally qualified to act in the consumer interest 

although not expressly appointed as representatives of other interests. 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that not only will this House give unanimous endorsation to this Resolution, 

but that the Government will very quickly move thereafter to do the things that are suggested by this 

Resolution. I don‘t think there is any room whatsoever for tardiness and delay at this time. The creation 

of a Consumer Section should be regarded by the Government as a matter of top priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, additional steps to energetically protect and assist the consumer have been needed in this 

province and Canada for many decades at the very least. If they have been needed over these years, they 

have been more desperately needed during the period of the past four or five years in which inflationary 

pressures have been most noticeable. 

 

In expressing the hope that this House will accept this Resolution, and that the Government will proceed 

to implement the recommendations it sets forth, I would also like to appeal to the Government to create 

a consumer agency, and an advisory council of people who are widely accepted and acknowledged as 

experienced, capable and impartial persons. I would hope that the Government if it agrees to set up these 

bodies would ignore all partisan consideration in this connection. 

 

The idea, Mr. Speaker, that the consumer is sovereign has been for far too long a fiction in this country. 

It is time that we achieve a situation where the consumer is, in fact, king. All of what many people are 

trying to achieve in consumer laws is directed to helping often the most helpless, unfortunate and 

inarticulate members of our society. The consumer protection laws today mean far more than that. They 

involve a whole system of value judgements, of moral attitudes, of our general sense of charity and 

consideration for humanity. In the analysis, consumer laws are a buttress to democracy. Democracy 

depends on informed people. The purpose of my Resolution, in the end, is not only to protect the 

consumer but to arm and to equip him for the struggle that he has in today‘s world. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1385 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Resolution presented by 

the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies). It is a timely Resolution, it is a Resolution that is 

in keeping with the Batten Commission‘s recommendations and it deserves the unanimous and complete 

support of this Legislature. 

 

All Members know that there have been sharp price increases in consumer goods over the past several 

months. During the last two years, retail food prices alone rose in the Province of Saskatchewan between 

10 and 15 per cent. We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, are concerned and are fearful of the 

effect the sharp price increases are going to have and are having on the wages of working people, on 

living and production costs of farmers, and those who are forced to live on fixed incomes, particularly 

people who have to live on $75 a month pensions, or is it $76.50 now, and the welfare and the 

unemployment insurance recipients. The need for a consumer‘s agency at the provincial level to develop 

an effective and broad program of consumer protection, education and information is urgent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me first talk about the need to protect the consumer from the many unjust price 

increases that we have been experiencing. Members know that the rising prices for food and other 

household necessities have occupied a great deal of public attention. Let us briefly examine who is 

responsible and what are the causes for the high and rising prices. The Senate House Committee on 

Consumer Prices found in its investigations that Kelloggs, a cereal manufacturer, had a profit figure of 

11.3 per cent after taxes. Both General Foods and Kelloggs report advertising and promotion spending 

of more than 14 per cent of sales. Both profits and advertising costs are considerably higher than the 

wages and costs of material. Now, the Members opposite are always inclined to be critical that the cause 

of rising prices is due to labor costs. Well, Mr. Speaker, facts show that a 39 cent box of cereal contains 

only 3 cents of wage costs compared to 4.5 cents for packaging and the other materials, 6 cents for 

advertising and sales promotions and 4 cents for profits. You will notice, Mr. Speaker, that sales and 

promotion costs and advertising are twice as high as the cost of wages, and profits are at least one-third 

higher than are wages. 

 

In the meat-packing industry, we find that in the period 1956-65, the number of production workers fell 

by 22.3 per cent and productivity rose during that same period by 54.3 per cent. The labor cost per 

pound of meat fell from 4.6 cents a pound to 3.12 cents per pound. But has the consumer had any 

reduction in the retail price of meat? Certainly not, Mr. Speaker. The reverse has been true. Meat Prices 

have been going up, and up, while labor costs dropped and the prices to farmers have remained 

relatively unchanged. The same situation as in the cereal industry remains in a great many industries 

manufacturing and distributing household foods and items. Advertising and 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1386 

promotion costs are greater than are wages for soaps, detergents, tooth cleaners, tea, coffee, baby foods, 

frozen foods. The list is endless. 

 

Sidney Margoluis, a noted consumer expert, writes that much of the anger has been directed toward 

supermarkets, and especially towards such highly visible factors that raise prices as trading stamps, 

bonus bingo and other lottery games, night openings, carry-out and other services. In reality, the food 

manufacturers are even more responsible than the stores, he says. But the supermarkets are trying hard 

to dodge their share of responsibility, if extra services, such as cheque-cashing, carry-out boys and night 

openings were discontinued, retail prices would drop from 6 to 9 per cent. This was the conclusion 

arrived at by the President of the National Association of Food Chains. Furthermore, he pointed out that 

supermarket profits are only about 1.3 cents of the dollar. This is in the United States. But Margoluis 

points out that they are really dodging the issue. It is not the percentage that hurts as much as the money 

they waste — your money — to achieve the dollar profits. The fact is that supermarkets have joined in 

the food manufacturers‘ modern game of pushing at you a host of highly advertised processed products 

whose prices have little relation to their actual value. 

 

To a noticeable extent, television advertising, with its ability to command a huge audience has made 

retailers as consumers its captives. Any product that can be advertised on television in a dominating way 

now is able to force its way onto the supermarkets‘ shelves simply by its ability to develop demand. One 

result is that modern large supermarkets now carry between 8,000 and 9,000 items compared to 3,000 or 

4,000 that used to be considered a big stock several years ago. The proliferation of items, brand and 

sizes, many only slightly different or merely under different names, has helped to thwart the early 

promise of supermarkets that they would reduce the cost of bringing foods from the farm to the 

consumer. Both business and government officials often argue that this wide variety of brands and items 

is a benefit to the consumer. In actuality it has become a major source of shopping confusion and one of 

the reasons why food prices have gone up in our time more than any other commodity, and why much of 

the benefits of automation on the farms and in the supermarkets themselves has been lost to the 

consumers and the farmers. 

 

Now when the first supermarket started in the big depression of the 1930s, in an abandoned garage in 

Jamaica, New York, it had only pine-board tables and cases cut open so shoppers could serve 

themselves. The original supermarket operated at a retail margin of 10 per cent, that is, it took only 10 

cents out of each sales dollar for all its operating expenses and profits. By the 1940s, the supermarkets 

had crept up their percentage to 18 per cent and now their mark-up is often between 21 and 22 per cent. 

Also beware of supermarkets and service stations offering bingo and sweepstake games such as ―Bonus 

Bingo‖ and ―Match and Win‖. The number of winners is 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1387 

controlled. Some newspapers in the mid-western states of the United States have been full of classified 

ads from people seeking other people who might have the matching half of the number needed to win a 

prize. So you can see that your chances of winning even a small prize, let along $1,000, is very slight. 

Meanwhile you can be misled into buying at more expensive stores and buying costlier products. 

 

Many excuses are being made by owners of retail food supermarkets for the high cost of foodstuffs and 

other household necessities they sell. They argue that net profits on sales are small. Facts show that net 

profits on sales in the United States are 1.3 per cent and 2.3 per cent on the average in Canada. But then 

they try to convince us that this isn‘t much. I submit that measuring profit in the retail food store on a 

sales dollar is completely a wrong base on which to measure profits. The more appropriate and proper 

base to measure profit is on investment, not on the sales. When we examine profits on investment the 

picture looks entirely different, Mr. Speaker. The Royal Commission on Price Spreads of Food Products 

found that the five major food chain companies operating in Canada between 1949 and 1957 had a 17.1 

per cent average rate of return on investment. That was 10 years ago. The wholesale trade had 11.1 per 

cent and food processing averaged 8.4 per cent. 

 

Some may suggest that the return on investment in recent years has not been as great. I don‘t know, but 

obviously the return must be considerable, otherwise we would not see so many luxurious supermarkets 

and giant department stores opening practically every day at every street corner of our cities. Facts show 

that 20 per cent out of every dollar spent in the retail food store goes towards the payment of these new 

supermarkets. This is almost three times as much, Mr. Speaker, as the cost of wages to employees who 

work in these stores. It is also argued that the mark-up between the wholesale food prices and retail 

prices is not large. Well, Mr. Speaker, what is meant by not large? Is 20 to 22 per cent mark-up on meat 

not a large mark-up? Is an average of 12 per cent mark-up not a sizeable one on canned goods and other 

dry lines sold in the grocery stores? These are the average mark-ups the food chains in this province are 

taking at the present time. 

 

Other unnecessary but expensive items consumers pay for are gimmicks; bingos, trading stamps, give-

aways and what have you, that the retail food chains promote. Mr. Robert Mueller, the editor of 

―Progressive Grocer‖ claims that a survey conducted by his magazine in the United States found that 14 

cents of the food retailer‘s expense dollar is spent on these types of gimmicks. Advertising and other 

promotional costs take another large share of the food dollar. I do not object to informative and useful 

advertising. This Resolution before us calls for informative advertising to be presented to the consumers. 

But as a Member of the Legislature, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about much of the present advertising, 

its usefulness and its informative value. I do not blame the press and other 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1388 

advertising media. They carry what the sponsors give them. I have, Mr. Speaker, with me, a newspaper 

ad that was sponsored by one of Regina‘s food chain companies about 15 months ago. I would like to 

draw this newspaper ad to the attention of the Hon. Members on both sides of the House. You will 

notice this is a two-page newspaper advertisement. The biggest portion of this newspaper ad is not 

advertising the food product or the items that this chain company sells. Almost two-thirds of this 

newspaper ad is advertising the games that this company is promoting. ―Win up to $1,000, play instant 

bingo.‖ You will notice that I marked it, only this portion of it here is advertising the games and the so-

called give-aways. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that a full page newspaper advertisement in the Leader-Post costs 

approximately $400. This is a two-page advertisement; this is approximately $800. This particular 

company employs, or has two stores in the city and employs 25-30 people, or maybe a few more now. 

Mr. Speaker, my estimate is that this newspaper advertisement cost more than the company paid for a 

full day‘s wages for all its employees. One newspaper ad appearing in one day cost more than wages for 

all employees and they normally run two or three a week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had brought to my attention this afternoon a newspaper item which I think is significant 

and relevant to this discussion. It is an item that appeared in the Grenfell newspaper — and I‘m sorry 

that the Minister of Agriculture is not here, because he should take special note of this report that 

appeared in the newspaper in his constituency. It states this: 

 

Let‘s start off on a light note with the news from Indian Head that Mr. s. Verna Thompson of Wolseley 

hasn‘t like the price she has been getting for eggs. Recently she shipped off 15 dozen eggs and later 

received payment, one 4-cent stamp. The eggs were valued at $1.87 and the freight was $1.83, hence 

the 4-cent payment. I can imagine that would put her in a state where she would like to give up 

democracy. But you haven‘t heard the best part of it yet. Her husband shipped 15 dozen eggs since 

then and to another candling station in hopes of a better price. The eggs were valued at $2.67, the 

freight was $3.50 so he now owes the candling station 83 cents on top of giving them the eggs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that this information would be useful to present to this 

Legislature. I think if we examine the facts we will find the farmer is at the end of the totem pole, we 

will find that certainly the wages are not the cause of the high consumer prices we have been paying in 

recent months, we will find that advertising gimmicks and profits are the main cost of the high consumer 

costs we are paying. The need, Mr. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1389 

Speaker, to adopt this Resolution and for the Government to take action upon it is urgent. It is timely as I 

said earlier, it is in keeping with the Batten Commission Report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do have a few more remarks to make on this Resolution and I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 10 — AGRICULTURE MACHINERY TESTING PROGRAM 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey) moved, seconded by Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that the 

Agriculture Machinery Testing Program be reinstated and that the scope of the Agricultural 

Machinery Administration be extended so as to provide reports on all components of the agricultural 

production industry. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the assistance and benefits that the Agricultural Machinery 

Administration supplied to the Saskatchewan farmer in the way of testing farm machinery and further 

because the needed information is no longer available. I am moving this Resolution in its regard. Mr. 

Speaker, a prudent selection of farm machinery can yield as significant financial benefits as might result 

from a reduction in the initial price. Yet although some of these points on the performance of a machine 

are obvious to the purchaser, many are not. To make an intelligent choice, the user must have available 

unbiased information on the performance of the machine that is on the market. Moreover, this 

information must be based on general conditions under which the machine will be used. Since even the 

most thorough test by the farm machinery companies themselves lacks the necessary objectivity and is 

in any event, rarely found to be adequate, government testing programs have been established. Today 

such tests and services are available to farm people and manufacturers in 21 countries outside of the 

Soviet bloc. 

 

The National Institute of Agricultural Engineering has provided the public testing service on farm 

machinery in the United Kingdom for almost 18 years, while the Swedish Government Agricultural 

Machinery Testing Institute was first established in 1897 and has grown progressively since that date. In 

the later case almost every farm machine sold on a large scale in Sweden is submitted voluntarily by the 

manufacturer to the Swedish Government testing agency for field testing and the publishing of the test 

report. Other countries throughout the world that supply independent farm machinery testing are: 

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Finland, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, 

Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, United States and 

Yugoslavia. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1390 

Although the United States and Canada have shown the greatest degree of farm mechanization, public 

testing programs have not been established here to the same extent. In fact, the Farm Machinery Testing 

program begun in Saskatchewan in 1958 was the first comprehensive testing program in the North 

American continent, although the Nebraska tests which were confined to tractors have been conducted 

for many years. It is unfortunate that this independent agency of farm machinery testing was 

discontinued by the present Liberal Government. I say this because most other agricultural countries in 

the world, as I have indicated, have independent testing, and because of the interest expressed in the 

Saskatchewan program by the Member of the House of Commons Committee, who several years ago 

thought that this program was not only warranted but a necessity to the modern day farmer. The 

desirability of a testing program was recognized by the Select Special Committee on Farm Implement 

Prices and Distribution of the Saskatchewan Legislature as far back as 1939. Among other 

recommendations, this enquiry pointed out that the Federal and Provincial Government organizations 

should encourage to test the utility of new implements, to suggest improvements and where possible, to 

encourage standardization of implements and repair parts. This was in 1939. 

 

Again, in 1952, the Special Select Committee of the Saskatchewan Legislature on Farm Machinery 

recommended that the Provincial Government consider the creation of a Farm Implement Board to test, 

inspect and certify under actual working conditions farm implements and machines sold in 

Saskatchewan. As a result of these inquiries and continued requests from farm people, the Province of 

Saskatchewan in 1958 set up the Agricultural Machinery Administration under the CCF Government to 

perform the following duties in the machinery-testing field: 

 

(a) Test and appraise under actual working conditions implements sold or offered for sale in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(b) Undertake development work to improve and develop implements for use in Saskatchewan. 

 

(c) Publish such reports, pamphlets and bulletins as are consistent with the intent of this Act. 

 

The concrete results of these tests fully justified the establishment of this program. In almost every 

instance, the field testing of the units has led to changes by the manufacturer that improved the 

functional and structural performance of the machines that were tested. Mr. Speaker, to show the 

Members opposite some of the benefits of such a field-testing program, an example of a test conducted 

by the Agricultural Machinery Administration under Field Test No. 859 carried out on the ―Du-Al‖ 

windrower, manufactured in the United States and sold in Saskatchewan, points out the importance of 

field evaluation of farm machinery by an independent organization. The test on this machine revealed its 

inability to perform in an acceptable 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1391 

manner in Saskatchewan grain fields and the public report which was released in June, 1960, stated: 

 

The swather is not capable of satisfactory operation in cereal crops as bunching of the swaths, and 

driving on the swaths at the corners is not acceptable. 

 

As a result of the field testing of this machine, the manufacturer stated as follows in the published report 

and I quote: 

 

We have evaluated the tests conducted and are in complete accord with all the modifications 

recommended by the Agricultural Machinery Administration. This machine is not presently for sale in 

the Province of Saskatchewan and is now undergoing modifications. It will not be released for sale 

until the necessary modifications have been made and tests have proven that this unit is satisfactory for 

use in the province. 

 

The machines that had been sold in Saskatchewan by the manufacturer of this machine were accepted in 

return by the manufacturer and the farmers involved were refunded their purchase price. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is an indication that this company was in agreement with the test that was 

carried out and the problems that arose from their machine not being constructed properly for conditions 

here. But until an independent organization had carried them out they were continuing to sell these 

machines in the province. Now this is one test. There were many of them that showed that there were 

machines, as there are now being sold in the Province of Saskatchewan, that are not satisfactory in their 

operation. The Agricultural Machinery Administration was a source of information to the farmer before 

he purchased such a machine, and the tests point out in many instances where machines were not 

acceptable to the agricultural conditions in the Province of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, in spite of 

this, the present Government for some reason that I do not know discontinued this very valuable 

program. 

 

The experience of the Farm Machinery Testing program that was operating in Saskatchewan led to 

certain conclusions. It concluded for instance that very few models of farm machines can come on the 

market free from mechanical and functional defects. Some of these defects are taken care of by the 

manufacturer upon receipt of experienced data from the farm users; but a great many others, especially 

since the discontinuation of the Agricultural Machinery Administration, remain to mar the performance 

of the machine to be corrected by mechanical changes at the user‘s expense. In many cases, the changes 

dictated by field experience are available to the user only at an additional cost. In other words, I would 

believe it fair to state that farm machinery manufacturers are presently using farmers to work the bugs 

out of their new machine designs. 

 

In addition, one of the basic problems is that the 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1392 

manufacturers design machines primarily for the biggest market areas. It is recognized that sales in 

Canada are only about 1/7 of the United States market. For this reason, farm people in Saskatchewan are 

often faced with the necessity of using a machine designed primarily for other areas entirely, and 

because of this, find them quite unsuitable for Saskatchewan and Western Canadian conditions. 

 

A prime example of this problem occurred in the fall of 1959 when many farmers were buying grain 

dryers because of the wet conditions at that time. For the most part, these grain dryers were designed to 

dry shelled corn, and certainly in no case had the design been modified to avoid damage to the milling 

and baking qualities of hard spring wheat. There was considerable loss in many instances to farmers 

before the functional and structural performance of the dryers were improved upon. With the 

significantly high portion of farm income being poured back into the farm machinery, operators can ill 

afford to purchase high priced machines that will not perform in the manner they anticipated. The 

Agricultural Machinery Administration would and could through its testing program offset such costly 

losses to the farmers of Saskatchewan and indeed the prairie provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring forth some of the statements that emerged from the public hearings of 

the Royal Commission on Farm Machinery, which was conducted by Dr. Clarence Barber, head of the 

Economics Department of the University of Manitoba. Statements to this Commission shocked some 

members of the machine industry. But others were a predictable expression of the increased frustration 

felt by farmers across the country who are caught in the present cost-price squeeze. In the public 

hearings of this Commission, it was pointed out that, if some farmers had their way, the Canadian farm 

machinery industry and its distribution system would be placed under strict public regulation. Others 

would require machinery companies to establish central parts depots, stocked by all manufacturers to 

provide farmers with spare parts within 24 hours or less. One farm organization wants manufacturers to 

be required by law to make new machines, and I quote, ―function properly‖ and provide necessary repair 

parts, ―or be liable for time and crop loss of farmers.‖ Virtually every farmer in the country wants more 

interchangeability of machine parts. In short a large segment of the Canadian farm community is 

dissatisfied with the goods and services offered by the machinery companies of today. 

 

Some indication of what the Commission may recommend has already been predicted by the equipment 

industry itself. Mr. J.R. Graydon, Executive Secretary of the Canadian Farm Industrial Equipment 

Institute, who has attended most of the hearings across the country, says he thinks the Commission, 

whose report is expected in September, will propose some kind of testing program. He also suggests that 

the Commission might (a) recommend that the manufacturers provide considerably more product 

information and develop a new form of warranty, possibly similar to the present automobile 

manufacturer‘s warranty. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1393 

(b) recommend legislation to ensure an adequate supply of parts, and that manufacturers develop more 

centralized parts depots or joint retail outlets that would stay open at all times during peak periods of 

farming operations. 

 

Of all the Royal Commission‘s inquiries into industry in recent years, none has perhaps fallen heir to 

more tangible evidence of consumers‘ displeasure than this one. Assorted hardware and parts collected 

from farmers across the country are now stored in Ottawa headquarters of the Commission, lying in 

mute indictment of the manufacturer‘s art. The collection of parts that failed to do the job they were 

designed for is probably the most dramatic evidence presented to the Commission. What importance the 

Commission in its deliberations will attach to it remains to be seen. But from the weight of the testimony 

presented, orally and in briefs, outlining complaints about availability and quality of repair parts, it 

seems likely that this aspect of machinery industry will receive more than passing consideration. This 

Commission further pointed out the drastic seriousness of the problem and lack of interchangeability of 

parts. The farmer contended that commonly used parts like hydraulic couplings, knife sections and 

guards, belts, bearings, chains, wheels, universal joints, and so forth be standardized. In the parts that 

companies buy, such as bearings, farmers could not see why the marker‘s number could not be used 

rather than a company part number. Nor could they understand why hydraulic coupler hose connecting 

threads could not be the same for all equipment. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the farmer is in dire need 

of the interchangeability of parts and consequently is demanding standardization of the farm implement 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of International Harvester Company having total agricultural sales of some $910 

million, Massey Ferguson $932.1 million, John Deere $877 million, the highest profits that they have 

had in a number of years, the trend is every year to a higher profit for the machine industries. They are 

not adequately area-testing the machinery that they manufacture for durability and performance. I say, 

Mr. Speaker, that they are more concerned with planned obsolescence, as the car industry is. They are 

more concerned with frills, with sales gimmicks, and advertising that will sell a larger volume of 

machinery rather than with manufacturing and testing a machine that will be relatively trouble-free to 

the farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, it is just not a farmer here or a farmer there that is asking for a machinery 

testing program in Saskatchewan and, indeed, in the prairie provinces. It is, according to a survey 

conducted by the United Grain Growers Limited of Canada, that, at least 88 per cent of the Western 

Canadian farmers contacted in their survey, have indicated they want to see some sort of testing program 

initiated for farm machinery which they buy. Further the survey indicated that information received 

from the dealer regarding a machine is somewhat false, 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1394 

misleading and insufficient in detail. This is further true in regard to operating and instruction manuals, 

where the farmer has been more experienced in regard to servicing and repair of farm machinery. They 

are the farmers who complain the most in regard to lack of information in regard to operation and 

service of these machines. 

 

The National Farmers Union pointed out that the only way a farmer could determine how a machine 

would perform was from what his neighbors told him. Many times after a new model had been 

introduced and sold to farmers, the companies call the machine in for modifications or send out a kit to 

correct a weak spot. To a farmer this means inadequate testing of the prototype and/or the initial factory 

run. Because of such conditions, they strongly urge for an agricultural machinery-testing program. 

 

The Canadian Federation of Agriculture has urged the establishment of a continuing joint Federal-

Provincial machinery council, which would address itself to legislation, warranty policy, and repair and 

parts service organization, transportation and communication problems and the like. It would be a 

vehicle through which farmers and farm organizations would submit their problems to be dealt with. The 

Federation also noted that farmers in Canada were not satisfied that there was adequate farm machinery 

research, either in new design or in the performance and durability of present machines on the market. It 

recommended that rather than establish an independent public agency an expanded engineering research 

service be set up in the Research Branch of the Canadian Department of Agriculture. This service would 

work closely with other agricultural disciplines and co-ordinate public agricultural engineering research 

and work with private consumer research companies. 

 

Support for a testing agency has also been indicated from a somewhat unexpected quarter. The Canadian 

Federation of Farm Equipment Dealers, which also expressed regret at the elimination of the 

Agricultural Machinery Administration, have recommended that steps be taken to set up a national 

equipment-testing organization which might be financed jointly by government, machinery 

manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers and farm commodity organizations. Such an institute would 

perform certain prescribed tests for each type of new machine with set minimum standards to be met. 

Not only could it make recommendations to manufacturers, but it could also act as a clearing-house for 

failures in the field, reported by both dealers and farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these recommendations point toward the desirability of a program based on the 

Agricultural Machinery Administration which was operated by the previous Government in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. In every aspect of the agricultural industry today we can find a lack of quality 

machinery; and because agriculture has become a highly mechanized field any breakdown or loss of 

time due to breakdowns is a major catastrophe to the farmer today. Consequently, I urge every Member 

of this Assembly to consider and support this Motion. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1395 

This Agricultural Machinery Administration should by no means be restricted to the testing of only farm 

machinery. It is of utmost importance and dire necessity that testing and experimentation be done in 

other fields, such as agricultural chemicals and fertilizers. Because of the high cost of farming and the 

cost-price squeeze which the farmer now finds himself in, he has to use every available means to 

increase his production so that he will stay in a profit-making position. Many of the reports of tests that 

the farmer now has available to him in regard to chemical and fertilizer applications are for areas other 

than his own, and consequently because of area, soil and/or climatic changes these recommendations are 

not of any value to him. Indeed in many instances these recommendations may be in a direct hindrance 

to what he should actually be doing. Therefore the Agricultural Machinery Administration should not 

only test machinery but should be testing fertilizers and chemicals or any commodity that is used in the 

basic agricultural industry of today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again ask all Members of this Assembly to give this Resolution due consideration. I am 

sure that all Members opposite are aware of the seriousness of the present agricultural situation. Many 

progressive steps will have to be taken if we are going to maintain this industry and keep pace with the 

world food demands. One of the major steps forward will be the implementation of an Agricultural 

Machinery Administration that will through its testing program and recommendations of all farm 

commodities save the farmer a great deal of money in breakdown time and experimentation on his own 

behalf. Because of these facts, Mr. Speaker, I ask all Members of this House to support this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! It‘s customary when a motion is lost that the seconder of the motion 

shall by courtesy have the opportunity to speak immediately after the mover. If he doesn‘t choose to 

avail himself of that advantage at that time, he can enter the debate later on. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 

should like to congratulate the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) for having made such an excellent 

presentation to this House. I agree with him that no one in this House should refuse to support this 

Motion and I am sure no one will refuse. I think it is a timely and a good proposition and certainly, if the 

suggestion is implemented in legislation, then we will find that the farmers of Saskatchewan will 

appreciate this kind of move by the Government. I‘m not going to bring recriminations into this House, 

but I must mention that we did have an AMA testing service in Saskatchewan which the farmers liked. 

When it was removed by the present Government most farmers were quite unhappy about it 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1396 

and since that time we have been able to learn of its value. At the time the service was removed I recall 

that it was argued that the University of Saskatchewan would provide machinery testing which farmers 

desired and should have had. So far I do not know of any farmer in this Province, at least I haven‘t met 

one, that has been able to get the kind of information that he would like to have. And so there have been 

all kinds of requests and all kinds of discussions. I would like to refer you, Mr. Speaker, at this time to a 

study that was made very recently by the United Grain Growers, I think it is proper and good 

information which should be recorded in this House. This is from the Leader-Post, November 22nd, 

1967. It says: 

 

―Study shows farmers want machine test.‖ 

 

That‘s the heading, and I think it suggests reasons why we should all support it, because this indicates if 

nothing else just what the farmers of Saskatchewan are thinking. I quote: 

 

Western Canadian farmers would like to see some kind of comparative machinery-testing agency 

established on the prairies. A recent study was carried out by the United Grain Growers, of which 761 

farmer members of that organization were questioned about their interest in farm machinery testing. 

This study which covered 130 farmers in Manitoba, 295 in Saskatchewan, 323 in Alberta and 13 

miscellaneous persons, indicated 88.8 per cent of the farmers were in favor of comparative testing of 

farm machinery sold in the three prairie provinces, and that such testing be carried out in the provinces. 

 

Now I am not going to read it all, but I do refer the Hon. Members to the Leader-Post of that date and 

they can get more of the comments. But I will say this, about the middle of the article, in the second 

column, it says: 

 

Only 5.4 per cent of the respondents were satisfied with performance and durability of machinery they 

bought. 

 

And this is very, very important. About 30.4 per cent felt that they were misled by false information and 

63.6 per cent felt that they did not receive enough information. Now, Mr. Speaker, that alone should 

make it certain that something should be done by the Government to see that farmers do get the kind of 

information that they should have, particularly when we look at the farm economy and see that we get 

nothing for eggs or less than nothing for eggs, when we see that the price we get for grain at this time is 

something like the price we used to get 25 years ago. Yet everything else has gone up! Surely the least 

that any government can do is to try to help those farmers who are trying to stay on the land. Now, if the 

Government refuses to give consideration then I can only gather, and all farmers of Saskatchewan will 

gather, that its only reason is a selfish or some other kind of reason. I might suggest that this might be 

the reason. For example, again in the Leader-Post of November 16, 1967, there is an item which says 

―Testing by Government 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1397 

of no value‖. Let us see, Mr. Speaker, who is speaking. It is not the farmer speaking, it is not the 

Government speaking. I quote: 

 

Ottawa. Universities and Governments are useful in farm machinery research but standardized 

equipment tests have little value, the Royal Commission on Farm Machinery was told today. George 

Vincent, President of Cockshutt Farm Equipment of Canada Limited, Brantford, Ontario, said the 

company has worked with the Ontario Research Council and the University of Saskatchewan to 

develop and test products and has co-operated with the University of Manitoba in the study of four 

wheel-drive tractors. In a company which budgets 3 per cent of gross sales for research and 

development and has also made use of Federal Government incentive schemes, Mr. Vincent said, ―The 

tax write-offs allowed for research permitted the Company to invest more in research than the 3 per 

cent figure allowed normally.‖ 

 

And he mentions that the research is needed, but says that testing by the Government is no value. Now 

that isn‘t what the farmers of Saskatchewan or Manitoba feel, that isn‘t what the Members of the 

Legislature of Manitoba feel, and I am sure the Members in Alberta have talked about it too, because 

there are definite advantages to have an independent body to test machines. I could tell you about some 

of the experiences I have had. I have bought machines for my farm, different kinds of machines, diskers, 

combines and others that just wouldn‘t work. I could tell you the reasons why they wouldn‘t work, Mr. 

Speaker, because many of these machines are made in Ontario or even overseas, and they have not been 

properly tested in the area in which I live and they have not been able to perform efficiently. I would say 

this, Mr. Speaker, that various areas have different needs. When we had machinery testing here in 

Saskatchewan we did get the kind of information which was valuable. I challenge the Minister to 

produce evidence of how many farmers have been getting information on machines in the last four years 

since they have removed AMA. I haven‘t heard of any and yet the farmers need that information very 

badly, they can‘t find further economies in farming. So I would say that, when we invest dollars in 

implements and spend tens of millions of dollars in the price of implements, surely the Government can 

spend a fraction of a per cent to give us the kind of information that is going to mean many hundreds of 

thousands of dollars for the farmers. If the Government refuses to do so, then I can only consider that it 

is only friends when there is an election. Members get up and say, ―We‘re friends of the farmer,‖ but 

when it comes to perform and produce legislation then they are found wanting. Mr. Speaker, I have 

considerable more to say on the subject and I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Leave for adjournment negatived. 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — The subject matter of the Resolution that we are considering has 

been debated at some length in previous sessions. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1398 

I can say quite frankly that I am not going to support the Resolution. I have some comments to make on 

it and I would like to make them at a later date, so I would ask for leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That‘s democracy! 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 11 — 

ESTABLISHMENT OF A MUNICIPAL FINANCING CORPORATION 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker, (Regina south East) moved, seconded by Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): 

 

That this Assembly recommends that the Government give consideration to the establishment of a 

Municipal Financing Corporation to assist local governments with capital projects by providing the 

means whereby local governments may market debentures without having to depend exclusively on 

the open market. 

 

Mr. Baker: — Mr. Speaker, I‘m glad you‘ve given me the opportunity to speak on this Resolution after 

what just happened a minute ago. Of course it‘s typical of the Member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! You can‘t refer to what has taken place in the previous debate under the 

debate you are launching now. 

 

Mr. Baker: — All right, I‘ll leave it. I‘ll have some more to say on that later. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — And that remark was uncalled for too, and it was a reflection on the Chair. 

 

Mr. Baker: — I have always looked upon this as a very democratic institution, Mr. Speaker, and you 

have been most fair to both sides. There is no criticism of you at all. I think as one Member to another, 

no matter what side of the House we‘re on we should show a little courtesy. But I want to deal with the 

Resolution. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Baker: — I don‘t profess to dwell an hour on it but I do want to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order! 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1399 

Mr. Baker: — . . . reiterate and bring some of the points back to the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Point of order! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — I think the Hon. Member has to refrain from speaking on 

subjects which have already been dealt with and has to continue to speak about the Resolution which he 

is bringing into the Legislature. I suggest he get to the Resolution and . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — Well I am. I just said I am speaking to Resolution No. 11 and I will. I think the Member 

across the way is out of order, Sir, I am on the right Resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now every Member has a right to rise on a point of order, and I would suggest we 

debate the Resolution that is about to be moved, I presume. It‘s not before the House yet. 

 

Mr. Baker: — Well I will try to continue, Sir. I think most Members of the Legislature know the 

feelings of the larger urban centres and the position of SUMA with regard to the setting up of a 

Municipal Financing Corporation, more commonly known as the Municipal Loan Fund. They also know 

the feelings of the mayors of Canada who had supported this over the years and most mayors in every 

province continue to support the establishment of a fund of this type. In other words, to say as we say, 

the Government of Saskatchewan should establish a Municipal Loan Fund or Municipal Financing 

Corporation offering loans to local governments at a low rate of interest. Mr. Speaker, every Member of 

this Legislature is fully aware that the Budget contains nothing in addition which will be of assistance to 

municipalities and very little to assist local school authorities. The Government appears to have adopted 

an attitude that the only big spenders in the Province in 1968-69 will be the Government itself. It has 

placed local government authorities in a most difficult position. Having imposed drastic tax increases on 

the people of this province and having done nothing to assist the municipalities, they are faced with 

increasing municipal taxes or with cutting back on services which the people of our cities, towns and 

villages not only deserve, but desperately need. The so-called tight money situation has obviously done 

nothing to cut the spending habits of this Government. Because of tight money, high cost money and 

inflation, there is all the more reason why a fund of this type is so necessary today. Repeated cries of 

austerity heard remind me of the narrow-minded parent who tells his child, ―Don‘t do what I do. Do 

what I tell you to do.‖ The cities, towns, villages and hamlets and RMs have endeavored to assist this 

Government by delaying capital projects to the point where it is now imperative that some projects must 

now be undertaken despite the high cost of money. While I appreciate 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1400 

the difficult position of the Local Government Board in advising local governments of marketing 

conditions we cannot continue denying local municipalities from proceeding with projects. These 

monies are needed for capital work projects now, if we are to progress with our growth. Nevertheless I 

feel that the local governments have been put in a very untenable position. The Local Government 

Board must exercise its extensive authority over the local governments while conscious of the immense 

spending of its parent body. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time that this Government was made aware of the fact that the local government 

authorities were created by the Government of Saskatchewan to perform specific functions. It is the duty 

of this Government to assist the local authorities to carry out their functions. It must provide part of the 

capital funds at reasonable interest rates to keep municipal economies buoyant. The Government is well 

aware that the capital needs of local government are far more urgent than perhaps some priorities listed 

in the Province‘s expenditures. Quite a point has been made that the Government in 1967 purchased 

something over $2 million worth of local government debentures offered for sale. While I do not have 

information at hand, I feel I am safe in assuming that those debentures offered a high interest rate and 

even at such a high interest rate they would have been difficult to dispose of on the open market. Our 

city has not been neglectful in assisting towns, villages or other cities in helping them out. I might point 

out that the city of Regina has on record debentures purchased in Saskatchewan from cities, towns, 

villages and RMs to the tune of a total of $18,186,000. This bears out the need for action by this 

Government for the establishment of a Municipal Loan Fund or Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amount of debentures issued for local government purposes has been increasing over 

the years from a about $17 million in 1957 to $30 million in 1966. There is also a definite indication that 

the market is reluctant to pick up the debentures of the smaller local government authorities even at high 

interest rates. This Government has the means to ease the situation and should take the steps necessary 

to see that help is forthcoming to local governments, by establishing this Municipal Financing 

Corporation. It then would leave risk capital for investment in industry, the building of apartments, 

housing and other commercial enterprises. This is at a premium today as we all well know. 

 

The Canada Pension Plan makes considerable funds available to the Government of this Province at 

low-interest rates. The Government has been diverting all of these funds I believe to the use of the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation and Government Telephones. Yes, this is one way the Government 

can say more of its equity is in Saskatchewan or in Canadian hands, yes, by using Canada Pension Funds 

contributed by Canadians. No one denies that these utilities require capital funds for expansion, but I 

would say that the self-liquidating feature of the debt of these Corporations makes them much more 

attractive on the open 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1401 

market than are the debenture issues of local government bodies. In other words the SPC and the 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones, or SaskTel, can compete for available funds. Local 

governments do not have the same preferred position. The first year of the Canada Pension Plan saw $22 

million placed at the disposal of the Province; by last year the figure was about $29 million; for the 

coming year I suppose we can estimate that $35 million will be available. Mr. Speaker, this is a ready-

made source of funds with which to establish a Municipal Loan Fund. Loans could be made available to 

local authorities at a low rate of interest, perhaps one quarter or one per cent higher than the rate paid by 

the Government to the Canada Pension Plan. It should be possible to devise a means of distributing the 

funds available on an equitable basis. I would suggest for the Government‘s consideration that $30 to 

$35 per capita would not be unreasonable in the initial stages. The establishment of a Municipal Loan 

Fund would be of immense help to the Local Government Board too in helping them plan the needs of 

municipalities for capital expenditures. It would also take off a considerable load from the Government 

eventually in its grants to municipalities, because this in essence would cut costs in the long run. The 

Provinces of Alberta and British Columbia recognized the needs of local government authorities and 

have taken action to assist them. I was pleased to note that the Premier hopes to inaugurate a foundation 

plan similar to those existing in our neighboring provinces. This could be a step in the right direction to 

relieve municipalities of the high education cost-load. What point is there in being classified as a have 

province when progress is stifled by the lack of funds for capital development? Where is development 

more readily apparent if it is not in the upgrading of our cities, towns, and those other areas governed by 

local authorities? It is estimated that local urban authorities are apt to spend more than a half billion 

dollars over the next 15 or 20 years. Mr. Speaker, prosperity brings people, and people must be housed 

in our cities and towns, and provided with all reasonable services and facilities. Even in these so-called 

austere times it is the duty of the Government to ensure that adequate capital funds are available to 

permit the natural growth of municipalities. Smaller municipalities are witnessing difficult times with 

high interest rates to unload their debentures. Cheaper borrowings can be made by larger cities, it is true. 

All the more reason why the Province can get money much more cheaply than we can. The provision of 

gas and electricity is not enough to bring new investors into our province. We must have sewer and 

water, new schools, paved streets with adequate lighting as well as parks and recreational areas. These 

facilities have been left to the local authorities to provide. 

 

Taxes by government are collected in the following manner. You look at the Federal field. Most of 

theirs comes through income, excise taxes and so forth. Provinces get the biggest percentage of their 

money through sales, resources and so forth. But the cities chiefly get their funds from property taxes. I 

have always advocated that there should be services to property which belongs to local authorities and 

when you speak of services 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1402 

to people this belongs to the two levels of government, the Provincial and the Federal covering 

education, welfare and health costs. The Government must now take steps to ensure that the funds are 

available with which to provide them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the last session of the Legislature a Motion was passed that the Government study the 

feasibility of setting up a Municipal Loan Fund. I would hope the results prove it is needed now. It is 

evident that the need exists. It is also evident that the Government can take steps to establish such funds. 

I therefore look for the support of every Member of this Legislature in passing this Resolution. The 

Federal Municipal Loan Fund set up some six or seven years ago was a real primer for the economy of 

Canada. This made social capital available at low interests and it also had a 25 per cent forgiveness 

feature. On a project dealing with our sewage system in Regina costing something like $1,250,000 we 

realized close to $300,000 as an outright gift. The rest was borrowed at a low rate of interest. I am not 

asking for any forgiveness feature in this legislation, but that monies be provided at lower than the 

present market interest rates so that our municipalities can continue to forge ahead. It also means more 

revenue too for our Provincial Treasury, because a good portion comes back as a tax source. Therefore, 

it is good business for all, no matter which way one calculates it, and it will create the much needed jobs 

which we will require over this year and the next. If this is not done, we could be triggering a very 

serious unemployment picture. Mr. Speaker, I think some of the points that I have outlined indicate the 

tremendous need of a fund or of a Municipal Financing Corporation of this type. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that a good case can be made for the 

setting up of a Municipal Financing Corporation. I do believe that the Hon. Member from Regina South 

East has made a very good case on it this afternoon. I do believe that each municipality endeavoring to 

sell its own debentures or bonds and going into the eastern market and other markets of North America 

to dispose of these bonds puts itself in a very weak position. These municipalities are quite possibly 

unknown beyond the borders of our province and for them to go into a crowded market and endeavor to 

sell their debentures is very difficult indeed. The fact that they are not known would put them in a 

position of possibly not being able to dispose of the debentures in the first place, and secondly when 

they were disposed of they would have to be at a much higher rate of interest than what they could have 

done, if they were well known and had well-secured bonds. I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Provincial Government has always held a very good position in this regard. They have been able to sell 

their bonds throughout Canada, and I believe they are still in a quite comparatively good position when 

it comes to selling bonds, both here and in the United States. Their ability to obtain money is 

incomparably better than that of the municipalities of the province, especially the smaller ones and some 

of the smaller ones may need this money quite badly for the providing of very 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1403 

necessary capital expenditures. 

 

We have at the present time throughout our Province, Mr. Speaker, a good many communities that need 

capital development. I think that the Hon. Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker) has made a very 

good case in this regard. If we are going to attract industry to our province, if we are going to attract 

people to come here and live, we have to have sites that are prepared for the industry and we have to 

have facilities within our cities and other urban as well as rural centres which will attract people and the 

people are going to like to live here. This is not only in regard to streets and sewerage and other facilities 

in the cities, but in regard to roads and such in our rural municipalities. If we are to make this province 

what it should be and what it could be, Mr. Speaker, we are going to need more capital than has been 

provided in the past to do so. 

 

In reference to the past, Mr. Speaker, we have had money made available. The former Government 

made available monies from the School Lands Funds and other funds that were available to the 

municipalities and lent this money out to them for various projects that were brought forward. I do 

believe the present Government is doing the same thing, but I do believe that this procedure could be 

improved upon. I think that more monies could be available and I think we could have a different 

procedure set up to handle this than what has been done in the past. I think that each situation must stand 

on its own merit. What was possibly sufficient a few years ago may not be sufficient today. I do 

maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the time has come when the Government should be prepared to do 

something about setting up a Municipal Financing Corporation as has been outlined in this Resolution 

by the Hon. Member for Regina South East. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, I think there should be absolutely no difficulty and no dissension in the House on 

this Motion because as has been pointed out here today, a year ago we did have a Resolution asking the 

Government to give consideration to this and I believe it was passed unanimously in the House. Besides 

this I do believe that slightly over a year ago that Resolutions were passed at the annual conventions of 

both the political parties that are represented in this House, asking for something along this line. If the 

Members opposite are committed to this sort of thing, as the Members are on this side, I think there 

should be no difficulty whatsoever in having this Motion accepted by the House at this time. Mr. 

Speaker, there are a few other words that I would like to prepare on this, I don‘t consider that I have 

exhausted the subject from my own viewpoint and I would like to ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Motion to adjourn negatived. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, this Resolution is typical of those that 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1404 

are presented by the Members opposite. They had 20 years of the best times this Province ever saw up 

until we become the Government and after we became the Government the times really got good. We 

are the ones that assisted municipalities and tried to help them with the problems they had in financing 

local improvements or the problems that faced the urban municipalities in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, and the problems they faced in those years were very severe. I know, because I 

represented a city that had difficulties in raising money. We came down to the Government time after 

time to get assistance and we were turned down. Now in the Opposition they suggest that we set up a 

fund to make it possible for the municipalities to borrow money at reasonable rates of interest. We 

recognized this problem; in fact we put it in our platform and we intend to fulfil our platform, this plank 

in our platform along with all the other planks that we went to the people on when we were elected. 

 

It comes strange from the Member from Regina who also wears the hat of the Mayor of Regina to get up 

and lecture us about our responsibilities. I would suggest he remembers this when he goes back to his 

own council. I see they‘ve taken on the responsibility of lecturing us and passing motions requesting us 

to change certain legislation, to reconsider certain tax increases. I suggest that the Mayor of Regina and 

his council would do much better to look after their own record. I can assure the House that, if the city 

of Regina under its present administration, under the leadership of the present Mayor do not put their 

own house in order, when we do bring in this legislation — and we will bring it in, in our four-year term 

of office — the city will have a great deal of difficulty qualifying for any help in this regard. We‘ve got 

the highest tax rate of any city in this province here in Regina, also one of the worst debt ratios of any 

city probably in Western Canada. I would advise the citizens of Regina that they should look to the 

administration of their city if they want to receive any help in regard to borrowing money at reasonable 

rates of interest that will be backed up by this Government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we do recognize the problems that face municipalities. We have done something 

about it in the past and we intend to do something in the future. One of the problems without a doubt is 

their ability to borrow money at reasonable rates of interest. In fact in this year of tight money, and I 

think last year as well some of them had the same problem. This year the problem is even worse; some 

municipalities will have difficulty borrowing money at any rate of interest. 

 

I want to go into this in much more detail, Mr. Speaker, but I want to go on record as saying that we do 

intend to do this. The fact is that we will carry out this program and we will put into effect a program to 

allow municipalities, to support municipalities in their efforts, to borrow money. It won‘t come about as 

a result of any urging from the Member for Regina East (Mr. Baker). It will come about because we do 

recognize the problems that face urban municipalities. It will 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1405 

come about because we recognize that the growth, that has taken place these last four years under the 

Liberal Government, has made those problems even more severe. It will come about because we have 

put it in our program and we intend to do it. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 33 

 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Bjarnason Mitchell 

Boldt MacDonald Larochelle 

Cameron Estey Gardner 

Steuart Hooker Coupland 

Heald Gallagher McPherson 

McIsaac MacLennan Charlebois 

Guy Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

NAYS — 24 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Baker 

Kramer Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 4 — AMENDMENT TO THE VEHICLES ACT 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. R. Romanow 

(Saskatoon Riversdale): 

 

That this Legislature urge the Government to make such amendments to The Vehicles Act as are 

necessary in order that the Highway Traffic Board of Saskatchewan be empowered to, firstly, suspend 

an operator‘s licence for a period of one year where an operator of a motor vehicle has displayed a 

breathalyzer reading of .08 per cent blood alcohol content and, secondly, suspend an operator‘s licence 

for a period of one year where an operator of a motor vehicle has refused to submit a breathalyzer test 

having been so requested by a peace 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1406 

officer in the lawful execution of his duty. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in favor of this Resolution, I wish to say 

that it is a very important one. I hope that the Government side will treat this Resolution very 

respectfully and that it does not wind up being all mutilated like most of the resolutions have been dealt 

with. 

 

Ever since I have entered this House I have been very interested in traffic safety. I know several times 

across the way you will hear them say, ―Well you had 20 years.‖ I don‘t look at it in this light. I have 

never treated the question of traffic safety and I have never felt that it had any place in the realm of 

politics. We should approach this problem with a united front as we might say. To prove my point I 

want to go back to Hansard 1961 and I want to read to you the Resolution that was brought in by the 

Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) who has been here since then. It was supported right across the 

floor. I want to point out that I was on the Government side at that time. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It will never happen again. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — The Member for Prince Albert West might just as well sing his swan song now. With 

the close shave you had in Prince Albert, you have no more hopes. 

 

Well now we get back to business. And I want to read the Resolution that I brought in in 1961: 

 

That in view of the rising death toll and injuries on our highways and the consequently appalling loss 

of human life, this Assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan give consideration to 

further encouragement and assistance to a comprehensive program of driver education. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we had a school teacher in the Opposition by the name of Mr. Foley, the Member for 

Turtleford, a great friend of the Premier. He warned the House that we should not encroach upon the 

school curriculum because there was just a limit to what you could do in schools, although he supported 

the Resolution. 

 

A few years ago, we set up a Legislative Committee to study highway safety and the effects of alcohol 

on driving. I want to quote from the report, page 10, and this is one of the recommendations that the 

Committee has made: 

 

That a Standing Committee of the Legislature be initiated to continue and study traffic problems. 

 

It is the opinion of the Committee that a continuous review of traffic safety is necessary to ensure 

progress in 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1407 

this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am disappointed that this Committee was dropped. We had quite an increase in the death 

rate as I have said before, and I want to bring it to the attention of the House at this time. In 1960 there 

were killed on our highways 164; by 1967 we have risen to 287 deaths. We can use the argument that 

we have more miles driven and so on, but I can assure you that we have not kept pace with the need. 

Had we kept pace or pushed right ahead with the recommendations of the Committee, I think that we 

could have saved a lot of these lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Now one thing that sort of worries me a bit is the recommendation by the Federal 

Government of legislation that is to be brought down using point one — alcohol level — to decide 

whether a person is intoxicated or not. I am very concerned about this suggestion. In my opinion, if 

point one is accepted, what we are doing is legalizing drunken driving on our highways. That‘s exactly 

what we would do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I have a press clipping from the Free Press, February 14, 1968: 

 

―Breath Test Bill called unrealistic‖. 

 

This is according to Dr. Penner. He is the doctor who helped develop the breathalyzer and he clearly 

states regarding point one, or he uses the figure 100 milligrams. 

 

Legislation before the House of Commons which would make it mandatory for suspected impaired 

drivers to take a breath test is unrealistic and should never be passed in its present form, according to 

an acknowledged Canadian expert, Dr. W.W. Penner. 

 

The legislation part of an omnibus Bill, which would radically change Canada‘s Criminal Code if 

passed sets a maximum legal blood alcohol content for drinking drivers at 100 milligrams. 

 

Dr. Penner, chief pathologist at the Winnipeg General Hospital told an audience at Greater Winnipeg 

Safety Council‘s annual meeting Tuesday, at the International Inn that a 100 milligram limit was far 

too high. 

 

He said that a 200-pound man could consume nine ounces of whisky or six bottles of beer in an hour 

and still register a blood alcohol content below the purposed legal maximum. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1408 

Now if you think that you can drink six bottles of beer, I would say — even if you take the Member for 

Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) and I wouldn‘t trust him with one bottle — six bottles of beer within 

an hour is just a little too much. This is not a laughing matter. Every time we have talked about traffic 

safety there are some Members across the way that stretch their mouths away up to their ears and laugh 

about it. It is not a laughing matter. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame, shame! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — It is a dirty shame, when we‘ve got 267 killed on our highways in one year, that some 

Members across the way will find if convenient to laugh about it. I am going to quote further from this 

news article. 

 

Dr. Penner suggested that 50 milligrams might be a more reasonable limit, but stressed that a 200-

pound man would still be able to drink six ounces of whisky and four bottles of beer in an hour and not 

exceed that mark. 

 

And even the smallest amount of alcohol consumed increases the probability of a driver being involved 

in an accident. 

 

The pathologist urged that the phrase ―impaired driver‖ be more clearly defined in the new legislation 

before it is passed. 

 

One of the biggest problems with current laws on drinking and driving, he claimed, was the fact that 

the police had no firm guidelines to use in determining when a driver is impaired. 

 

The proposed Bill would do nothing to solve the problem, he said. 

 

(Under the proposed amendment to the Criminal Code, police could force breathalyzer tests on only 

those that they had reasonable grounds to suspect were impaired.) 

 

Dr. Penner suggested that words be defined to term the scientifically verifiable blood alcohol content. 

 

Twenty-five years ago, Dr. Penner helped develop the first chemical blood alcohol test used in 

Manitoba. Since that time he has participated in a number of studies on the hazards of driving while 

under the influence of alcohol. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps some of you would be rather uncertain about the alcohol level of .08 that is talked 

about a great deal. I don‘t care what they do with this Resolution, if they leave the .08 alone, go along 

with .08, and if they want to 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1409 

mutilate the rest of the Resolution, I am not going to quarrel too much with it. But the .08, I believe 

should be stuck to, because many other jurisdictions are taking the level of .08. The suggested level by 

the Federal Government is definitely too high. To prove my point I want to refer to a breathalyzer test 

that we had during the work on the Committee. Now, to set all the Members who sat on this Committee 

at ease I will not reveal names and I will not reveal weights. I want to say that during this breathalyzer 

demonstration we had five volunteers who volunteered to drink to prove the accuracy of the 

breathalyzer. We had Members of the Legislature who were observers at this exercise. It was done in a 

scientific way with police officers in attendance, doctors and nurses. Anyone who sat and observed this 

performance I can assure you, was convinced that .08 was still too high. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give you an idea of the performance of the subjects who volunteered to be the 

guinea pigs. I think the Government paid for the liquor in this case and I don‘t expect the Government to 

make any research to find out how much it cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — But it was good V.O. anyway. We had five subjects. One subject consumed 10 ounces 

of liquor in about an hour. To determine how accurate their driving would be, they were put through a 

test of several things: how they reacted to the red light; how quick they performed taking their foot off 

the foot-feed and putting it on the brakes. And this is what they came up with. On 20 tries when they 

were sober, they made two mistakes. After this subject drank 10 ounces of liquor, he made eleven 

mistakes. His alcohol level according to the breathalyzer was 1.11. Now the blood test showed very 

much the same level. The breathalyzer gave the benefit of the doubt to the person that was charged. The 

blood test showed a higher level of alcohol than did the breathalyzer. 

 

Now what about the reaction of taking your foot off the foot-feed and getting it on the brakes? Everyone 

of the subjects failed to perform properly on the first try of getting their foot off the foot-feed and getting 

it on the brakes. Without fail the five subjects failed to get their foot properly on the brakes, which 

means that on the first try, at the first red light, they would have got into an accident. But after playing 

around with it for awhile, they got themselves oriented to it. It took one-third of the time more to get a 

foot on the brake after they had been drinking than before they drank. So the speed was lessened. They 

took more time to get off the foot-feed and get onto the brake. There was one subject who drank 14 

ounces — now that should give you an idea of what problems the police will run into. I am talking about 

the exterior appearance of these four subjects. This character with 14 ounces was able to walk quite 

normally, speak quite 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1410 

normally and you wouldn‘t think that he had a single thing to drink. But when we put him on the 

machinery to perform he just wasn‘t there. So now how does a policeman judge a person without using 

the breathalyzer. 

 

We had consumptions of alcohol of, 10, 8 and 14 ounces. Now one subject after consuming 8 ounces, 

was completely out of commission. And there again, still the subject had a blood count of .09. 

Completely off their feet at .09! The Federal Government is going to pass legislation at .10. I am going 

to tell you that if I was a police officer I would be tempted to completely forget taking breath tests, if 

they are going to set the level at .10. We would be setting the pace. This is why I am going to spend a 

little time here to speak about .08. 

 

There is another news item here that I would like to bring to the attention of the House, the headline in 

the Leader-Post, March 21, 1968: 

 

Alberta‘s breath tests ruled valid. 

 

Alberta‘s compulsory breathanalysis test law was ruled valid Thursday by Alberta Supreme Court. 

 

The court‘s appellate division rejected a magistrate‘s ruling that drivers refusing to take the test are 

within their rights. 

 

An Edmonton lawyer, Leon Prodor said he is considering a further appeal to the Supreme Court of 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Prodor acted for Frank Tenta 31, after Tenta refused to submit to the breathanalysis test a year ago 

in Edmonton. 

 

Mr. Justice H.G. Johnson and Mr. Justice N.D. McDermid ruled that they were bound by a previous 

Supreme Court decision in a similar case and that magistrate Carl Rolf was wrong in holding Alberta 

legislation beyond the province‘s jurisdiction. 

 

Mr. Judge M.M. Porter held that the compulsory legislation is ―legislation in the criminal field‖ and 

therefore, outside the province‘s jurisdiction. 

 

If we are going to pass legislation here, Mr. Speaker, we should go for .08. Let‘s not get away from it. 

Let‘s not be tempted for any reason at all. .08 is the top that we should go. As a matter of fact if I had 

my choice it would come down to .06. 

 

We also had quite a bit of study in this Committee. I always appreciate committee work, because we can 

talk to these Liberals without any politics. That‘s when they perform the best. There was a Grand Rapids 

Report that we studied. There 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1411 

is a graph if someone wants to see it; it is in the final report of the Committee on the last page. It shows 

a graph of the chances of being involved in an accident and what happens. According to the Grand 

Rapids Report, if you have one drink you are better off than with none. But I am inclined to disagree 

with that. But .04 is when you start getting into trouble. When you have reached .06 it starts rising at a 

considerable rate. When you get to .08 this is when the line starts shooting almost straight up. When you 

get to .1 your chances of being involved in an accident are very great. When you get to .3 you are not 

around in an automobile; you are in the ditch some place and you are out of danger then. I would go 

along with the Government holding breathalyzer demonstrations throughout the country to tell anyone in 

the audience if they tell you that they could drive better when they had a drink, let them come up and 

perform before the whole audience. I think that there would be nothing more convincing because it 

convinced the committee. 

 

Mr. A.C. Cameron (Minister Of Mineral Resources): — Are you going to pay for the liquor? 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Well no. I think that the Government should pay for it. I think that the general public 

wouldn‘t be ashamed to declare the amount that was consumed, before this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — You would be glad and I think the entire House would say, ―Good for you. If you can 

have it, we would vote any amount of money you want for this type of liquor,‖ because I know that 

some of our Members on the Committee were quite uncertain about this .08. After our demonstration, 

there was no question. I have a little more to say on this, Mr. Speaker, but will you call it 5:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:30 p.m. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BOY SCOUTS 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, with your permission and the permission of 

the House, I wonder if I may be allowed to introduce to the Assembly a group of 14 boys who are seated 

in the Speaker‘s gallery. They belong to the 44th Douglas Park Cub Pack. In that particular Pack there 

are 33 boys but today we have 14 of them with us. They have been selected by the leaders for the special 

excellence in the good work that they have been doing. They are accompanied by Ken Morini the Cub 

Leader and also two fathers, Doug Drysdale and Rudy Prockner. I extend to them a warm welcome on 

your behalf, Mr. Speaker, and on the behalf of the Assembly and hope that their stay here this evening 

will be 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1412 

pleasant and that they will be able to learn the first lessons in parliamentary democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Thibault on Resolution 

No. 4 — Amendment to The Vehicles Act. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Mr. Speaker, when we call it 5:30, I was going to comment a little more on the 

breathalyzer. I know that we could go back into the records and remind you of what some people have 

said in this House about the breathalyzer. But I think that it would be a waste of time. I feel strongly that 

the demonstration that we had was more than convincing, also that the breath test gave the benefit of the 

doubt to the accused because the breathalyzer showed a little lower count than the actual blood count. 

 

One thing that I would like to bring to your attention is the judgment of distance. With the person who 

had 10 ounces of alcohol, in judging distance he made two mistakes before he drank and after he drank 

he made eleven mistakes. This shows quite a step up from two to eleven. I think if we would support this 

Resolution that it certainly would be a step in the right direction. 

 

Another point that I want to bring out is the question that the judges may not go along with it in the 

courts. I feel that, if the judges would witness a breathalyzer demonstration before they are even asked 

to judge a drunken case, to judge the result of a breathalyzer test, it would be more than convincing to 

the judge also, because I know that before we had this demonstration, I mean the Committee had the 

demonstration, that several of the Members were supporting the .1, but after the demonstration they 

changed their position and they were unanimous on .08. I think the very same feelings could be held by 

a judge in the courts. But if all the judges would witness a demonstration of the kind we had, I don‘t 

think there would be any worry about the enforcement of this .08. I want to make it quite clear that I 

think that .10 is nothing but sheer lunacy and we‘d be just legalizing drunken driving. 

 

With these remarks, Mr. Speaker, as I said a moment ago, I wouldn‘t quarrel with amendments in the 

others parts of the Resolution. That wouldn‘t bother me too much, but if the .08 is not gone along with, 

well, I would begin to wonder if Members are really sincere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I desire to make some observations with regard to 

this Resolution and I beg leave at this time to adjourn the debate. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1413 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 27 

 

Thatcher Coderre Mitchell 

Howes Bjarnason Larochelle 

Boldt Estey Gardner 

Cameron Hooker Coupland 

Heald Heggie McPherson 

McIsaac Breker Charlebois 

Guy Leith Forsyth 

Loken Radloff McIvor 

MacDougall Weatherald Schmeiser 

 

NAYS — 20 

 

Lloyd Romanow Pepper 

Wooff Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Davies Whelan Messer 

Dewhurst Snyder Kwasnica 

Meakes Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Berezowsky Brockelbank  

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 84 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Davies (Moose Jaw South) 

for Return No. 84. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) that Motion for Return No. 84 be amended by deleting part (2). 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, I fail to see just why the Government refuses to 

give us this information. All we are asking here is the name, address, principal line of business of each 

unsuccessful applicant for appointment as special liquor vendor in the above-specified time period. We 

are not asking how much business is done by these people; this is not private information. I can‘t 

understand why the Government is reluctant to pass this information on to us. Surely they can‘t have 

anything to hide here. Surely we should be able to get this information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, I draw to the attention of the House that this is 

the self-same question as I understand it which was answered some two years ago by the Government. It 

would appear that the Government is getting less and less anxious to answer questions that pertain to the 

business of the people of this province. As the last speaker has indicated, information that 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1414 

is being asked for here is quite relevant, pertinent in every way, and I think that everyone in this House 

is entitled to that information, as much as indeed the people of the province are entitled to receive that 

information. I am at a loss to know why at this moment and time the Government has decided that it will 

not give the House the information that it gave two years ago. The only conclusion I can come to is that 

more and more the House and the people are being denied information that was previously supplied to 

the people of this province and which for some reason it now doesn‘t want to supply. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Davies — Mr. Speaker, I call to the attention of the House that there is an error in the No. 1 Section 

— 15 (a) was 15 (a) before the revision of the statute. It is now Section 16 and unless anyone wants to 

get technical about it, I suggest we might take it as a typographical error and treat 15 (a) as 16. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I would presume that we should have an amendment with it. I‘ll tell you. The 

question before the House is on the Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) for an Order of the 

Assembly to issue the Return No. 84 showing: 

 

(1) The name, address, principal line of business and date of appointment of each person who has been 

named a ―special liquor vendor‖ under Section (and I‘ve amended it) 16 (a) of The Liquor Act, from 

February 14, 1966, to March 1, 1968. 

 

Is the House agreed on that change? 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 91 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Michayluk (Redberry) for 

Return No. 91. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, this particular Motion for 

Return asks for (b) the number of meals served at the Department of Natural Resources Cookhouse 

(maintenance headquarters) during each of the above years; and (c) the amount charged per meal in each 

of the above years. My information is from the Department of Natural Resources that no record of such 

meals or charges are kept because you are engaged or hired either with sustenance or without 

sustenance. And therefore I move, seconded by the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) that Motion No. 

91 be amended: 

 

That the letter ―(a)‖ after the word ―Park‖, and parts (b) and (c) be deleted. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1415 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 — CLOSURE OF COMMUNITY HOSPITALS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution of Mr. J. Kowalchuk 

(Melville): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the Government that no community hospitals be closed, — 

 

(a) until it has been conclusively established that alternate services will be available on a year-round 

basis; 

 

(b) without prior consultation with hospital boards and communities affected; 

 

(c) without a minimum of 12 months notice; 

 

(d) until alternate use has been found for hospitals which are structurally sound and in a good state of 

repair; 

 

(e) until a thorough study has been conducted into the needs of affected communities, including the 

concentration of senior citizens in the area, travel conditions and distance from alternate hospital 

services, and other pertinent factors. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — First of all, I‘d like to congratulate my colleague from Melville (Mr. 

Kowalchuk) for his capable presentation regarding the Resolution in the talk he gave some days ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — I‘m rising to speak in favor of this Resolution for two main reasons because, first of 

all, according to the Saskatchewan Hospital Survey and Master Plan, which is the only major serious 

study we have of Saskatchewan‘s hospital needs, two hospitals in my constituency, namely, Lashburn 

and District Union Hospital and Cutknife Union Hospital are scheduled to be converted to alternate use 

between 1961 and 1970, so these two hospitals concern my constituency. 

 

The second reason I rise to speak for this Resolution is because of this Government‘s lack of insight into 

appointed committees and its recommendations as shown glaringly by the startling announcement 

without serious consultation and deliberation of the closure of eight hospitals on December 10 last year 

by the Hon. Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant). 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1416 

Before turning to specific ideas and sections of the Resolution before us, I would like to review briefly 

some of the key ideas of the Saskatchewan Hospital Survey and Master Plan, 1961. It says in the Plan 

that one of the major aims of the survey was to state recommendations for the construction, extension, 

replacement and closure or conversion of specific hospitals to meet existing and future needs. Now this 

Survey stated plainly its recommendations, but above all it stated and I quote: 

 

The present assessment of future needs should not be considered a static evaluation to be applied 

without any degree of flexibility. 

 

And I repeat, ―should not be considered a static evaluation to be applied without any degree of 

flexibility.‖ Now in spite of this simply stated recommendation on page 155 and 156 of this report, the 

Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) chose to ignore it and thus left himself out on a limb. He also frightened 

and angered many Saskatchewan residents by his previous announcement regarding hospital closures. 

The Hospital Survey Report stressed that the closure of hospitals and the availability of beds within a 

geographic area must take into account such local factors as population changes, (that is the composition 

of the population in the area) and the number of older people in an area. It said it must take into account 

such things as existing hospitals, patterns of hospital use, trading centres and transportation. The Report 

recommended that patients should not have to travel any more than 30 miles over all-weather roads to 

get to hospitals. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to review the approach to the problem made by Mr. Allan Blakeney, 

then Minister of Public Health, in April, 1963 when the Hospital Survey Report was made public. He 

stated at that time that steps directed towards closure had to be well planned and proceeded with in an 

orderly manner after consultation with the hospital boards and medical staffs involved as well as with 

hospitals in adjacent areas. He stated also that at the time it would be necessary to consider special 

problems peculiar to a particular community which may be affected by closure. This is the only sensible 

approach to a very complicated problem, Mr. Speaker. Now as far as the 21 limited function hospitals 

that would be scheduled for conversion to some alternate use, Mr. Blakeney pointed out at that time that 

this was a difficult aspect of planning in the hospital field. It was, namely, the adoption of treatment 

facilities in the light of technological, scientific and social change and the problem of obsolescence. Mr. 

Speaker, in all fairness to the hundreds of Saskatchewan citizens who will be effected by decisions made 

in regard to hospital closure, I urge this Government to make its policies clear at this time and sensible; 

to discuss the problems with the 31 hospital boards whose hospitals have been recommended for 

conversion by 1970 by the Hospital Survey Committee. I‘m asking for immediate discussion and 

planning, Mr. Speaker, because the people in the Lashburn area already have organized an action 

committee to get a new 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1417 

hospital built there. And according to the plans of that Committee, a new building will cost 

approximately $150,000. They plan to raise some $61,000 by debentures and another $60,000 by 

donations. Now, Mr. Speaker, this hard-working active group as of March 16, has already collected 

some $41,700 in the form of pledges and donations. Can you imagine what a let-down there will be if 

the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) makes another quick decision in this matter and decides to close 

the hospital completely? What a sorry, sad day that will be for the citizens of Lashburn, their doctor, 

their druggist, and the 400 some families that this hospital now serves. All this will happen if this 

Resolution is not passed by this Legislature. 

 

Now the Resolution states clearly that no community hospitals be closed first of all until it has been 

conclusively established that alternate services will be available on a year-round basis. Now this part of 

the Resolution simply asks that there be enough beds in nearby hospitals on a year-round basis before 

any hospital is closed. In the case of the Lashburn Union Hospital, closure would be a disaster because 

the hospital in Lloydminster has a steady waiting list of some 28-40 patients. 

 

The second part of the Resolution is simply urging the Government to use a gentleman‘s approach of 

consultation with boards and communities long before any decision to close the hospital is made. 

Section (c) of the resolution asks for a minimum of 12 months‘ notice. This is really a minimum, Mr. 

Speaker. The doctor needs time to relocate, the staff, many of whom are local people, will need time to 

readjust to the loss of a job. The druggist in the area too must choose to sell out and buy some other 

form of business or move to some other more stable area. Section (d), the fourth section of the 

Resolution simply suggests that if the hospital is structurally sound and in good repair, it should not be 

closed until an alternate and wise use has been found for it. And I might suggest there are numerous 

alternate uses that one could put for these hospitals. For example, they could be offices for physicians; 

they could be small nursing homes; homes for the aged or dental clinics or health centres for diagnostic 

purposes or training centres for the retarded. 

 

Now the last section urges a thorough study of the needs of the affected communities, including the 

concentration of senior citizens in the area, travel conditions and distance from alternate hospital 

services, and other pertinent factors. Mr. Speaker, this is a Resolution embodying the principles of 

consultation before action, a thorough study before action and the principle of courtesy and respect for 

existing institutions and for the people of this province. I urge all Members therefore to vote in favor of 

this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1418 

debate because I am one of the Members in this Assembly that has one of the small hospitals which the 

Opposition are making a great noise about. I say it is mostly noise, Mr. Speaker, because the Members 

opposite have given us a lot of platitudes, a lot of talk, but not one single one of them has stood up and 

actually said that they would keep a hospital in Saskatchewan open that is possibly going to close. Now 

we haven‘t said that we are going to close these hospitals for sure. We are negotiating with them, this is 

quite true. But not one, not one single Member, Mr. Speaker, that has entered this debate has said that 

they wouldn‘t consult. They will talk and that‘s all we ever hear from them is talk. All the hospital 

boards will ever hear from them is talk, because not one single one of them has stood up in this 

Legislature and said that they would keep that hospital open if they were the Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I want to review, I want to review because I live in one of these 

towns that received notice from the former Minister of Health, the now Member for Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney) during the 1964 election when there was a great talk about hospitals. They received a letter 

and that letter was published in five papers by the NDP candidate. The letter said at the top by the 

candidate, ―No hospitals can be closed in Saskatchewan.‖ But if you read the letter and we suggested to 

the people of Cannington that they read it pretty closely. The letter was well written by a very well 

educated lawyer who had gone to a great deal of work to actually tell the people of Saskatchewan 

absolutely nothing. And, Mr. Speaker, what it was was a dodge that he hoped the people of 

Saskatchewan wouldn‘t see through, but they did see through it because he didn‘t promise them in one 

single paragraph or one single place that those hospitals would stay open. He promised them the same 

thing that the Members opposite are telling us here tonight, that they‘d talk about it, they‘d investigate it, 

but he didn‘t tell us that one single hospital would stay open. Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Members 

opposite to stand up and say that the hospitals that we are talking about closing and possibly will be 

closed in Saskatchewan in the future, won‘t close. Because you . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . because, Mr. Speaker, you can talk all day but what these communities 

eventually want to know is whether they are going to be open or whether they are going to be closed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the people of Maryfield, despite a piece that 

was printed in the paper, have been very, very good to me . . . 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1419 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . not only in votes, but they have been very good to me since. And I want to say, 

also, Mr. Speaker, that in fairness to them the piece that came in the paper that they got a lot of bad 

publicity about (and myself I might say) was unfair in that it was largely a publicity stunt pulled on 

various other Members of this side of the House. Now I‘m not meaning to say that this should not be 

taken seriously because it is quite serious, and I wish to make a few other comments in regard to this 

hospital situation. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that if we get down to separate the wheat from 

the chaff and all of the propaganda being put forth by the Opposition, we get down to the basic fact that 

we have difficulties that we must face as far as many of these small hospitals are concerned. There is 

drastic need that we have a very definite policy, and I know from talking to the Minister that this policy 

will be forthcoming in regard to what the Government does intend as far as these hospitals in the future 

are concerned. 

 

Now I want to take just a few moments to outline some of the problems that these hospitals are facing 

and their problems, which it won‘t matter who the Member of the Legislature is, it won‘t matter whether 

he is NDP, Liberal, Conservative or any other political party. They are problems that the public in those 

communities will have to face eventually within the next few years. The first one of course and one 

which the hospital at Maryfield faces is the problem of low utilization. The fact of the matter is that they 

are down to approximately five patients per day. If you follow and look into the Department of Public 

Health records, you can find that a great number of the people that live in this community aren‘t actually 

using the hospital themselves. They are using other facilities simply because other facilities at 

neighboring towns are better. Now this is simply not a problem that will ever be overcome by any 

government, the problem of low utilization. This is a problem which is facing many of the small 

hospitals in Saskatchewan today. The required number of staff is large because of the 40-hour week, the 

professional people required to operate the hospital is substantial and yet the number of patients that are 

being serviced here is declining. Basically the local people of these communities will have to face the 

fact that in many cases they aren‘t using these hospitals. Although we may be able to temporarily take 

measures to assist them to operate their building unless these communities have a higher utilization rate, 

a necessary utilization rate, I don‘t mean an inflated one, Mr. Speaker, then eventually some of these 

hospitals certainly will likely have to disappear. I hate to say this myself, I know that problems are 

associated with the disappearance of the building. The Members opposite that have spoken in this debate 

have mentioned these problems and none of them likes to see a declining town. But I would point out 

that the Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) who spoke suggested hardships that would be created by 

loss of jobs. Now I know, Mr. Speaker, the local people employed are important, but I would take issue 

with 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1420 

the loss of jobs that he has suggested simply, because I do not think hospitals were ever built with the 

intention of creating employment. Factories have been built to create employment, but I think that we 

are in a sad way as far as governments are concerned if we start to run hospitals simply to give jobs to 

people in that particular area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — The hospital should be maintained as long as it is servicing a number of people in 

that area and giving them the type of health that is required. But I don‘t suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in any 

manner should we continue to operate hospitals simply to give somebody in that particular town a job. I 

think this would be gross inefficiency in our health system. Of course many of us are familiar with the 

staff problems that are associated with these hospitals, and some of them have certainly run into doctor 

problems and nurse problems. The particular hospital in my constituency has had neither one of these 

and certainly this is in their favor in continuing to be a medical centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much merit in the Resolution that has been proposed by the Opposition. Later in 

the debate, the Minister will be speaking on it and outlining more of what the Government‘s intentions 

are. I would like to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition may cry long and loud but not one of 

them has spoken and said that they would actually keep the small hospitals open, or offered a definite 

alternative plan except more talk with local boards. This is not what the local boards are interested in. 

The local boards are interested in a very concrete plan of action. As this debate unfolds, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that those Opposition Members who speak stand up and tell us if they would actually keep these 

small hospitals open or not, or whether they are just going to give us more talk. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN NO. 97 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Willis for Return No. 97. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. A.C. Cameron 

(Minister of Mineral Resources) that Motion for Return No. 97 be amended by deleting the words after 

the word ―appointed‖ in part (1) and the following substituted therefor: 

 

to permanent or probationary position on the staff of 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1421 

the Department of Highways from October 12, 1967, to date not including promotions or transfers. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, the Opposition is getting tired of asking questions 

which are turned down continuously by the Government. It won‘t be long, Mr. Speaker, before we 

across the House cross the floor during the session with a paper in our hand and put it under the 

Premier‘s nose and say, ―Is this question okay, or shouldn‘t we ask it this way? Are we entitled to this 

information or not?‖ 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, is the Hon. Gentleman 

speaking on a point of order or is he speaking on the subject matter of the debate? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I gather he has risen to oppose the amendment. 

 

Mr. Willis: — And if the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. Coderre) had listened a little more carefully he 

would have found out that I was opposing the amendment which the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) 

has put before this House. 

 

Time after time the Opposition Members have asked this Government questions. Time after time the 

Government has told us that these questions are not to be answered in the form we request them. All I 

ask here is for complete information. The Minister of Highways says that we could have part 

information. This is not good enough, Mr. Speaker. It is certainly highhanded, dictatorial, callous, and it 

is drastic action which the Government has taken to try to shut off information which we have requested. 

I want to inform the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) that sometime tomorrow I will have a question which I wish 

to ask. I will bring it to his office if he is not in the House. I will consult with him before I ask the 

question to find out whether or not I can ask the question. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

congratulate one or two of the Members on the opposite side who have risen and spoke to another 

debate, particularly the last debate. I think the young Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) should 

be congratulated in putting information before this House. I saw the Premier turn around two or three 

times and try to get him to sit down in his seat. When he did sit down in his seat . . . Mr. Speaker, I run 

out of words trying to condemn this Government for its lack of response to questions which we have 

asked on this side of the House. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — I don‘t think, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side of the House 

should let that tirade by the Member from Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) go unanswered. You know it‘s a 

curious thing, this is about the sixth motion that asks for exactly the same 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1422 

information in respect to the different departments of Government. In my department and in various 

other departments, this is about the fifth or sixth one, and we have in each case suggested an amendment 

to clarify and put it in the position of being permanent or probationary. On each occasion the Opposition 

have agreed to the amendment, there has been no opposition. Now here, this is about the sixth or seventh 

one. Does the Hon. Member for Melfort-Tisdale want us to answer one way with respect to some 

departments and in another way with respect to this department. This is about the sixth or seventh 

department, and all we are doing in this motion is making the wording in this motion exactly the same as 

it was for Education, exactly the same as it was for Industry, exactly the same as it was for the Attorney 

General‘s Department. Now if this is hiding information we plead guilty, but I submit in all earnest and 

in all sincerity we are giving him the same information that we suggested in the other departments and 

you all agreed to the other motions. 

 

Mr. Willis: — The information you want to give us. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, that is the subject that is being debated and I think that it also deserves 

an answer. I notice on the Journals of the Saskatchewan Legislature, 1962, a number of motions 

amended by the then Government, Motions 1, 2, 52, 53, 61, 65 and 68. More than half of the Motions 

for Return were debated and amended by the then Government and now the Opposition. 

 

Amendment agreed to 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 — GUARANTEED PRICES FOR FARMERS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution of Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): 

 

That this Legislature urge the Provincial Government to immediately request the Federal Government 

to adopt an agricultural policy that would ensure financial return to provide an adequate standard of 

living to farmers by guaranteeing prices of farm commodities based on the cost of production and 

subject to yearly review; such prices to be announced early enough each year to allow farmers to plan 

their current operations. 

 

and the proposed amendment by the Hon. Mr. McFarlane: 

 

That all the words after the word ―agricultural‖ in the second line be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

And trade policy establishing a trade commission under the Department of Trade and Commerce to 

negotiate with the various importing countries of the world and establish 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1423 

markets for Canadian agricultural products that would ensure favorable financial return to our farmer 

producers. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, this I consider is one of the important Resolutions of the 

session, because it affects not just agriculture itself but the whole economy both national and provincial. 

It‘s strange but it‘s true that over the 60 years of my experience in the province, Saskatchewan farmers 

have been fighting year by year for even-handed justice before government and marketing organizations 

such as the Winnipeg Grain Exchange. One may go back to the original brush with the CPR Company 

when the farmers had to take the railway company to court in order to procure the simple right of 

loading grain over the loading platform by the Armstrong method. And it was a miracle, Mr. Speaker, 

that they won their case. You can go back to the days of Partridge and Motherwell, the organization of 

the old territorial grain growers, the Saskatchewan Co-op Elevators, and later the Wheat Pool and the 

Farmers‘ Union and finally, last but not least the Canadian Wheat Board. We have received much 

benefit, Mr. Speaker, from all these efforts. I have only drawn your attention to them to highlight the 

fact that the heart of the problem that faces agriculture has never really been dealt with. Agriculture is 

still in the position of producing at near loss. We have appealed to Federal Governments and Provincial 

Governments at various times and by as many proposals. In the early days we asked for free trade. The 

farmers were prepared to take their chance on a world sellers‘ market if they were allowed to buy on the 

world-wide open market. If we must be compelled to buy in a protected market then we ask that we 

receive like treatment with industry. We‘ve asked for parity prices, but all kinds of obstacles could be 

raised as barriers to such an approach. At the same time gold mining could be subsidized and all kinds of 

devious ways and methods of subsidizing and protective tariffs could be worked out for industry. The 

farmers asked for deficiency payments. Remember they sent a group to Ottawa to put this proposal 

before the Federal Government in 1958 but again all kinds of bogies were conjured up as to why this 

could not be done. Yet over and over again the people of Canada have had to provide railway companies 

with subsidies — this glorious independent sector — they‘ve had subsidies and payments in many, 

many ways. We‘ve asked for a two-price system, but oh, no! Such an approach would be ruinous to the 

country or just wouldn‘t work. Even those aspiring to the Premiership, the Prime Minister‘s position, in 

the hectic race that‘s going on at the present time, each one refusing the two-price system. Governments 

paid lip-service to the farmers as the pioneers as the backbone of Canada, and as the most important 

industry in the country, but they leave the farmers to the tender mercies of chance and fate in a world of 

open competition against subsidized agriculture in almost every wheat-exporting country of the world. 

 

Last year the Wheat Pool asked Hedlin, Menzies and Associates to make a survey on the whole 

agricultural situation. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1424 

Mr. Charles Gibbings as President of the Wheat Pool wrote the foreward to the report. In it he quotes 

one paragraph that I would like to read: 

 

In the final analysis, the basic economic welfare of the entire prairie farming community must relate to 

the ability of the farmer to make a net return from the production of wheat. The design of policy which 

must concern itself with wheat and in the context of today must concern itself with the relentless 

advance of farm production costs and the inability of the farmer lacking imports from beyond the 

industry itself to compensate for the increases. 

 

However, just what is the story of Liberal Governments, both Provincial and Federal? Campaigning in 

the 1961 election, March 8th, in Saskatoon Prime Minister Pearson said, ―Return a Liberal Government 

and we will guarantee $2 wheat.‖ Yet, Mr. Speaker, when the most wonderful opportunity presented 

itself to the Prime Minister and his Government to fulfil that promise in the face of a six-months‘ gap in 

the International Wheat Agreement, when the farmers of Western Canada were left naked and 

unprotected, what happened? The Federal Government waited until prices had declined some 20 to 22 

cents per bushel, and then put a floor of $1.95½ cents, not $2, under wheat until next July 1st. When 

T.C. Douglas reminded the Prime Minister of his $2 promise, it was brushed off with, ―Why reap up the 

past,‖ or words to that effect. 

 

In Mr. Gibbings‘ address to the annual convention of the Wheat Pool last fall he made some comments 

that I would like to read into the records. At the time he was speaking of the change that had taken place 

in world wheat markets, both so far as deliveries and sales were concerned, and so far as the price was 

concerned. He went on to say what the impact would be on farm income and I quote: 

 

These changes are bound to have a major impact on farm income in Western Canada. The impact of 

the price decline will take a while to show up because it affects future income rather than the current 

position. But the decline in exports will have an immediate effect because it has already begun to slow 

the pace of farm deliveries. This is shown in current figures. 

 

Grain deliveries in Western Canada during the first three months of the present crop year have declined 

by 65 million bushels. Deliveries to Saskatchewan country elevators are 43,500,000 bushels less than 

at the same time a year ago. So far as current income is concerned the decline in deliveries is partially 

offset by the higher initial price which is in effect this crop year. 

 

I want you to keep that in mind. 

 

Producers certainly appreciate what the higher initial 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1425 

payment is doing to maintain income this year. But it should not be allowed to obscure the harsh 

reality of the current world price. Of the floor of $1.95½ for Number One Northern at the Lakehead, 

the price is now almost 4 cents below the average for the same grain throughout the crop year 1965-

1966 and it is 17½ cents below the Board‘s asking price in April of 1967. This reduction in price level 

combined with the smaller crop harvest this year must be reflected ultimately in farm cash income. 

 

Boiled down, Mr. Speaker, this means 1969 will be much worse than 1968. 

 

Inadequate prices — The income reduction arising from smaller sales at lower prices has to be 

squeezed out of an income that was already inadequate for many grain producers. The inadequacy of 

wheat prices during the last four years as you know has been disguised by the unprecedented volume 

of sales. In four years from August 1, 1963 to July 1, 1967, western wheat producers sold an equivalent 

of 5-year average deliveries based not on the long-term but on the most recent ten years. In the four 

years deliveries amounted to 100 million bushels a year above the 10-year average. It was these extra 

deliveries that enabled some producers to keep pace with the rising costs of things which must be 

bought to produce a crop. Costs are continuing to go up. In the current year the high level of deliveries 

will not be there. Industry is going to run a long way behind meeting its costs under present marketing 

conditions Rising costs on farms, costs of goods and services going into farm production, have been 

rising at the rate of almost 4 per cent a year ever since 1949. The total increase to 1966 is about 66 per 

cent. The price of wheat on the other hand has gone up only 9 per cent from 1949 to 1966 and more 

than two-thirds of the wheat increase or 6.6 per cent occurred in the last three years. 

 

Wheat prices are now down. There is no sign of any slackening in the rate at which costs have been 

climbing. I suggest that this puts agriculture in an impossible position. This is why the floor of $1.95½, 

when applied on the basis of reduced deliveries, will prove inadequate to meet the needs of Canada‘s 

grain producers, however effective it may be in freeing the hands of the Canadian Wheat Board to 

meet the competition currently being offered by other wheat exporters. The income gap arises from 

disparity between costs incurred and production and returns which are the product of volume of price. 

The attack must be on all three elements if the gap is to be removed and a reasonable return substituted 

for it. And each of the three is complex in itself and inter-related with the other factors. 

 

Producers are the victims of inflation. This is one of the 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1426 

most important approaches that Mr. Gibbings made. The impetus to rise in costs comes from factors 

outside agriculture. Farmers by themselves can do little about inflation. Grain producers are not 

contributors to it but victims of it. Being one of the groups most severely hit by inflation, they may very 

well ask the Government to do something to slow down the pace at which the costs are rising and 

thereby keep the farm income gap from getting any worse. 

 

May I once again point out that the Liberal Government carries the responsibility back to 1949 and 1945 

when it lifted the price controls. This is the date to which Mr. Gibbings is referring in this address. 

Producers are and have been doing things to reduce their own individual costs — and if they hadn‘t most 

of them would have been out of agriculture a long time ago — by the process of mechanization and the 

use of fertilizers and herbicides. 

 

I would like to suggest one thing more, Mr. Speaker, and that is that over the last six months the Federal 

Government has been playing politics with the farmers‘ wheat and the farmers‘ money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — The only reason that it gave us increased initial payments was to cover the present 

situation. The only reason that it has hung onto the final payment to the last of March is in order to make 

it look as good as they could for an election year. Any request that the farmers have made for rye, flax 

and rapeseed to come under the Wheat Board has fallen on deaf ears so far. As you well know if you 

were raising rape, rapeseed has dropped not 22 cents but 1/5 of the price that it was one year ago. 

 

What about our Provincial Government? Some three years ago when a Resolution was passed in this 

House, following a drop of wheat prices, a Resolution requesting the Federal Government to do all in its 

power to seek new markets and to save further decline in wheat prices, just what happened? A solid 

month after the Resolution was passed in this Legislature, it was still lying on the desk of the Premier in 

this very building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — One of the first slaps in the face that the farmer received from this Government and the 

former Minister of Agriculture was to have that gentleman — and I think that I am being very kind — 

go to the farm machine companies and ask them what they thought about the value of AMA. This, Mr. 

Speaker, coincides with going to the grain exchange and asking them what they thought was the value of 

a Wheat Board, which I am very suspicious was done on various occasions, before we finally succeeded 

in wringing the Wheat Board out of the Federal Government. Is it 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1427 

any wonder that the farmers have lost confidence in the Liberal party? 

 

I would like to turn for a moment to the Minister of Agriculture‘s remarks. What he said, Mr. Speaker, 

was very wide of the Resolution and I am not going to comment on it. However he persists in his 

approach to Provincial agriculture by riding the barley production idea, as being one of the great 

answers to the predicament that the farmers find themselves in. I am sure that he is not ignorant of the 

situation that prevails in Saskatchewan regarding barley production. I would like to quote from an article 

in the Family Herald Weekly Star: 

 

The eastern farmer is rapidly approaching the point where they will no longer have to depend on 

imports of prairie grains. Ontario farmers produced 72 million of corn last year, nearly three times the 

amount grown in 1960. Corn as a crop is spreading eastward. Last year Quebec farmers, the second 

time that this crop has officially been recorded, grew 20,000 acres. And some maritime farmers, 

particularly in Nova Scotia have started to use the crop for silage. There is no reason why the 

importance of corn as a feed crop should not increase in the future. 

 

The second point that must be considered and one which has immediate application is the abundant 

supply of United States corn available to eastern livestock producers. At the present the price of United 

States corn in Montreal is only 7 cents higher per 100 weight. Western feed barley is $2.47 per cwt for 

No. 1 Western barley as compared to $2.54 per cwt for United States corn in late December. The two 

grains are not entirely interchangeable and eastern millers have more experience with barley than with 

corn. But with such a narrow spread, the higher-energy corn becomes an attractive alternative to 

barley. Only recently Mr. Walter Miller, president of Ontario Farmers Union was speaking at Kenaston 

and had this to say. He spoke of the sudden ending of the sugar beets production in the Chatham area, 

remarking that 20,000 acres devoted last year to sugar beets would have to be put to corn this year. But 

there is an over-supply of corn right now and United States corn is being imported at cheaper prices 

than Canadian grain. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the situation of barley at the present time. I was down at the Wheat Pool only the 

other day and I asked them about the barley market. They told me that not only is malting barley in 

difficulty on the market but also feed barley. I will admit, Mr. Speaker, that at the present time the 

freight subsidy — for this is what it really is — is of value to western farmers on coarse grain. But if you 

note what I quoted from Mr. Miller‘s address, this is practically wiped out now and corn is coming in 

even below our western feed grains. 

 

I am sure that the Minister knows full well what the situation is at the present time in the province. 

There are not 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1428 

just hundreds of thousands of bushels of barley but there are thousands of granaries full of barley. I 

know people who have three or four granaries full of barley, before they took off the big crop in our area 

last fall. In spite of freight assistance, the price of barley is scarcely above the cost of production and 

cannot be treated as an answer to the agricultural problem of Saskatchewan. 

 

Just in closing, a word directly to the amendment, Mr. Speaker. The amendment is a typical one, coming 

from the Liberal Government. It pulls all the teeth out of the original Resolution. It buries the whole 

matter in a vague, long drawn-out, world-wide search that could only result in the death of agriculture in 

the meantime, very much like closing the door after the horse is stolen. Let‘s face it! Agriculture is the 

life-blood of the nation and agriculture is a sick patient at the moment. Nothing, Mr. Speaker, matters as 

much as food in the day-to-day business of living. Let us stop mucking about and do something concrete 

while the patient is still alive. Heart transplants are altogether too risky and too costly. I hope this 

Government will show some signs of initiative and some real concern for our basic industry and support 

the Resolution. 

 

Just in closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to read the final words of this report that the Wheat Pool had 

compiled: 

 

The long-run prospects of wheat industry in Western Canada are favorable. It is probable that there 

will be a short-term period in which the economic circumstances would become difficult, as a 

consequence of a variety of causes. The industry is so fundamental to the welfare of 200,000 Canadian 

enterprises, to the welfare of the prairie region and the economy of the nation that it is important that 

the commitment of the Government of Canada should extend well beyond the performance of the 

useful function of marketing the farmer‘s grain at prices that chance to be dictated by the vagaries of 

world circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 3 — ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J.E. Brockelbank 

(Saskatoon Mayfair): 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry that I have to punish you once more for just a few minutes. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1429 

Mr. Steuart: — You are carrying the load tonight. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — I assure you that I‘ll try to be brief this time. Mr. Speaker, the subject of constituency 

boundaries has been one of heated discussion for many, many years. This seems so incompatible with 

our want of democracy and multiple-party system to have constituency boundaries drawn by a party in 

power, whether that party be my own or otherwise. It lends itself to inconsistencies and much criticism. I 

know I have listened to the Premier and the present Government claiming to take great exception to 

multiple-city seats and any variation of this method. Had they done a decent and honest job of drawing 

boundaries on single-member basis, I for one would have found no criticism. When I recall the antics of 

the Government Members a year ago whenever the subject came up and especially of the Member for 

Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) one realized that nothing honorable was being attempted, a three-year 

stint on the constituency of Hanley that had not even the remotest connection with natural boundaries or 

population count, except party affiliation. 

 

Many now realize their utter gullibility. No self-righteous or parsimonious harangue by either the 

Premier or anyone else can hide the gerrymandering that was so openly evident. I hope that the Hon. 

Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) will note that I said gerrymandering. I also hope that before he takes 

anyone to task again on this pronunciation he will go to a good dictionary. Would he pronounce germ – 

germ or would he pronounce German — German? Well I‘ll admit that anything can happen in this 

language of ours with its multi-linguist background, but it so happens that in this particular case it is 

right either way. However, back to boundaries. We will never have a good, a just settlement of 

constituency boundaries until we set up a Committee or a Commission representative of all political 

parties or a strictly independent one. 

 

Mr. R.A. Heggie (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words in this particular debate. I 

have taken some time to study the electoral boundaries of the various redistributions from its inception 

in 1905. Starting with 1916 in which there were 59 Members in the Saskatchewan Legislature, which is 

more in keeping with the present number, it didn‘t seem to matter a great deal which party was in power. 

The constituency boundaries were altered and I presume altered in favor of the party in power on each 

occasion there was redistribution. 

 

My general consensus of the matter is this, that there would be very little to be gained by having an 

independent commission to redistribute the seats, because it is apparent from the Federal redistribution 

which was done by a Commission that the net result ends up less realistic than any redistribution made 

by the political parties. In the 1916 redistribution, taking it as a norm — there was a redistribution in 

1920 — and taking 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1430 

the Bengough seat as an example, it was left practically the same in both these redistributions. Then in 

1932 as all the Members here know, there was a change in Government. Another political party was in 

power and the Bengough seat really got emasculated in that redistribution. It took on a shape like a 

tornado with a narrow base and wide at the top. Then in 1938 there was still another Government in 

power and the Bengough seat then took on a different shape. It sort of broadened out and was 

lengthened in a vertical direction and leaned towards the northwest, just as good though as the 1932 

redistribution. In 1951 there was a different political party altogether in power and it had a chance to 

alter the Bengough seat. It had it, but it only added to the confusion by altering it slightly and still 

leaving its rather ridiculous shape. Now I only use the Bengough seat as an example because it was one 

which went through these sort of changes. Looking at the latest map, the most recent distribution, we 

have Bengough still with much the same outlines that it had in 1938. If you look at all these maps, the 

situation is not nearly as serious as the Members opposite would make out. I feel fully convinced that 

the people who know the province best, the people who are the representatives, the Legislators, have just 

as good an opportunity, have the knowledge and the experts to guide them to divide the province up into 

seats which give reasonable representation by population. 

 

Before I go into that, I want to speak a little about the English system. Now there is no doubt that in 

Great Britain they have had a great deal more experience than we have had in Western Canada, even a 

good deal more experience than they have had in the United States, where they don‘t call it a 

redistribution, they call it redistricting, but it means the same thing. Everyone knows from his history 

books that it was in the early 19th century that the Parliament of Great Britain began to realize that the 

districts were all out of shape. There were some cities which had grown in population as result of the 

Industrial Revolution, where a Member of Parliament was representing literally several hundred 

thousand people, while in some rural constituency perhaps in the north of England or in the north of 

Scotland, (where there had been a shift in population due to the Industrial Revolution, not any different 

than what is happening today) a Member of Parliament was representing a very few voters. Those were 

the days when they referred to these districts as ―rotten boroughs‖ and ―pocket boroughs‖. Those are all 

names that we learned in our history books of the redistribution that began to take place in the 19th 

century. The British experience was to try and redistribute the seats on the basis of four or five main 

propositions. They didn‘t use the expression ‗representation by population‘. That is more or less an 

American expression adopted by Canadians. They used what they called a ‗quota‘ to try and get a 

reasonably equal quota of people or voters in each seat. But it is the same thing as ‗representation by 

population‘. They felt that the second consideration was the matter of trying to divide up the counties of 

England so that the electoral divisions didn‘t go over the county boundaries. Now this is a sensible 

proposition. 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1431 

They didn‘t want a Member of Parliament representing part of the county of Middlesex, let‘s say, and 

the county of Essex that came close to it. They wanted to have the Member of Parliament representing a 

constituency which was all within one county, because after all in England these counties grew up 

around trading centres. They grew up around rivers and they grew up around bays or some geographical 

fact which centred the population in that area. In the era when there was poor transportation, a county 

grew up as a sort of a district within itself. And so the British experience was to divide the counties so 

that at least the constituencies were within the county boundaries and corresponded in some sensible 

way with the interests or trading areas which were within those county boundaries. 

 

Then the next consideration was one which is well known in Western Canada or in Canada generally, 

and that is the disparity between the city and country or between the urban and the rural. Even the 

English commissioners who at various times made a redistribution of England, Scotland, Northern 

Ireland and Wales said that a country Member of Parliament representing a rural seat could better 

represent that seat if it wasn‘t too large, whereas a Member of Parliament representing a borough or a 

city seat could represent a great deal more people effectively than his rural counterpart. That is still a 

matter of interest here in Western Canada or in Saskatchewan that a city Member can represent a great 

deal more people effectively in a city seat than he can, if he is spread over a great area as we have here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that brings me down to the point where I wish to refer to the recent redistribution made of the 

Federal seats whereby Saskatchewan‘s representation in the Federal arena has been reduced from 17 to 

13. Now the Government of Canada set up as I recall it a separate Commission in each of the 10 

provinces and in Saskatchewan the personnel of that Commission was a Queen‘s Bench Judge and a 

Professor of Political Science from the University of Saskatchewan. If there was a third member on it I 

can‘t remember who he was, but it doesn‘t matter, it was a multi-person commission. They deliberated 

as I understand it, for a number of months, I think actually they took over a year to make this 

redistribution of the Federal seats and they heard representations from various bodies, including political 

parties. But what they ended up with is in my opinion the worst emasculation of the Province into 

electoral seats that I have ever seen. Here you have an independent Commission which was devoted, and 

I‘m not criticizing, but devoted to the representation by population theory. In other words it made the 

boundaries like that ―drunk caterpillar‖ referred to by the Member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault), made 

them wiggle around in all directions in order to obtain the precise number of voters in each constituency. 

In doing so, in my opinion it has destroyed the whole geographic face of the map of Saskatchewan 

where it is divided into natural trading areas with the natural boundaries creating a basis for the seats. 

For instance if these boundaries between Regina East and Regina Lake Centre, 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1432 

are examined, their lines are far worse than any redistribution on the Saskatchewan map made by any 

political party. Furthermore, they have taken cities and divided them in two to balance out the 

population and joined them in with rural areas in order to get the population balanced. In trying to reach 

for perfection they‘ve got the Prince Albert seat with more jogs than that drunk caterpillar could make, 

and they have ended up with the Swift Current-Maple Creek seat so large in size that it would be like 

representing the State of Western Australia. It just becomes almost an impossibility for a Member of 

Parliament to do any kind of a decent job for the people in this area. In the Battlefords, the traditional 

pattern was that the people living and trading around the Battleford area down to the Wilkie and Unity 

area were drawn north toward Battleford. And so always was the Meadow Lake area included in this 

traditional trading pattern. But now it put them in with the Battleford-Kindersley seat so that it upsets 

their whole relationship in trading areas. Of course people don‘t like this. They object to having their 

normal habits broken up by arbitrary decisions of a Commission. 

 

Take the seat of Saskatoon-Humboldt and Moose Jaw. Here are a couple of townships which are eight or 

ten miles out of Saskatoon in which to vote for a Member of Parliament for Moose Jaw. This was 

probably done in order to obtain this perfect balance of representation by population, but it destroys 

many other things which redistribution should stand for. It would almost make sense to me that any area 

within eight miles of Saskatoon should be voting for a Member of Parliament in or about Saskatoon 

where his trading and cultural interests lie. I can only summarize by saying that a commission, in 

devotion to the perfect, ends up in a far worse position than if it had left it to realistic bodies who 

understand. And this includes all political parties. They all get a turn at it; leave it to the realistic people 

who in the end can make a fair distribution. 

 

Now the difficulties. The accusations that are levelled by one political party against another is that in 

order to get electoral advantage they try and group all the Liberals together in one seat and the CCF in 

the other, hoping in the scramble that the party in power will come out with a few more seats. Now this 

isn‘t anything new. Sir John A. MacDonald, the greatest gerrymanderer that Canada ever had, had a 

phrase for it. He said his theory was to ―hive the grits‖. In his day it was, ―hive the grits‖, group the grits 

all into one hive and let them have a member and the Tories would take the rest. Now that was his idea 

then and it hasn‘t changed a great deal. But it is different; there is just a different stripe in the hive now. 

So when you consider the English system and the fact that they set up independent commissions to try 

and bring a fair distribution, I refer you to this article in Public Administration of 1955, an article called, 

Redistribution of Seats, by David Butler. David Butler also wrote a larger textbook on the same thing. 

But his conclusions were that, no matter whether it was done by a commission, or by political parties, 

anomalies in redistribution always seems to arise, and it was 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1433 

never fair no matter who did it. I would say that if these reasonable milestones are used: (1) have a quota 

or representation by population; (2) keep the seats to represent trading areas; (3) allow a disparity 

between town and country; (4) add to the total number of seats when necessary, and you will get a 

division which is reasonably fair. 

 

Another consideration of course in this House — and they had the same thing in Great Britain — is not 

to increase the number of Members of Parliament too greatly. They have somewhat over 600 in the 

British Parliament. Here a legislative body for the size of this province would get out of hand if the seats 

were increased much beyond 60 unless we had a very, very rapid increase in population. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, in summary that the political parties, given the expert advice that is available with a 

knowledge of the geography of Saskatchewan, the trading habits, the voting patterns and all the other 

considerations which we must face, can equally do as good a job at dividing up the seats as any electoral 

commission has done. Consider what has been done in the Federal field for the proof of that. Mr. 

Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Adjournment was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 31 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Grant Weatherald 

McFarlane Coderre Mitchell 

Boldt Bjarnason Larochelle 

Cameron McDonald Gardner 

Steuart Estey Coupland 

Heald Hooker McPherson 

McIsaac McLennan Charlebois 

Guy Heggie  McIvor 

Barrie Breker Schmeiser 

Loken   

 

NAYS — 21 

 

Lloyd Berezowsky Brockelbank 

Wooff Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Blakeney Thibault Matsalla 

Davies Whelan Messer 

Dewhurst Snyder Kwasnica 

Meakes Michayluk Kowalchuk 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

SECOND READINGS 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1434 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan) moved second reading of Bill No. 59 – An Act to amend The 

Medical Profession Act. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading of this Bill I want to say that it has been 

requested by both the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan and the College of Medicine 

of the University of Saskatchewan. The College of Medicine has revised its curriculum with the intent 

that in his final year the medical student would provide certain medical services in hospital as a kind of 

undergraduate hospital medical intern. These amendments are considered advisable, Mr. Speaker, in 

order that the status of the student as a person providing medical services will be clarified. Details in the 

change of curriculum and the proposed functions of the undergraduate intern can be explained to best 

advantage by officials of the College of Medicine and College of Physicians and Surgeons. This 

explanation can be given when the Bill is considered in the Committee on Law Amendments and 

Delegated Powers. The new curriculum will not be fully in effect until 1970-71, but it is intended that 

the undergraduate internship program be applied to students in their final year commencing September, 

1968. With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read a second time and referred 

to the Select Standing Committee on Law Amendments. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. MacDougall moved second reading of Bill No. 60, An Act respecting The Saskatchewan 

Association of Architects. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 60, An Act respecting the Association of Architects was last 

revised in 1942 and has not been reviewed by the Legislative Assembly since that time. This Act is 

being updated, having regard to sections that are no longer applicable and judicial interpretations of 

various sections or similar sections in other statutes across Canada relating to professional people. In 

addition to the general updating of the statute, the Bill will allow more flexibility in the future in 

allowing the Professional Architects of Saskatchewan to function under the continued supervision of the 

Legislative Assembly. The Bill allows for continued changes to be made by bylaw, thus eliminating the 

requirements for amendments to the statute itself whenever a change is desirable. With those brief 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbanks: — Will the Member permit a question before he takes his seat. Was this 

requested by their Association and was there any opposition to the changes. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — No, it was requested by the Saskatchewan Architects 



 
March 26, 1968 

 
1435 

Association because they felt that the Bill that they presently operate under was outdated and they 

wanted to bring it up to date. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — With regard to the question, Mr. Speaker, I asked if anybody had opposed the . . . 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 o‘clock p.m. 


