




















































Hansard: February 16, 1968


9 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Sixteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Thursday, February 16, 1968. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

APPOINTMENT OF CLERK ASSISTANT 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day, I wish to inform the Assembly that Thomas Robert 

Michael Wood has been appointed Clerk Assistant of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

AWARD OF CENTENNIAL MEDAL 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Also before the Orders of the Day, Members of the Legislative Assembly will be 

pleased to learn that during the past year our Sergeant at Arms, Major Scott Calder was awarded the 

Centennial Medal. I will read the citation in connection therewith: 

 

On the occasion of the one hundredth anniversary of the Confederation of Canada this 

Centennial Medal is conferred on D.G. Scott Calder, Esquire, in recognition of valuable service. 

July 1, 1967. 

 

I am sure Members would wish to extend him the congratulations of the House. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

RECORDING OF MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day, I wish to make a brief statement in connection with the 

transcription of the debates. In the past it has not been the custom of this House to transcribe or have 

recorded any of the debates which have taken place in connection with Motions for Returns. It has, 

however, been decided that at this session of the House any Motion for a Return which is debated will 

be recorded. I think that Members will agree that a procedural decision of this nature should be made at 

the commencement of the session and not at some later time during the session. 

 

SASKATCHEWAN SAVINGS BONDS 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would 



 

February 16, 1968 

 

 

10 

like to inform the House that Saskatchewan Savings Bonds, series eight, will go on sale Monday, 

February 26. This year Saskatchewan Savings Bonds will carry the highest interest rate in their history, 

5.75 per cent if held to maturity in 1978. As in the past, Saskatchewan Savings Bonds will be sold only 

to residents of the province and to corporations with offices in this province and to Saskatchewan 

societies and organizations. They will be available in denominations of $100, $500, $1,000 and $5,000. 

The maximum purchase by any one buyer will be limited to $20,000. Saskatchewan Savings Bonds have 

always been well received and this year, with the highest interest rate ever offered, will be an even more 

attractive investment than in the past. 

 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the Hon. 

Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart), the Provincial Treasurer: 

 

That William Howes, Esquire, Member for the constituency of Kerrobert—Kindersley, be the 

Deputy Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

BATTEN COMMISSION REPORT 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I 

could address a question to the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and that question is: when will the Batten 

Commission Report be submitted to the Government and made available to the Members of the House. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I have been trying to find that out myself. Just as quickly as we can 

persuade the Judge to finish the document, we shall endeavor to table it. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — It was supposed . . .  

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, if you know the Judge as well as I do, you would realize that one doesn’t tell 

her when and how she must do things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 



 

February 16, 1968 
 

 

11 

move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of two former 

Members of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions made to 

his community, to his constituency and his province. 

 

D.H.R. Heming, who died April 20, 1967, represented Moose Jaw City in this Assembly from 

1944 to 1960. He was born in London, England in 1885, and was educated at Westminster 

School and King’s College, University of London. On first coming to Canada in 1905, he was 

employed with railway contractors, and later he homesteaded before moving to Moose Jaw in 

1912. Mr. Heming was active in the trade union movement in Moose Jaw and served for ten 

years as an Alderman of that city. I may say, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Heming was a very dear and 

personal friend of mine. I knew him for a number of years in Moose Jaw. He was, I think, a man 

of complete honesty, sincerity and integrity. He was a man who had a fine community spirit. I 

know he has been missed, not only by his family, but by everyone in the city and those who 

knew him. 

 

Joseph Albert McClure, who died in August, 1967, was a Member of this Legislature for the 

Canora constituency from 1925 to 1929. He was born in Brantford, Ontario in 1881 and came to 

the west in 1902. In 1904 he took a homestead near Sturgis and later moved to Hassan where he 

continued to farm until 1949. He was associated with several agricultural societies and took an 

active part in the organization of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most 

sincere sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I associate myself and my 

colleagues on this side of the House with the comments which the Premier has made with the expression 

of sympathy to the members of the families of these two former Members of the Legislature whom we 

recall today. Other Members who have known or who had contact with these men will want to add their 

comments as well. Mr. McClure represented a constituency in the northeastern part of the province. I did 

not know him either. He was a pioneer in more ways than one. We are reminded by the Premier’s 

remarks he was a pioneer in terms of farming occupation in the Province of Saskatchewan. He was also 

a pioneer with respect to political movements. He was, I understand, elected to represent the Progressive 

party when he first came to this Legislature in 1925. He was very much active in movements which one 

would suspect a pioneer person with those kind of feelings to be associated with. 



 

February 16, 1968 

 

 

12 

Dempster Heming was one with whom I sat in the House for a number of years. I certainly echo the 

comments made by the Premier with regard to his integrity, his sincerity, his wide interest at the level of 

the community and the province. He had a very deep sense of respect for the rights of people and he had 

some very keen feelings of the justice which people should have in times which he felt they didn’t have. 

He wasn’t a very frequent contributor to the debates of the Legislature, although, when he did speak, he 

did speak out of undeniable conviction and with considerable emotion and feelings, particularly with 

respect to the rights of people. May I join the Premier in the extending of sympathy to the members of 

Mr. Heming’s family and as well as to those of Mr. McClure. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like also to join this afternoon in 

associating myself with the remarks that have been made by the Premier and our Leader with respect to 

both Mr. McClure and Mr. Heming. I would like to expand of course with respect to Dempster Heming 

whom I knew very well and very intimately for twenty—seven years in all types of organizations, as 

well as members of his family. Everyone knows, I think, that Mr. Heming, with me, represented Moose 

Jaw City from 1956 to 1960, that he had previously sat to 1956 with the former Attorney General and 

CCF MLA for Moose Jaw City, J.W. Corman, Q.C. You heard something of Mr. Heming’s service as 

Moose Jaw alderman for a period of ten years, also that he was extremely well known in the city’s trade 

union movement. I think Mr. Heming, during the period that he was an alderman, sat on every city 

board, every committee and every city commission. He was constantly associated with local causes and 

organizations and particularly the cause for general reform. If any citizen had a problem he could always 

look upon Dempster Heming as the person who would try to get something done. You could always be 

sure that Dempster Heming would be one who would try to get it done, and he was, as has been 

suggested, especially zealous and considerate in the case of poor or necessitous citizens. As a member of 

the Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen, Mr. Heming worked first of all in the general office of the CPR 

at Moose Jaw and later as a yardman. He was not unnaturally sought out by trade union people on the 

railway, by employees on the railway. But he by no means confined himself to this employee area, so 

that both organized and unorganized labor people – all from Moose Jaw – came to depend upon him to a 

large degree for valuable advice and assistance during the many years that he was an alderman and a 

Member of the Legislature. 

 

Dempster found time all through his life to work not only in the elected offices but for his own union 

and for other labor organizations in Moose Jaw. He was an enthusiastic supporter of sports and 

recreation and he is especially well remembered in that connection around the Friendly City. One of the 

chief reasons why concerned his own large family. 

 

A number of his sons today work on the railways, following in his footsteps. During World War II, one 

of Dempster’s sons, 



 

February 16, 1968 
 

 

13 

George, lost his life in the services, a loss which was a source of great grief to the Heming family. There 

are six other sons, Philip of Calgary, Leonard of Regina, Dempster and James of Moose Jaw, Arthur of 

Vancouver, Alan of Swift Current, a sister, Mrs. Isabelle Pick in England, two brothers, Jack and 

George, also in England and fourteen grandchildren besides his wife, Katherine, who survives him. 

 

What isn’t as well known about Dempster is that he was one of the founders of the Labor Representative 

League in Moose Jaw in 1916, as well as of the local branch of the Labor Party in the following year. I 

think it could be said Dempster was a true grass—roots politician. During the sixteen years he sat as 

Moose Jaw MLA, he continued to faithfully look after the affairs of his constituents in the same way 

that he performed during the earlier terms of office on the city council. Everybody here, I’m sure, knows 

that there is a great deal of work that has to be done to keep political organizations functioning, and 

Dempster was one of those who did his very full share in seeing that this condition was assured. 

 

He was also one who liked to keep himself well informed, not just about local and provincial events but 

in a far wider area of interest. He read a good deal and he was a confirmed believer in world government 

to assure world peace, security and prosperity. He strongly believed, too, in the parliamentary system of 

government as the best form evolved to this time. Sixty—two of Dempster Heming’s eighty—two years 

were spent in Canada after he arrived in Canada on August 31, 1905, just the day before Saskatchewan 

because a Province. His service to Moose Jaw where he lived from 1912 (which was also the year of his 

marriage), to his death in 1967, as both the city and provincial levels of government, as well as in many 

other community activities that he was a part of was exemplary. A very sizeable contribution I think 

which, you will agree with me, will be recorded and long remembered. Mrs. Katherine Heming and her 

six sons and their families are justly proud of the contribution which he made and which we honor and 

observe here this afternoon. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add just a very few words to those 

that have already been expressed by others with respect to the passing of Mr. Dempster Heming. I had 

the good fortune to know Mr. Heming even prior to his election to this Legislature in 1944. He had been 

employed for many years by the Canadian Pacific Railway when I began my service with that company 

in 1943. I didn’t have the opportunity to serve with Mr. Heming in the Legislature, as I received the 

nomination following his retirement in 1960, but I knew him well and I was acquainted with most of the 

family, two of whom followed in their father’s footsteps and are presently working for the Canadian 

Pacific Railway in Moose Jaw. The Heming family was a closely knit family, and I know how deeply 

they fell the loss of the head of that family. The large gathering which attended the funeral to pay their 

last respect to Dempster Heming, I 



 

February 16, 1968 

 

 

14 

believe, gave a further indication of the high regard in which he was held in our community. Mr. 

Heming made a significant contribution to our city as a family man, as a trade unionist, as a member of 

Moose Jaw city council and as a legislator in the Province of Saskatchewan. Our community is the 

poorer for his passing, and I want also to express my sincere sympathy to his family at this time. 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself and the people I represent 

in this Assembly in expressing sympathy and paying tribute to the former MLAs who have died during 

the past year. I’d like to particularly direct my remarks to Mr. Joseph Albert McClure or Bert McClure 

as he was more commonly known. Mr. McClure served the Canora constituency during the term 1925 to 

1929. I had no person acquaintance with the McClure family but from conversation with some of the old 

times in the constituency, some interesting recollections were made. First of all I might say that Mr. and 

Mrs. McClure were pioneers of this province who contributed a good share of hard work and social 

service to the community. By occupation, Mr. McClure was a farmer in the Sturgis area until 1949. As a 

farmer he was a strong believer that, if agriculture is to develop into a significant industry in this 

province, representations are to be made and farmers are to speak for themselves through farm 

organizations. It was his close connection with the problems of the farmer that led Mr. McClure to enter 

provincial politics in 1925 as candidate of the Progressive party. His tremendous success in winning the 

election is indicative of his popularity as a farmers’ worker. If one had personal acquaintance with Mr. 

McClure, I’m sure that there is a lot more that could be said about the community contributions made by 

this aggressive and hardy pioneer. I’m pleased and feel honored to have had the opportunity of officially 

paying tribute to Mr. McClure. I would like to extend my sincere sympathy to Mrs. McClure and the rest 

of the family. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to what has been said 

by the Premier and by other Members in tribute to past Members. It was not my privilege to know Mr. 

McClure personally although I have heard his name mentioned in connection with farm programs. But it 

was my privilege to have known Mr. Heming quite well for some years, having been a colleague of his 

in this Legislature. I would just like to say that regarding the words expressed concerning him by the 

two Members from Moose Jaw, his activities in the labor movement, on the railroad and so on, I add my 

sentiments too. Mr. Heming was a man, who, while he was a member of the labor organizations, worked 

hard for labor unions. On many occasions he would also sit down with us as his colleagues in this 

Legislature and discuss farm problems. He deplored on many occasions a lack of income for the farmers 

because he felt that the farmers along with the laborers needed a better and stronger union. I am sure that 

any of us who knew Mr. Heming are that much richer for having enjoyed his acquaintance. I’m sure that 

he was a good husband, a good father and 



 

February 16, 1968 
 

 

15 

a good citizen of his district. He is a man that will be missed by all who knew him. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:30 o’clock p.m. 


