



















































Hansard: February 26, 1968


203 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Sixteenth Legislature 

8th Day 

 

Monday, February 26, 1968 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it‘s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all 

Hon. Members, 140 young citizens from Regina North West. This large group are in the east gallery and 

the west gallery. They are the grade 11 History class from Martin Collegiate. With the students are three 

History teachers, Mr. Shields, Mr. McGraw and Mr. Steininger. We are pleased that their visit here is 

included in this History course. All Members join me, I‘m sure, in extending a warm welcome to them 

and expressing the wish that their stay with us this afternoon will be pleasant and informative and 

educational. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a group of students from the 

Waldheim-Hepburn area. They have been touring the city here this afternoon and this morning. I‘m sure 

that we welcome them here in this House and that we hope their visit will be informative as well as 

educational and we wish them a safe journey home. I‘m sorry that I couldn‘t meet them before the 

House met but I will see to it that I will be at the door when they leave the Chamber. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, through you, I would like to 

introduce to the House, a class from Grosvenor Park school in Saskatoon who are now seated in the 

Speaker‘s gallery. They have been brought to this city by their teacher, Mrs. Quanne and I think we wish 

to take this opportunity of thanking Mrs. Quanne for taking such an interest in the welfare of her 

students. I‘m sure we all hope that these students will benefit from their stay in this House and will 

enjoy their visit to Regina and we wish them a safe trip to their homes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

SCHOOL CURLING CHAMPIONS 
 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

204 

draw the attention of the House to the outstanding record of the school boy curling champions of this 

province who had an outstanding time at the playdowns. These boys are from Aden Bowman collegiate, 

which is in my constituency and under the leadership of Skip Rick Folk were Neil Gallagher, Dave Folk 

and Jim Spinney and their coach, Mr. Bill Hamilton. They were successful in reaching the finals and as 

you know, unfortunately lost the final event, but I think they were very worthy and outstanding 

representatives of this province at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must apologize to the Member for Saskatoon Nutana Centre for not giving them the 

correct introduction when he rose to speak. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

BATTEN REPORT 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, may I ask the 

Premier – all the news reports have intimated that the Batten Commission Report has been delivered to 

the Government – if this information is accurate, if the copies of the Report therefore will be delivered 

to Members of the Legislature, and if so, how soon can this be done? 

 

Hon. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member will realize that this was a 

three-province investigation. I talked with Mr. Manning this morning and Mr. Weir. Mr. Weir had not 

yet received the Report although Mr. Manning had. This Government received it, I believe, on Friday. 

The Cabinet will be going over it during the coming seek. Then as soon as we can receive concurrence 

from the other two premiers as to a mutual date for release then all Members will receive a copy. I 

would hope it would be within a week or eight or nine days. 

 

RURAL TELEPHONE PROJECT IN SPIRITWOOD AREA 
 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Before the Orders of the Day, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the 

Minister in charge what progress is being made in the rural telephone project in the Spiritwood area. I 

understand the groundwork, as far as organization work, has been carried out, and I would like to know 

what the chances are that the project is going to go ahead? 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, may I say we have several projects that are 

going ahead this spring and I believe Spiritwood is one, but I would have to check with the Department 

to see, particularly, 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

205 

what stage the development is in at this time. I shall do that and give you the information. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. D.A. McPherson (Regina 

South West) for an Address-in-Reply and the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. W.S. Lloyd 

(Leader of the Opposition). 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned debate, Friday last, I had said most of 

the nice things that one says in congratulating all the Members. I congratulated those who had made 

their maiden speech and went on and talked about the delivery of the mover and the seconder. But one 

thing I failed to do, which I would like to do now, and that is to express my sympathy to the new 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). The Member for Prince Albert West takes over a very bad mess left 

by the previous Provincial Treasurer over a period of four years . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — . . . I‘m sure he must be in a very tough and sad position. 

 

I want to also take the opportunity of thanking those people of Touchwood constituency who returned 

me on election night to this Legislature. I want to especially thank those people who worked so terribly 

hard in the organization to make the defeat of the Liberal MLA a certainty. On election night, Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier of the Province came on TV. He was discussing the loss of his two Cabinet 

Ministers, the Member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner) and the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Trapp). It 

seemed to me that night he laid the blame on the Indian people. He said he couldn‘t understand why they 

had not voted Liberal because of all the things that this Government had done for them. I want to say 

that, in my opinion, and in the opinion of many Indians, this was an insult. In fact the Indians of the 

Qu‘Appelle Valley asked the Premier, I believe, to apologize at one given time. You know, I want to 

point out this, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn‘t only the Indians of Touchwood that voted against the Liberal 

Government and a Liberal MLA. All you have to do is look at the returns of Touchwood constituency 

and in practically every poll, the Liberals lost votes. Indeed you could take any three of a whole number 

of polls and the majority given to myself under the CCF was as large as, or larger than those given by 

the three Indian reserves. As usual the Premier open his mouth and put his foot in it. Certainly more 

Indians worked in that election than had ever worked before, and the Premier wonders why. I‘d like to 

tell him. The Liberal candidate in 1964 promised to the Indian people the moon and the stars and 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

206 

the whole universe, and it seemed to me it was all dressed up in strawberries and whipped cream. And 

by 1967, the Indians realized that this was another, in what they would call, a mooneass lie. In case 

somebody doesn‘t know what mooneass means, it means a white man‘s lie. They have been used to this 

for a hundred years. In 1964, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal candidate promised the Indians power on all the 

reserves, and on October 11, 1967, the power wasn‘t there. In 1964, he promised telephones to all the 

Indian reserves; and by the fall of 1967, there were no telephones. He promised them roads, and the only 

roads that were built were by the Federal Government, and there wasn‘t very many of those built. The 

Liberal Member promised the Indians of the Standing Buffalo that the Highway No. 35 would go from 

Lipton, through past the Sioux Bridge and bypass the town of Fort Qu‘Appelle. 

 

It seems to me though, Mr. Speaker, that the main reason that the Indians didn‘t vote Liberal was 

because of the Premier himself, quoting from the Globe and Mail of May 12, 1966, said that they bred 

like rabbits. And certainly I know, in my travels through the reserves, how many Indians mentioned this 

to me and said, ―He compares us to animals.‖ And I note his remarks the other day in the House in 

which he referred to the explosive birth rate on the Indian reserve as being one of the greatest. I want to 

point out to him, and I want to point out to this House, that if there‘s an explosive birth rate on Indian 

reserves, the main reason is because of the white man, the white man that sneaks on to those reserves in 

the middle of the night . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — . . . and the Premier wonders why. This is right, Mr. Speaker, this is the reason for the 

big explosion. Now don‘t get me wound up on it. The Indian people are not that stupid. They knew that 

there was money being spent on these marble floors out here, and they knew that the Premier had an 

exclusive airplane. He even came out to Touchwood constituency in a helicopter, he dropped down into 

the centre of them. They knew that there was money for this kind of spending, but they saw there was no 

money spent for them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — But it wasn‘t only the Indian people, Mr. Speaker, who voted against the Liberals. Let 

us look all across the constituency. 

 

First of all I would like to look at the hospital situation. First of all the hospital situation in Ituna, in 

1964, the Liberal candidate, two days before the election, stood on a platform and promised a new brick 

hospital within 18 months. He went further; he claimed that if a CCF Government was elected that we 

would close that hospital because of the Hospital Report of 1963 which said it was due for conversion in 

1970. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

207 

The people of Ituna and I too, after listening to the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) trying to chop off 

eight other small hospitals, are now wondering what‘s going to happen to the Ituna hospital. Mind you, 

they have been assured that it will be built, and understand that plans are made to build in the spring. It‘s 

too small for a community, a town of 1,300 and I ask the Minister if there is going to be any action in 

Ituna? There‘s money for wrecking these walls that we see going on every day in the corridors here. 

That should be money for people first and for things afterwards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Let us look at the Lestock hospital situation, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I must review the 

history of this hospital. In 1935 a few of the sisters of the Order of the Grey Sisters of the Immaculate 

Conception moved into Lestock and started a hospital in an old manse, and through those bad years they 

turned nobody away. The sick were looked after. In 1957, the hospital was expanded to 24 beds and 

again as the community grew, the Department of Health in 1962 okayed an expansion of another further 

ten beds plus a nurses‘ residence. But because, Mr. Speaker, the same Order also operates a hospital in 

Esterhazy, in your constituency, Sir, because of the exploding population at Esterhazy, they decided to 

build the Esterhazy hospital first. But I want to point out to this House that, by 1964, all plans were 

complete to go ahead with the Lestock hospital. But what happens in 1965? We find out that plans must 

be changed. And now there‘s to be no nurses‘ residence. And now a letter comes out from the 

Department and says that arrangements are being made for a union hospital, a union hospital, I 

understand that the Sisters are supposed to run. All I hope is that this works out. But these Sisters have 

hospitals all over Canada and in other parts of the world. And if it comes to the time when there‘s a 

disagreement between the hospital board and the Sisters, that we may well lose them. I certainly hope 

not. 

 

It looks to me, Mr. Speaker, that this is the way this Government is acting. They are trying to get rid of 

small hospitals and certainly there‘s a shortage of all hospital beds in the cities. I can find people from 

my own community that have been waiting three and four months. And here we have a hospital in 

Lestock which serves three Indian reserves. It covers a large area for the maternity cases and the 

accidents and above all, Mr. Speaker, one of the greatest things about this hospital is that, when people 

are on their last days and are dying, they don‘t have to lie in a hospital a hundred miles from the family, 

but they are sent back to the hospital where their loved ones can visit them every day. 

 

I must put on the records what these Sisters have meant to my family, myself, the community and 

hundreds like me. We owe them a debt of gratitude that money can never repay. It seems to me that this 

Government has betrayed the people of that area, 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

208 

betrayed the Sisters, by not letting that original plan go ahead. Here we have dedicated women, ready to 

serve and they are being curtailed because of lack of action by this Government. And I say again, there‘s 

money for four-lane highways from Saskatoon to Regina or from Regina to Swift Current, but 

apparently they have to cut down on the money for hospitals. It might pay to put on the records, Mr. 

Speaker, what some of these Ministers across the way were saying a year or so ago about small 

hospitals. The Member for Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) said on February 23, 1967: 

 

As we took office, we sat down with the hospital authorities and established a better spirit of 

co-operation. By working with these people we have been able to improve standards, slow down 

the rate of cost increase and by this combined effort, we have preserved the hospitals in the rural 

areas that the NDP were going to close down. Some of these that come to mind are a few in my 

own are in the province, such as, Qu‘Appelle, Montmartre, Maryfield, and Lampman. 

 

Lampman closed, Maryfield and the others would be too, if the Minister of Health had not had so much 

opposition in recent weeks from those areas. 

 

I want to go on, Mr. Speaker, with what‘s going on in Touchwood. The people in Touchwood through 

the years were used to seeing Governments doing things. The CCF Government brought natural gas 

from Fort San to Cupar, and it was on the program of the Power Corporation for 1965 from Ituna to 

Raymore. And in 1964, the Liberal candidate and myself both promised natural gas in 1965; another 

broken promise of the Liberals – still no gas. There is money again, as I say, for the other things that 

I‘ve mentioned, the marble walls and the four-lane highways. Last fall during the election the Liberal 

candidate was promising natural gas for 1968. I certainly hope that this is one promise that this 

Government will fulfil. The people there deserve natural gas as do other areas, and they deserve it on the 

same plan as the rest of Saskatchewan and should not have to pay more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Let us go on and look at farmers and agriculture. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that never 

have the farmers of Touchwood worked as hard to defeat a Liberal candidate as they did in 1967. Again 

the farmers went out and defeated them. After the Liberal candidate had promised everything possible in 

1964, he won the election, and I went home, as I said the other day, and became a private citizen. After I 

was nominated again I started travelling; it didn‘t matter, Mr. Speaker, whether I was travelling in the 

good farm land from Cupar through to Lipton or whether I crossed over the Touchwood Hills to 

Punnichy and from there through to Goodeve or whether I went into the Beaverhills area and through to 

Jedburgh, there was no 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

209 

difference. The small farmer is being pushed out – in one area, over a 30 per cent decrease in three 

years, a mass exodus from the farms. As I said yesterday, I realize there‘s going to be fewer farms. But 

there was no adequate training for those people who are leaving the farms to meet the problems of an 

urban society. In fact in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals are glad to see them go. The question I 

ask all Members of this House – and I think it‘s a serious question – Who are going to be the farmers in 

the next generation? Why are going to be the farmers? Who is going to take over the land in the next 

fifteen years from now? Certainly, there are people on the farm now who average 50 or better. Their 

sons and daughters have left the farm because of conditions and I think this is one of the problems that 

we are going to have to face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look at education. Once again there were more teachers who worked to defeat the 

Liberals in Touchwood than ever before, and this was the Minister of Education (Mr. Trapp). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I might suggest to the new Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac), you‘d better pull up 

your socks and do a bit better than the last one did or you‘ll get the same medicine as the last one got in 

Touchwood. School units were forced to cut back construction, cut back on education as well. And I 

want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that it is the children who suffer when school construction is cut back 

and education is cut back, it‘s not this Government in its ivory towers and it‘s not us, but it‘s the 

children themselves. Units were forced to raise their mill rates. Why? Because of inadequate grants. 

What happened then was that the school unit boards got in trouble with the rural municipalities because 

the rural municipalities were the ones that had to collect the tax. No wonder the Premier wonders why. 

 

Let us look at the rural municipalities. Again, I had more councillors working for me than ever before. 

The Liberals have much to say about unconditional grants, but I‘d like to point out to this House, Mr. 

Speaker, that in 1959-60, the Government gave $5,845,000 towards grid roads. The grid road program is 

finished now. The Estimates for grants for 1967-68 were only $5,500,000. This was the reason why it 

was able to increase the unconditional grants, because it was not spending the money on grid road 

programs. What‘s happened all through my constituency? Farmers are forced to move to the villages, 

because the roads from the grid roads to their farms are inadequate, and because the children have to go 

to school. They are just sick of shovelling or plowing snow. Municipalities have been forced to raise 

their taxes. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to look at (I‘ll take as an example), the rural municipality of 

Garry No. 245 where the mill rate from 1959 to 1964 remained stable at 35 mills. In 1964 to 1967 it 

went up to 42 mills, and the council now feels that this coming year it is going to 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

210 

have to raise it another three mills. 

 

Let us look just for a moment what this means to a taxpayer, a man owning a half section with an 

assessment of $5,850. His taxes in 1963 were $427, and by 1965 they had increased to $468.69 and by 

1966 they had increased to $512.71, that‘s an increase from 1963 to 1966 of $92.64. The farmers of that 

area say that it would have been better if they‘d never got the homeowner grant and kept giving the 

municipalities money to keep that mill rate down. No wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the people turned 

against the Liberal MLA and the Liberal Government. And the Premier wonders why. 

 

Let us look, Mr. Speaker, at the youth of my constituency. Again, I never saw such a group of dedicated 

people. I want here and now to say, ―Thank you for the dedication and the hard work that the youth put 

into the election.‖ They made posters, they put them up, they delivered literature, they campaigned from 

house to house, they did everything that anybody else would do, and then if somebody else wouldn‘t do 

it, they did it. Why did they do this? They did it because they knew university fees were up, they knew 

the limitations in the enrolments of the universities, they knew the autocratic attitudes of a Liberal 

Government. And I want to say here and now that the youth were tired of being pushed around. 

Wherever I go the young folks were laughing at the Youth Caravan. They considered it a joke. I think 

it‘s only natural, Mr. Speaker, that most of our youth are more idealistic, and they didn‘t buy this 

materialism off the Liberal party. 

 

At this point also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to put some other figures on the records of this House. I 

have here in my hand a document authorized by the Touchwood Liberal Association. This is a 1964 

piece of campaign literature. They say on this for a family of four in Saskatchewan, taxes are: provincial 

$416, municipal $428, for a total of $844 and then they go on and say in the next line, ―Keep 

Saskatchewan ahead, is deep in the heart of taxes.‖ Pretty smart. But let us look at these figures today, 

four years later. The provincial taxes based on four people, an average of four are $766.56. Municipal 

taxes have gone up to $535.76. This makes a total tax for a family of four, $1,302.32. This is $458.32 

more than it was four years ago. If we were deep in the heart of taxes in 1964, Mr. Speaker, we must be 

deep in the realms in that place we can‘t mention in this House, but in which it would be even warmer 

than it is here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Come back, Mr. Speaker, to what happened to the people of Touchwood. The women 

of Touchwood certainly never worked before to elect a CCF candidate as they did this time. I ask you 

why, I can tell you why. The answer is fear, fear of losing Medicare. These are the people who have to 

worry about their 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

211 

children and they have to worry about what would happen, if we did lose our Medicare, or if we did get 

a deterrent fee or a sickness fee, as it sure sounds like it in the Speech from the Throne. These are the 

worries of these mothers. 

 

The next thing they‘re worried about is the high cost of living. Certainly this Government has done 

nothing about this except to have an unreported Commission. Pardon me, I guess it is reported as of this 

weekend, but certainly unreported until then. The ladies of Touchwood were weary, weary of no action 

on two hospitals. They were weary about what they would do when their loved ones are sick, if these 

hospitals are closed. They were sick of nice words and no action. They worried about their children 

getting to university and the costs, and then the Premier wonders why Touchwood turned against him. 

 

Let us look, Mr. Speaker, at the urban centres of Touchwood. The businessmen came out and voted New 

Democrat this time more than ever before. Why? Because when agriculture suffers, our small 

businessmen suffer. When the returns from agriculture are small, business is small. Taxes are up and 

services are down. In 1963 the previous Government started a program of dust-freeing streets. As far as 

Touchwood is concerned, the Liberals slowed it down, they never did anything. 

 

I want to point out to this House that the costs of this program to the small villages and towns are just 

too expensive for the smaller centres. I suggest that the Premier live in one of these villages for a few 

months and eat the dust every day. He wouldn‘t wonder anymore why the people of Touchwood didn‘t 

vote Liberal. I say again there was money for four-lane highways. The priority is more important for 

four-lane highways than it is to build roads to farmers‘ homes, so that they may have an all-weather 

road. 

 

One thing, Mr. Speaker, that I must mention is the report that was tabled in the House the other day, the 

Frazier Report on Mental Health. If the Government had listened to the CCF MLAs two or three years 

ago, it wouldn‘t have to have this Commission, it wouldn‘t have to have this Report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — All I hope is that the Government acts on this Report. There are some terrible 

indictments in this Report. I am only going to deal with a couple of them. I am now quoting from the 

Report on page 21: 

 

After visiting and reviewing the in-patient facilities we have concluded that discharge criteria 

were not consistent, uniform, predictable, nor did we see any written criteria. Considering all of 

the in-patient facilities together, discharge did not appear to be related in any consistent manner 

to the age of the patient, the amount and the type of psychopathology, the adaptive and coping 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

212 

capacities of the patient. The availability of community therapists, the opinion of the referring 

physicians, the opinion or the wishes of families, etc. 

 

I know of cases in Touchwood constituency where sick ones were moved back to their parents and to 

their families. Without even discussing it with them they received a letter saying they will be coming 

home. To me, this, Mr. Speaker, is a terrible indictment of the lack of feeling for human beings. 

 

Just the other day when I was speaking in the House, Mr. Speaker, I referred to what I felt was the 

neglect of this Government in terms of what it was doing for agriculture. I would like to say a few more 

words about it. In 1964 this Liberal party went out and promised – I don‘t know how many – thousands 

of different things, but one of the things they promised was to work to aid in diversifying farming for 

promoting expansion of the livestock industry. As I gave the statistics the other day, I‘m not going to go 

on to reproduce the figures on the records again because they are on Friday‘s records. But certainly the 

records were proof that practically in every phase of the agricultural industry or livestock industry that 

there has been a reduction, in the population. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) as I said the 

other day, was in the shadow Cabinet prior to 1964 and he was always yelling in this House about what 

a Liberal Government would do to assist agriculture. Well surely he must have been neither in the 

Cabinet nor in the Caucus in the last three and one half years, or if he was, he wasn‘t making himself 

very clear and very loud. 

 

I want to say again that we‘re in a hungry world. The world today is hungry, except our western nations. 

This Department of Agriculture in Saskatchewan, as well as the Department of Agriculture in Canada 

should have as one of the main objectives, and as one of the main things it should be remembering that 

we have a hungry world and that people are going to continue to get hungrier. The problem must be 

solved. If we don‘t within a few years, Mr. Speaker, those hungry people in the other parts of the world 

are liable to come over here and take it from us. We haven‘t many years left to go. Mr. Speaker, from 

what I have said this afternoon, this Speech from the Throne that we had presented to us, has nothing in 

it to solve the ills and problems that I mentioned that are in Touchwood constituency. Absolutely 

nothing! For this reason I will not be supporting the motion but will be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, in rising today to participate in the Throne Speech 

debate I would first like to express my sincere thanks to the people of the Moosomin constituency for 

returning me to this Legislature in the recent election. I believe that the people of Moosomin are 

generally pleased with the present Government. They are happy with: the homeowner grants, land 

clearing grants, hog barn grants, lighted school 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

213 

house grants, snow removal and grid road maintenance grants and many of the other new programs 

started by this Government. They appreciate the improved health services; the new nursing home just 

opened in Moosomin, the new hostel just opened in Grenfell, the approval for an addition to Broadview 

hospital. 

 

I congratulate the local people for the efforts they have made to get these services, and I hope that 

something can also be done in this regard at Whitewood, our other major town. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) spent a good deal of his speech the other 

day doubting the existence of new industry in this province. I realize that he may not be seeing too much 

in Moose Jaw, as I understand that city is acquiring a country-wide reputation of being a tough place for 

industry because of the attitude of local organized labor. 

 

However, we have a new $70 million potash mine under way in Moosomin and I am not talking about 

something just in the planning stage. The railroad is under construction and work is being done at the 

mine site. Manitoba tried desperately to attract this mine to their province to get a start in potash. We are 

pleased that our Liberal Government was able to convince these people that the Socialists were gone for 

good . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — . . . the political climate was favorable to industry, and we are happy that the mine site 

was established a few miles on our side of the border. 

 

Now I plan to speak briefly on education. I hope that what I have to say will generate more light than 

heat. In the past few months some aspects of education have received more publicity in this province 

than at any time in our history. We all know that education all over Canada faces substantial problems, 

but the amazing fact is, Mr. Speaker, that none of the diatribes we are currently being subjected to has 

had anything to do with the basic problem facing education. We have heard a great deal about crisis in 

education, academic freedom, lengthy arguments on financing, and dire predictions of strikes and loss of 

teaching personnel. 

 

Now good education should be of concern to all and I suppose it is inevitable; but it‘s unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, that some groups and individuals should use these issues for political purposes, for personal 

reasons or simply to get their names in the paper. 

 

For those genuinely concerned with education the past few months have been a trying time. We have 

seen a period of time when the Government and responsible University officials have been meeting and 

working together to better understand their respective problems. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

214 

The Government has to cope with the problem of raising vastly increased sums for the Universities, both 

for capital and operating grants. And when the Government asks the taxpayers of this province for this 

money, as a responsible Government, it wants to be able to assure the people that these sums are being 

spent to the best advantage. For this reason the Government wants to know how the money is being 

spent, but at the same time it doesn‘t want to interfere in any way with the internal operations of the 

University. 

 

Unfortunately on each campus we have a small minority of staff and students who have used this issue 

as an excuse to attack the Government and the Premier, to get personal publicity, and all in the name of 

academic freedom. Now this is a popular slogan, Mr. Speaker, and professional protestors have made 

use of this banner to recruit a certain amount of support for their own purposes. By their actions they 

have clearly shown that they are much more interested in perpetuating the issues than in terminating 

them. They enjoy the alleged problems and are disappointed when it became clear that any issues which 

may have existed would be resolved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that I have more reason than most to be concerned about maintaining university 

integrity, reputation and academic freedom. I was born in this province and I got my education here. I 

entered university at Saskatoon and interrupted my training there for three years to serve in the Air 

Force. I returned to that University and graduated in Engineering. I took additional training at the 

University of Saskatchewan and I taught there for some 11 years. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, as a Member of this Legislature, I represent a large group of Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. So I doubt if any or many can claim an interest in the University for a greater number of 

reasons. I would be the first to object if I thought there was any threat to the University. I feel as 

competent as anyone to judge just what constitutes a threat to academic freedom and at no time, Mr. 

Speaker, in the past three or four months have I felt this threat did exist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, I think you can understand my feelings about some newcomer to our 

province or our University, who may be here simply because we offered him more money and may be 

gone next year, when some other university offers him more, or about some left-wing student agitator 

who can hardly wait to get his degree, so he can take off for the United States or Eastern Canada. When 

people of this type make a lot of noise about academic freedom at their university, I think we are 

certainly justified in suspecting their motives. 

 

From some of the articles in the student newspapers and even letters in our own daily papers it is 

obvious that many of these people have used the controversy for their own ends. I would 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

215 

like to just give you an example. Mr. Speaker, we have about 3,000 students on the Regina campus and 

we have several hundred more on the staff. There are about 135,000 in the city of Regina, and as 

everyone knows an attempt was recently made to convince these people that a crisis existed at the 

University. A well-planned and well-publicized meeting in the Met Theatre with a few imported big 

name entertainers attracted a mere 300 or 400 people, and most of these were simply disgusted later by 

the tone of the meeting. After all, Mr. Speaker, we can get 20,000 people out to a Sunday afternoon 

football game! So can we say that the students and the citizens who stayed away from this meeting by 

the thousands were unconcerned about education? Not so, Mr. Speaker. The truth of the matter is that 

they just did not believe that a crisis existed or that there was any threat to education or university 

autonomy, and they refused to let themselves be used by unscrupulous individuals for political or for 

other purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going into details on University-Government relations, however, I would like to 

make a few general comments. I would first like to commend Dr. Spinks and the Board of Governors for 

the fine manner in which they acted in spite of a good deal of provocation from the University staff and 

students, and I suspect some provocation from the Government. Dr. Spinks, in particular, acted at all 

times like the true gentleman that he is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — The people of this province and especially the academic community owe him a great 

deal s it was largely through his efforts that mutual understanding was arrived at. I had feared that the 

fine art of British diplomacy was perhaps dead and gone, but his performance has restored my faith. The 

Board of Governors are a group of distinguished public-spirited citizens who give freely of their 

valuable time, and they should also be commended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard a great deal about academic freedom and no doubt we are 

going to hear a great deal more. Now just what is academic freedom or for that matter, just what is a 

university? I can assure you the definitions are not nearly as simple as you might imagine. 

 

On the campus there are perhaps two concepts of what a university consists of. We have group one who 

say that it is a place to go to create, meditate, to do research and to philosophize. We have group two 

who say that it is a place to train young people to do the professional jobs required in our society and our 

economy, to provide us with the engineers, the lawyers, nurses, doctors and teachers who are so badly 

needed. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

216 

There is probably a need on a campus for some members of group one, but I can tell you that a province 

or a government that gets a majority of group one is in trouble. 

 

Many of you have heard about the Regina campus case of the missing hippy prof. Here we have an 

individual who was hired by the University last fall to teach a class in English Literature. He was a true 

hippy – he was unshaven, unkempt and unusual, to say the least. He turned his office into a typical hippy 

pad. He wore old clothes and lectured to his students while standing in the pool in front of the university 

buildings. He often failed to show up for classes at all and many students either dropped his English 240 

class or stayed home as they were getting nothing from the course. 

 

No doubt, Mr. Speaker, you are asking yourself this question. Why did the head of the English 

Department or the Dean of Arts and Science not do something about this? Presumably they didn‘t want 

to interfere with this man‘s academic freedom. I am sure they were well aware of his actions and by 

doing nothing it appears that the University and perhaps even the Government condones this sort of 

thing. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that this man was not fired but quit on his own accord without notice, 

and was back in Missouri before the university officials knew he was gone, leaving his students deserted 

in mid-term. I mention the above, Mr. Speaker, only to show you what academic freedom can mean in 

an extreme case. 

 

I will agree that it is difficult to say whether or not the people of Saskatchewan, through their elected 

Members, should have any influence on decisions made within a university. But many of these 

decisions, Mr. Speaker, directly affect the taxpayer. There are many examples of this and I would like to 

cite just one for your consideration. 

 

At the present time there are something over 400 foreign students on the Saskatoon campus alone. Most 

of these are from the Far East and most of them are taking post-graduate work. These are the students 

that are by far the most expensive to educate because graduate classes are very small, often three or four 

in a class; they require the attention of the senior and the highly paid professor and they require much 

more expensive facilities. Various estimates have been made, but I would suggest that a graduate student 

would take at least the time and facilities of four or five junior undergrads. So this means that these 

foreign students are costing the Saskatchewan taxpayer perhaps $2 to $3 million per year, and they are 

taking up the time and facilities equal to perhaps fifteen hundred undergrads. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at a time when our University is faced with massive increases in enrolment and the 

accompanying problems of providing the necessary staff and facilities, and at a time when we are short 

of teachers, nurses, dentists, etc., in our own province, are we justified in utilizing these scarce staff and 

facilities to train so large a group of foreign students 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

217 

rather than train an additional 1,500 of the sons and the daughters of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. To 

carry this a but further, Mr. Speaker, if the Government of the day – and this could be any Government – 

was concerned about turning away 1,500 of our own students, and provided the university with another 

$2 or $3 million, under the present system university officials could take this money, bring in another 

400 foreign students and still limit the enrolment in first year nursing or education, if they so desired. 

 

I am not giving you this example as a criticism of our university policy regarding foreign students, but 

merely to indicate how internal university decisions can affect our taxpayers and our economy. 

 

I am not going to make comparisons about how much we spend on the University compared to the 

former Government. I think they did a reasonably good job for the University, and I would like to think 

we are doing much better. Nor am I going to quote a lot of figures to indicate how our University is 

financed. These are futile arguments and you can juggle the figures any way you like, as the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) tried to do the other day, but you are not going to fool the Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. You might confuse them about academic freedom or universal accessibility or some other 

favorite campus topic, but not when it comes to dollars and cents, and the Leader of the Opposition 

should know this as well as anyone. 

 

We are no longer a have-not Province, Mr. Speaker, we get nothing from Ottawa that doesn‘t come from 

here in the first place. University costs have increased tremendously in the past few years and the $30 

odd million we are now spending comes ultimately from one source, and that‘s the pocket of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — Now a word or two may be in order regarding tuition fees. As you know tuition fees 

provide about 25 per cent of the operating costs of the University. Under the Socialist Government in 

1959-60 for example, the student paid a little over 26 per cent and the Government about 73 per cent. In 

the present academic year the student is paying less than 20 per cent and the Government over 80 per 

cent. The student pays less now than he did under the previous Government and he still pays one of the 

lowest rates in Canada. 

 

A university education, Mr. Speaker, is a bargain today for any young person. No other group is in such 

a preferred position in our society. If a young man wants to get a university degree as an asset with 

which to make his living, the taxpayers 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

218 

of Saskatchewan will pay about 80 per cent of the cost of this asset. 

 

An Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — However, if he wants to start a business, buy a farm or some other enterprise, he must 

pay the full cost himself. And often the university graduate picks up his degree, which ahs cost our 

taxpayers something over $5,000 and leaves this province to live elsewhere, while the young farmer or 

laborer who has received no government subsidy stays here in this province to pay his taxes and to 

contribute to our economy. 

 

I am sure that no one in this House wants to see any qualified student barred from the university for 

financial reasons and I‘m also sure, Mr. Speaker, that with the assistance available today no qualified 

student is barred. In the recent University controversy, I fear that some of the general public may have 

been impressed by the statements of certain faculty members simply because of their position or 

academic degrees. A doctor‘s degree in History or Sociology or English may make a person an expert in 

that particular field, but doesn‘t necessarily qualify him as an expert in some other field. 

 

Now I would like to discuss fully some of the real problems facing us in education, but time permits 

only to mention them briefly for your consideration. First of all in large areas of Saskatchewan we are 

offering our young people what amounts to only one choice in education. We say, either you get the 

academic grade 12 offered, which is essentially a university entrance standard, or you become a dropout 

and accept the stigma that this implies. Obviously all young people are not suited to obtain this academic 

grade 12 and we are being unfair to them in many cases. 

 

Secondly, in spite of tremendous sums spent on teacher training and education research, the quality of 

education in our schools often seems to be deteriorating. Students enter university in many cases unable 

to spell, write or compose a decent paragraph. Like most Members, I received a good deal of mail from 

teachers in recent weeks and one I thought was typical of this particular problem. One lady teacher in 

my constituency wrote me about her concern for maintaining high teaching standards and she had three 

spelling mistakes in a few short lines. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency we have one of the largest concentrations of Indian people 

in Saskatchewan. In the town of Broadview there are 116 Indian children in elementary grades and only 

nine in high school. In Whitewood there are 16 in elementary grades and only one in high school. While 

there are 125 Indian students in the Broadview school, only one has ever graduated from grade 12. The 

ratio here is then about 13 in public school to one in high school. The provincial average is about four in 

public school to one in high school. The Indian children are bright, intelligent youngsters, but 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

219 

some motivation must be provided to keep them in school. We talk of utilizing our natural resources and 

here is one of our most valuable natural resources, Mr. Speaker, left virtually untapped. And this is a 

situation that none of us should be proud of. 

 

These problems I have briefly referred to did not originate with our Government nor with the previous 

one. They are problems which should be above politics and which we should all work together to solve. 

And I am sure that these problems will get the attention of this Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I would just like to offer a word of reassurance and consolation to the citizens of 

this province. I hope that the general public is not too concerned about the statements from some of our 

university staff and students, because this concern could well be the real threat to our University. There 

always seems to be a small group of radicals, extreme left-wingers and various other assorted oddballs 

who get all the attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — They often get key jobs on the campus papers and student councils, and we tend to be 

overly concerned about the future because of their statements. You can take a bum off the street, Mr. 

Speaker, provide him with a university education and you may just end up with an educated bum. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gardner: — However, I would like to assure you that the reasonable majority of University 

students are decent, reasonable, hardworking, young citizens who are genuinely concerned about the 

future of our country and our society, and most of the staff are also in this category. I suggest that we 

should all take time off some day, Mr. Speaker, to talk to some of these people and it will restore our 

faith in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of what I have said, I think it is obvious that I will support the motion but not the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, as the newly elected Member from Watrous 

constituency, I would like to join with the other Members of this House in offering my congratulations 

to you on your re-election to the high office of Speaker. I know you will continue to rule in a fair and 

impartial manner throughout your new term of office. It is with warmth and sincerity that I greet and 

congratulate our Premier and the other Members of this House. I also take this opportunity to 

congratulate my colleagues as 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

220 

mover and seconder of the Address-in-Reply. 

 

As most Members of this House already know, Watrous constituency has been under the guidance of the 

Opposition for the past 25 years. In many ways it was like a people lost in the desert . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Schmeiser: — . . . a voice crying in the wilderness. Finally, after 25 years they have seen the pillar 

of fire and have been led through the desert to the promised land of milk and honey. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Schmeiser: — As the Hon. Member from Hanley (Mr. Heggie) has indicated, it has been a turning 

of central Saskatchewan to a new future, a new hope. This is a sign that our people recognize that the 

development of our natural resources is the concern of the Liberal party, a development that must be 

entrusted to a party that has awakened the potentialities that had been dormant for so long under the 

reign of the Socialists. Mr. Speaker, as a new Member from the Watrous constituency . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — New generation. 

 

Mr. Schmeiser: — . . . I would like to express my appreciation to the people, not by verbal utterances, 

but by a constant concern for the problems and well-being, not only of this generation but of the 

generation to follow. My concern will not only be for their material well-being, but will also be a 

concern for that which is of more importance, a concern for their rights, so that the ordinary, common 

person will never be considered unimportant or of no value. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been blessed in the constituency of Watrous with great potash resources. These 

are already being developed, are offering job opportunities to our youth and are adding greatly to the 

economy of this area. The increased population and wealth are giving new life to our towns and 

gradually are introducing a new pattern of living. The future development of our water resources, the 

system of reservoirs and canals will add greatly to the development of our area. It will be an inducement 

to the establishment of new industries, it will provide for the development of greatly needed recreational 

sites. It will be the answer to the many problems faced by towns without a good water supply. It is 

difficult to evaluate at this point the importance of a constant source of fresh water, but the future years 

will prove the value of our concern in this field, a concern that will greatly benefit all the people of our 

area. In particular, the level of the water in Manitou Lake will be raised and maintained, thus providing 

for the future development of an already existing health and recreational centre that 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

221 

was a victim of fluctuating water levels. Planning can now proceed with the assurance of a maintained 

water level, the assurance that is required for long-range planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, constant consideration must be given to roads in our farming communities, roads that 

permit passage during all the seasons of the year. In general, our farm roads are greatly in need of 

improvement and development throughout our area. The present program of providing farm access roads 

must continue to increase, and the standards must be maintained, if we are to aid in the development and 

future of all our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, up to this point I have mentioned a few of the material concerns of our people. Now I 

would like to manifest my concern for values that cannot be measured in dollars and cents. We must 

always be aware of the needs of our senior citizens, the men and women who pioneered this country and 

provided us with the opportunities that are presently ours. I am most happy to be able to state that in the 

Watrous constituency there are senior citizens‘ homes in Watrous and Middle Lake, and that another is 

being constructed in Cudworth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a Member of this Legislative body and as a father of a young family, I am very 

interested in the opportunities for youth in this province. This interest extends to all phases of their lives. 

This interest will include educational, industrial, agricultural and recreational development. However, 

the most important concern that we can have is that our Province will show in its policies a concern and 

respect for people; that people will always be placed ahead of dollars . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Schmeiser: — . . . that our Province will always guard and promote the rights and dignity of the 

ordinary man. This concern, Mr. Speaker, has already been shown during the past year in the following 

Acts: 1) The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act which provides payment of compensation to persons 

injured by crimes of violence; 2) The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act which provides for clear information 

about the cost of credit; 3) The Unconscionable Transaction Relief Act which allows the courts to 

renegotiate loans where the transaction is harsh or unconscionable. However, this concern must be 

continued in forwarding this principle that every person is free and equal in dignity and rights without 

respect to race, creed, color, nationality, ancestry or place of origin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency that I represent is composed of people of many creeds and places of 

origin. We must always remain vigilant in developing a society that will not suppress but will enhance 

the richness of each ethnic group and thus bring about a greater society. We must remain vigilant that 

our province be free of prejudice and discrimination, whether this comes from individuals, companies, 

the Legislature or the judicial body. Mr. Speaker, it is impossible for the common man to protect himself 

alone in this complex society of ours. It is of 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

222 

the utmost importance that qualified and trained men be commissioned to guard and further the 

recognition of the inherent dignity and the equal and unquestionable rights of all people of our province. 

This, Mr. Speaker, will be the foundation of our future development. This will be the province where the 

rights of the individual comes first, where the material development of man will not lead to his 

destruction but to his betterment. 

 

The Speech from the Throne has indicated policies directed towards the achievement of this end. I, 

therefore, urge this House to adopt the motion before it and defeat the amendment. I will vote 

accordingly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F.K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, it does give me a great deal of pride, and it is a real 

privilege for me, to again serve the people of the Nipawin constituency. Today I am proud to represent a 

Government which is going to make again a major contribution to Saskatchewan welfare, to the 

economy, and to the advancement of the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, to you I wish to express 

the appreciation and support of the people of the Nipawin constituency for their continued support and 

their faith in me to serve them. While, of course, my majority is somewhat of a limited nature and of 

course my tenure in this Legislature could be temporary, as long as I am here I am going to serve the 

people of my constituency . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — . . . to the best of my ability and to do everything possible to make it a better place to 

live. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Talk fast! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Now, many people accuse our Government of moving too fast. I am quite amused by a 

comment the other day from the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) when he called this 

a pussy-cat Government, because certainly the actions we have taken so far would not indicate that type 

of action. And of course, the Member from Saskatoon Riversdale had a number of rather amusing 

sayings, ―chug-chug Government‖ and how he was going to represent the ―go-go age.‖ 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Tommy Douglas! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — But I would say to this Member it might be well for him to consider sometimes. These 

go-go people don‘t go too far and that chug-chug-chugging along might be very beneficial. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

223 

Last Thursday I listened to the Throne Speech with great interest. I can say that the program outlined by 

our people introduces new legislation, new thoughts, and of course it carries out the Liberal pledge of 

establishing new standards to encourage new industry, full employment and increased benefits and 

opportunities. Mr. Speaker, special highlights of the Throne Speech read at the opening of the first 

Session of the 16th Saskatchewan Legislature, include some 14 special measures to meet changing 

present-day problems. Now some of these measures are: new measures for law-breaking drivers; better 

control of health facilities; a Saskatchewan flag; the dropping of religious criteria in child adoption 

procedures; closer scrutiny of University budgets for operating and capital expenditures; new teacher 

salary bargaining procedures; increased minimum wage; municipal sharing of tax levies on potash 

mines; regulations for collection agents; a great voice for Indians in local education; the expanding of 

our crop insurance program; the use of French as an instructional language in certain schools; the 

establishment of an Alcoholism Commission. I expect many NDP people on the opposite side of the 

House are wondering why they did not think of these measures some time ago. It is an exciting 

legislative program and one that promises increased benefits and more protection for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I find that the citizens of Saskatchewan are happy that the Liberal Government of 

Premier Thatcher continues to approach and solve the many problems with new ideas and different 

solutions. And I can say that the people of Saskatchewan are continually amazed by the Premier‘s 

vigorous and determined efforts to chart a new course for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Mr. Speaker, several days ago I was approached by a gentleman, who asked me if I 

was going to support the legislation to allow liquor advertising in local papers. He stated he was CCF 

and that he could buy his liquor without seeing any more advertising in the papers. He went on to state 

that he was a good CCFer and he felt that he was a good citizen. Mr. Speaker, I know that this man is 

loaded with money. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Loaded all right! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — And so far as I know, this man has never squandered a nickel needlessly, other than for 

his own needs. At this time I did recall some sage claiming there are only two kinds of Socialists – the 

needy and the greedy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — So knowing of this man‘s condition, I said to him that you are a very poor Socialist. He 

wondered why I said that. I stated that with the money he had, he should be spending money 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

224 

to assist mankind. This gentleman then stated that he had earned the money and advised me not to worry 

about his situation because he was going to move from Saskatchewan and live at the Coast. I told this 

gentleman that his plans were typical of Saskatchewan Socialist planning. Make all the money you can 

in Saskatchewan and then leave our country for warmer and more pleasant climates . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — . . . sometimes looking for opportunities to increase their sometimes ill-gotten gains. I 

told this man what Saskatchewan really needs is people who are going to stay in the province and invest 

their money and use their abilities to build a better Saskatchewan. I also stated to this man that I 

expected that all NDP Members on the opposite side of the House would use the same criteria for 

criticizing all Liberal legislation because they can see nothing good in anything else but their own 

particular type of legislation and thoughts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today, the legislative program outlined by this Government proposes to make satisfactory 

settlements with many of the acute problems, problems that should have been settled by the previous 

Government many years ago, problems that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) could have settled 

when they were the Government. The Hon. Mr. Lloyd‘s comments to reporters on the Throne Speech, as 

reported in the daily papers are in text, ―What you say about hardly nothing except it is hardly nothing,‖ 

are typical comments of the Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) when he can find no other criticism to 

offer. 

 

As the representative of the Nipawin constituency, I must take this opportunity to convey to the 

Government and to the Members of the Legislature some of the needs and problems faced by the people 

of the Nipawin constituency. Mr. Speaker, I can say that the people of my constituency are aware of the 

fact that dollars spent must be taken from some individual or some company. The people of my 

constituency are also aware of the need at this particular time for the Government to curtail unnecessary 

spending during this year of financial limitations and high interest rates. The people of the Nipawin 

constituency do not wish me to present any requests upon this Government that are not legitimate 

requests for the Government‘s consideration. It is unfortunate that northern Saskatchewan and in 

particular the Nipawin constituency, did not receive just consideration by the previous CCF Government 

in the allocation of capital expenditures similar to those they made in the rest of Saskatchewan. They 

should have given greater effort to improve the services in the north. Roads, bridges, schools, municipal 

assistance, all received scanty consideration by the previous Government. Consequently, because of the 

CCF or NDP oversight in this regard, the load to provide the many acute needs of our present 

community falls on the Liberal Government. I am happy to say at this time that my Government has 

been doing an outstanding job at recognizing these needs and of trying to provide the answers 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

225 

and improve the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly on this occasion, I must thank the Hon. Dave Boldt, Minister of Highways, for 

his generous consideration of the road problems of the Nipawin constituency. Mr. Speaker, it is 

unfortunate that I have to report today a few other needs that must be fulfilled. I am almost ashamed to 

have to point out to the Minister, some of our further needs. The Minister is aware of these needs and he 

is trying to do something about it. One of our most basic and acute problems is the need of a new 

highway and bridge at Nipawin. Since Premier Thatcher got this Government moving and we have the 

large pulp mill at Prince Albert, the many pulp trucks rolling from Squaw Rapids west to Prince Albert 

are indeed creating a road problem. I think these large trucks are rolling over the bridge with pulp at the 

rate of something like one truck every hour. 

 

Another need is a new highway bridge over the Carrot River, south of the town of Carrot River. We 

need the competition of the Carrot River – The Pas highway, which was promised by the previous 

Government many years ago. We need the continuation of Highway No. 6 through the town of 

Choiceland to the Hanson Lake road. And the people of Lost River and Teddington districts have 

requested that I ask the Minister to include a grid road in the highway system. 

 

Of course, there is a continuous need for more oiled and paved highways. Last year there was something 

like 50,000 tourists who visited the Square Rapids Dam site. Add this to the many other tourists who 

have visited the constituency and moved through the Hanson Lake road to Flin Flon. That does indicate 

the heavy traffic and the continuing need to expand the oil and pavement. 

 

With regard to other types and kinds of needs, there is the continuing need for more adequate school 

accommodation. The north urgently needs a planned comprehensive school in the Nipawin school unit. 

There is concern regarding Federal grants that are to be made available next year. The present composite 

high school in Nipawin that was built to house and accommodate 250 students now has an enrolment of 

almost 500 students. Students aiming for a technical or vocation career need the delayed 

accommodations. Industrial development, expansion of business, development of a large diversified 

agriculture area, all require trained personnel who could be trained locally as soon as a comprehensive 

school can be constructed there. Mr. Speaker, I realize that the problem of proceeding with the 

comprehensive school is attributed to the request of the Federal Government to slow down until the 

money problem has improved, but the need remains and I hope that every effort will be made by our 

Department to have the Federal people reconsider their position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, moving on to other aspects of the constituency, it is fortunate that the new Government of 

Saskatchewan recognizes the vast potential and the need of development and use of the resources of 

timber, mineral, wild life and the agricultural 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

226 

land that exist in the northern part of the province. Today, on behalf of the people in the Nipawin 

constituency, I must in particular thank the Premier and the Department of Industrial Development for 

their efforts to have the north developed and all these resources utilized. Mr. Speaker, I can say that the 

people in the north are thrilled by the Premier‘s announcement of last week when he indicated that there 

was a possibility of an agreement being signed by Choiceland Mines and the Czechoslovakia people. 

Should this occur this will mean a tremendous boost to the economy of the northern part of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again the people in the Nipawin constituency are happy that the Government of the 

Province recognizes the needs of all types of development and that the Throne Speech promises large 

sums of money for the development of the vast acres of the Cumberland Delta. This is the last 

agricultural frontier in Saskatchewan. Reports by the Saskatchewan River Delta Development 

Committee indicate approximately 750,000 acres of land that could be made available for farm land. For 

the past many years Indian and Metis people derived a meagre living from lumbering, trapping and 

fishing in the many marshes and the forest areas, generally with very little help from fellow citizens. 

Certainly in the past they have had very little help from the NDP Government. This is no longer the 

case. The higher standard of living required by these people, which the Liberal party recognized, forces 

them to consider other means of employment or to live on social aid. Indian and Metis people continue 

to demand recognition of their position. Mr. Speaker, with Premier Thatcher‘s leadership and vision, our 

Government recognizes the many problems of our Indian and Metis people. All departments concerned 

are making an all-out effort to create and find new opportunities for them to be rehabilitated and to 

obtain permanent residence. Mr. Speaker, this Government is proceeding with a development of the 

Cumberland Delta. To date there has been something like almost $500,000 spent in the planning and the 

outlining of the procedures to be followed. And all reports indicate that the local population are highly in 

favor of a total approach to the utilization of all the resources of this vast land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the general plan is that the major areas outside the flood area should be utilized for 

agriculture, while the natural resource base within the fur lease shall be retained for wild life. It is 

considered essential that the people of the Delta be fully involved in the development process so that 

they could adjust to full-time employment and agriculture. This will not be easy to do, but with our 

determination and effort on their part, I think it points to a very successful future. Mr. Speaker, it is 

desirable that the Liberal Government assist the local population to develop socially and economically in 

order that these people can fully share all the benefits of this modern age. 

 

A total of six stages have been suggested to be carried out over a period of 20 years, this at an estimate 

cost of $27 million. This development will forever change the face of 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

227 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I can assure all Members of the Legislature and the people of Saskatchewan 

that the forward thinking of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Natural Resources is 

giving full consideration to the many varied aspects of developing this rich Delta land. This is a 

complex, promising immense returns to the participants, should they use careful management 

procedures. Development of the Delta in the past has been hampered by the threat of constant flooding. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the flow of water, following the construction of the Gardiner Dam and the Squaw 

Rapids Dam, has now reduced this threat to a minimum. With the flood threat eliminated it is now 

possible to fully evaluate the rich rewards encompassed in this land and its resources. Mr. Speaker, more 

and more people are realizing the possibilities of this venture, and they are satisfied that Department 

officials are giving adequate consideration to the recreational aspects of hunting and fishing with 

adequate protection for the wild life, at the same time, planning to obtain the maximum returns from 

other resources. Mr. Speaker, Department officials are considering all aspects of forestry, fishing, wild 

life, recreation and land use associated with problems in relation to the complete utilization of the area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the development of the ten-farm units under Indian management, in the Cumberland House 

area is now in its third year of operation. To date these units have proved very successful. The Indian 

people are gratified by the arrangements made by this Government, and I know, after viewing this 

success, many other Indian people and people of Indian ancestry are asking for the same considerations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government is considering all other people‘s responsibilities in this area, not only the 

Indian people‘s position but that of all people of Saskatchewan. This is a vast area. It is something like 

75 miles square, and it is an immense task for a few people to completely assess all the possibilities and 

eventualities of such an immense undertaking. I expect some errors will be made, but it is very apparent 

from Delta reports that the Delta Committee and the Department of Agriculture, as well as the Natural 

Resource people, have taken time and much effort to finalize their recommendations. They have also 

considered in the report subsidiary non-farming activities, such as peat moss harvesting, wood products 

recovery, fur farming, commercial fishing and recreational aspects. Such activities under the proper 

management will add many dollars to the pockets of Delta residents and Saskatchewan people. Mr. 

Speaker, it has been the objective of the Government to have well informed and experienced people 

working with the Saskatchewan River Delta Committee. These people can and will encourage a 

satisfactory, orderly development, and are satisfied that the utilization of the area will bring many 

benefits to mankind in general. Mr. Speaker, there have been some people who have been asking for 

information. I‘m sure that, if these people would go to the Department of Agriculture and get the latest 

information, they would be able to offer to the Government some of their ideas and some of their 

criticisms so that they can be properly answered. Mr. Speaker, the people and citizens of 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

228 

northern Saskatchewan and in particular, the people of the Nipawin constituency are happy and pleased 

that the Liberal Government under Premier Ross Thatcher is making an all-out effort to meet the 

challenge of the Delta in providing immediate funds towards the progress and the general development. 

The Opposition are free with their criticism generally in the papers of this venture. They make efforts to 

ridicule Liberal efforts and their organizers do try to stir up the Indian people. Some Indian people might 

be misled, but generally most Indian people feel that the present Liberal Government of Saskatchewan is 

the first Government to ever give their depressed conditions priority consideration. Mr. Speaker, I can 

say without contradiction that the Premier of this Province, perhaps more than anyone else, is concerned 

about the desire to improve the living conditions of our Indian people and the people of Indian ancestry. 

The Departments are making new plans and new programs which will be used to encourage Indian 

citizens to accept their responsibilities and their rightful place in our modern society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another problem of general concern to the people of Nipawin constituency is that of water 

pollution in the Saskatchewan River. Many people of the province now are aware of the tremendous 

fishing potential of the Tobin Lake reservoir and how the area is rapidly becoming a real tourist 

attraction. Sportsmen from all over the continent are now visiting the Tobin Lake area to fish and are 

finding it a fishing paradise. Now, Mr. Speaker, the people are indeed happy that the Throne Speech 

does promise amendments to the present Water Pollution Bill, and the people in northern areas are 

appreciate of the Government‘s concern in this matter. It is felt that water pollution will continue to be a 

serious problem and they are requesting protection for this important resource. The people of the 

Nipawin constituency trust that all necessary action will be taken by the Government to control the 

effluent and waste from the pulp mill at Prince Albert. The waters of Tobin Lake are a valuable asset to 

our community and need continuous protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year our constituency was fortunate to have a visit from the Deputy Premier of the 

Province to assess one of the constituency‘s most serious problems that is the log and debris in Tobin 

Lake. And I‘m pleased at the Hon. Dave Steuart‘s visit to Tobin Lake. He did give a promise that his 

Department would try and budget some $250,000 for a start to clear the mess of logs from the shores of 

Tobin Lake. Mr. Steuart stated that it was the desire of the Government to improve Tobin Lake as a 

tourist attraction. Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that the short-sighted NDP policy created an 

unprecedented problem for an area that could be one of the top tourist attractions of Canada. I‘m sure it 

is a wonderful advertisement for the CCF party to have people come into this area and see the condition 

that the previous Government left this great lake in. Mr. Speaker, I‘ve yet to talk to anyone who could 

understand how the previous Government of the province could have made such a costly error. I 

suppose we will all have to accept the cost of the penalty for some people being led astray by devious 

propaganda. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

229 

Mr. Speaker, today I would like to thank the Hon. Doug McFarlane, Minister of Agriculture, for his 

continued efforts in support of agriculture, especially agriculture in the northern area. In the Nipawin 

constituency over 350 farmers have bought their land, and we of the Liberal party can be justly proud of 

our efforts in this regard. This policy has enabled many farmers to become permanently settled and to 

make permanent plans for the future, and certainly they can now make a much better contribution to the 

economy of this province. Mr. Speaker, Liberal agriculture policies have been successful in encouraging 

new developments, new procedures and giving new stability to our agricultural industry. People who 

visit the Nipawin constituency can only look to the south and see the large vegetable oil plant there. I 

can assure you now that there‘s going to be a large expansion in this plant and it will bring to eastern 

Saskatchewan, in particular, much added revenue and a constant market for farm agricultural products. 

Mr. Speaker, in the past year, I would like to say that the Cracking River agricultural area has been 

settled and it is a great credit to Mr. McFarlane and his Department. Some 29 new farmers have been 

settled on land that has been more or less waste land, and they are now making a real effort to 

consolidate this area and to make it something that Saskatchewan people can be truly proud of. 

 

Now, as I close my remarks, I wish to congratulate the mover of the Address-in-Reply, the Member 

from Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) and I would also like to congratulate the seconder, the 

Member from Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth). They did make an excellent job of announcing 

Government programs and policies and putting before the people of Saskatchewan some of the most 

important issues. I would like to extend to the Speaker the congratulations of the people of the Nipawin 

constituency on his re-appointment to that position. Many people know the Speaker and certainly they 

feel that he is doing a marvellous job. Again, Mr. Speaker, I must say that the people of the Nipawin 

constituency are appreciative of the continued concern by the Premier and by the Members of his 

Cabinet, and we feel that we are indeed fortunate to have men who have such vision and such 

enthusiasm for the development of our country. We and the people know that there are many difficult 

and sometimes impossible situations to solve. The Premier is going at his work with enthusiasm and I‘m 

sure that he is going to solve some of the very major issues. 

 

Our country in the north has educational, professional, cultural, and recreational facilities equal to 

communities of larger size. I want to invite each and every one of you to visit the constituency and see 

for yourselves some of the many characteristics and qualities which you do not find in other parts of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I leave you, I want to thank the Members of the Legislature for their time and attention 

and we look for you in the northern part of the province to view what we have there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

230 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, may I congratulate you, Sir, on your re-election 

as Speaker of this House. Since you first took this office you have made constant and continuous study 

of the background, the traditions and the duties that you inherited. Your diligent application to the task 

at hand is evident to all of us. 

 

I should like to congratulate all Members of the Government who have been selected for new positions 

and sit now on the Treasury benches. I sincerely hope that the Hon. Member for Pelly, the new Minister 

of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) will make a rapid recovery from his temporary illness. 

 

I would like to congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address-in-Reply. I want to welcome all the 

new Members to the House, and I want to express to the people of Regina North West my sincere thanks 

for the majority I enjoy as a result of their expression of confidence. Members opposite did not plan it 

that way. One look at the ridiculous boundaries is a clear indication to everyone that there was a 

deliberate attempt to gerrymander the riding of Regina North West. Mr. Speaker, the boundaries are a 

tangled mess and they are such a tangled mess that my Liberal opponent insisted on locating his bus stop 

signs in another riding, in the recent campaign. He didn‘t know where the boundaries were. It is a fact 

and everybody who lived in the area will testify to this. The boundaries were not drawn so that people 

would know where they were; that wasn‘t the purpose. When Members opposite drew the boundaries 

and totalled the score, it looked like a pretty close thing. They hadn‘t anticipated the loss that they would 

suffer as a result of the inept handling of the Saskatchewan Power employees, or the hospital workers, or 

their failure to live up to their promise to pay up to 50 per cent of the cost of education. This failure 

drove the mill rate up in the city of Regina like a rocket. And their general anti-labor attitude was bound 

to galvanize and unite the working people of my riding, white collar and blue collar workers, against 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1964, the group opposite had a majority of votes in Regina City. This time, our 

candidates overcame that lead and we finished with a good majority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I expect the Government will be back on the drawing board with new 

constituencies. They can work on my riding and I invite them to work on it until they are blue in the 

fact. Come ahead, you‘re welcome to try. In my estimation they will try to draw Regina into seven 

constituencies hoping to take three of them for themselves. Even if these ridings are as small and 

unexplainable as Moose Jaw North, I don‘t think they will be successful. If the present boundaries 

remain as they are, the independent sector candidate from Regina South West will be in desperate shape 

to get re-elected. If they remain the way they are, he‘ll be in desperate shape to get 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

231 

re-elected. I predict by the time the policies of the present Liberal Government seep down, five years 

from now, he won‘t make it, because he talks about a cracker-barrel approach, but his philosophy is so 

old, so out of date, that it was enunciated long before they discovered crackers. 

 

The Premier used to brag about wiping us out. He used to rush down to his seat here and used to tell us, 

―We‘ll go to the country, and there won‘t be seven of you.‖ And then he would get enthusiastic, ―There 

won‘t be five of you‖, and we came within 350 votes of beating him. He used to talk about having an 

election; every 15 minutes he would threaten us with an election. It was quite a bombastic performance. 

I used to enjoy it thoroughly because I was hoping secretly that he would try it. But there is a different 

tune this time. He talks about an election maybe in five years, a different attitude. I want to say this, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to be most emphatic, I don‘t care whether he calls an election in five minutes, or 

five hours, or five weeks, or five months, or five years, because, when the time comes, the Premier and 

his moth-eaten speech which he makes here and all over the United States, is going to be thrown 

headlong and the people of this province are going to say, ―Good riddance, let‘s get on with the job.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — You said that last time. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I also said, Mr. Speaker, that the former Hon. Member from Melville (Mr. Gardiner), 

when he laughed at the borders of my riding, wouldn‘t be back. Take a look for him and see where he is. 

Have a good look. Just remember that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I was out at Melville every three months – just remember. Prior to their election in 

1964, the Liberal party promised to the people of Regina City that they were going to make grants of 50 

per cent to cover the cost of education. We‘ve got a Liberal pamphlet that says this. Fifty per cent of the 

cost of education. Well their grants have been around 30 per cent. This is about, I would say, their 

regular batting average. But the net result has been that taxes on city homes have gone up. Meanwhile 

the Premier has been raising taxes pretty rapidly and about as fast as you can for a Premier, that has been 

elected on a policy of reducing taxes. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Henry is the one . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Look at the Estimates in 1963-64 – taxes raised by the Province from all sources, 

according to the Estimates, the total estimates at that time, $93,892,000. Let‘s look at 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

232 

1967-68, total taxes, Provincial revenue from all sources, $159,928,000. And he was elected to reduce 

taxes. This was his platform in 1964. In spite of this, huge increases in taxes. Regina did not get its share 

for education. It didn‘t get 50 per cent, it got 30 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the McLeod Report, the McLeod 

Commission on Taxation, recommends that the tax burden be taken off city property. The person on a 

fixed income, the old age pensioner, the superannuated civil servant, the retired employee, knows the 

payment of school taxes by land assessment is outdated and unfair. No steps have been taken to alleviate 

this problem. The plight of these people has been ignored. The Premier is busy rushing off to get tax 

concessions for mortgage companies, oil companies, and insurance companies and screaming at the top 

of his lungs when a Liberal Royal Commission recommends taxation on these people. And what are 

they doing? Here‘s the Toronto Daily Star, a good Liberal paper, and this is what they tell us: 

 

Canadian insurance companies with 30 per cent of their business place abroad paid $13,800,000 

in income taxes to foreign governments. 

 

It pointed out, in contrast, that foreign insurance companies in this country paid no income tax to 

Canada on life insurance policies within this country. The 1964 revenues of Canadian insurance 

companies exceed their expenditures by $90 million, but they‘ve paid tax on less than $5 million of that 

amount. But when a honest to goodness Royal Commission suggests they be taxed, the Premier is 

opposed to it. He runs up and down the country. I would suggest that he go to bat for the pensioner and 

the people on fixed income. Here are the people who have got a real deal, these are the people that 

should be looked at. I congratulate the Royal Commission when they write a section like this in their 

report. It takes courage to do this, particularly when they are members of a party such as the party that 

the Members opposite belong to. 

 

May I turn to something else, Mr. Speaker, for a moment. I‘m not satisfied with slugging the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation employees into submission. I‘m not satisfied with holding a sword 

over the heads of all the underpaid hospital workers in the province. The Government has now decided 

to introduce legislation which, in effect, will coerce teachers. It will be, in effect, compulsory arbitration. 

Area bargaining that cannot be settled, if all the rumours that we hear are correct, will eventually wind 

up as nothing more than compulsory arbitration. Well, Mr. Speaker, we are short of teachers now. The 

relationship that has existed between teachers and trustees is about to be shattered. Many teachers will 

go to areas where they will be treated as individuals with bargaining rights, where they will be treated 

with respect. The net result will be that the young people of Saskatchewan, the young students will be 

without teachers. Once more the 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

233 

Government has set a dangerous course. I‘m saying this emphatically. I want the Minister of Education 

(Mr. McIsaac) to listen. I‘m saying that they‘ve set a dangerous course, a course that is going to put our 

educational system high on the rocks. 

 

In my constituency, grade 12 students received a letter from the Premier urging them to stay in the 

province. I thought it was a dandy document just before the election. I‘d like to read some parts of it to 

the House. I quote: 

 

In addition the Canadian Student Loan Fund makes available interest-free loans up to $1,000 per 

year depending on your need. These can be obtained by applying to any chartered bank or credit 

union. The Government will pay the interest on the loan while you are attending university and 

for six months thereafter. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

If you wish to obtain employment upon graduation, numerous opportunities await you. However, 

I must caution you that your potential earnings will not be as high as they would be if you took 

further training. Regardless of which course you choose, university, technical training or 

immediate employment, I hope you will decide to make Saskatchewan your permanent home. 

 

I agree with that. This is good. 

 

If you require more information on training or employment opportunities, please do not hesitate 

to write either the Minister of Education or myself. 

 

Well, I‘ve interviewed a good many of these students. As a matter of fact I sent out a questionnaire and a 

good many of them came to my house. Mr. Speaker, I‘ve seen this letter torn up quite a few times. I ask 

the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac): where are these people going to get their training? And how 

are they going to get their training? A huge percentage of young people in my riding, when they 

answered the questionnaire, indicated that they needed training such as you would get at the Technical 

Institute in Moose Jaw. 

 

The Moose Jaw Technical Institute trains people well. It‘s a good organization, it‘s a good school, it‘s an 

educational asset, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it is too small. It is overcrowded and there just isn‘t 

room for the students who are seeking admittance. No new accommodation is being built, and the young 

people in my riding, who have graduated from grade 12 who haven‘t the money, who don‘t want to go 

to university, have a choice. They can work as laborers for the rest of their lives or 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

234 

they can go to Alberta. The population figures bear this out. 

 

I heard the Hon. Minister (Mr. McIsaac) and I think he‘s a nice fellow – I heard him repeat the 

announcement that the late lamented Minister (Mr. Trapp) made about North Battleford. I hope he has 

more luck in the next election with that announcement than the other Minister had. But I can say this, 

that the young people in my riding need this type of facility and have needed it for the last three years. 

They are saying it over and over again in questionnaires, they are saying it to their teachers. I urge him 

to get on with the job. 

 

Regina is in need of developing, at the earliest possible date, a community college that would provide 

technical training of some sort. There is such a demand that I don‘t think that we should worry 

immediately about facilities. The need for education among these students is so desperate that we should 

find staff and begin the organization of a community college immediately. A recent copy of the Globe & 

Mail, Report on Business, Thursday, November 6, 1967, describes the development in this area in 

Ontario. I would certain suggest that the Minister read it. I quote: 

 

Seventeen community colleges in Ontario have made a spectacular start this fall on closing what 

the Economic Council of Canada calls a long-standing gap in Canadian education, the need for 

broader post-secondary school training outside of universities. The colleges of applied arts and 

technology, to give them their official name, have a total enrolment of 11,700. The 9,748 men 

and 1,952 women are attending classes in converted factories, old schools and other improvised 

quarters. The eighteenth college will open near Kitchener in January. 

 

And with the article is the picture of a group of young students attending a class in a shopping centre in 

Barrie, Ontario. I think that all Members of the Legislature, if they haven‘t already done so, should read 

the report on community colleges of the Regina Committee on Community Colleges which sets out very 

carefully the program which could be followed by these institutions. I would certainly urge the Minister 

to begin immediately, if he has to start as the people in Ontario have, if he has to begin with facilities. 

As long as he has staff, if he can train these young people, it‘s better than condemning them to a job as 

laborers for the rest of their lives when they need training. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, we heard a great deal about the Opportunity Caravan. You know when I walked 

by that caravan trailer parked in front of this building, I had the feeling it was more of a travelling 

election sign than 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

235 

an honest-to-goodness project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — When the report comes back in the House, I will be asking where the trailers are and 

how many people were counselled, because I have heard a number of complaints about the effectiveness 

of this particular project. In my estimation and from talking to these young people, there is a desperate 

need – and this group talking about community colleges points this out again – the desperate lack of 

counselling. There has to be a course to train counsellors. This most necessary educational service must 

have concentrated attention. Hundreds of students leaving school are completely bewildered, because 

they have not been counselled or because their counsellor is not properly trained to give the guidance 

they need. Students tell us over and over again that the people who counsel them are nice people, but 

students are reluctant, Mr. Speaker, to accept their advice because there is a lack of technical know-how 

in the counsellor‘s approach. The counsellor isn‘t adequately trained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many groups of employees in my constituency who are suffering because their 

wages are below average and are dropping rapidly particularly since this Government took over. I would 

suggest that all Members read the last edition of ―The Dome‖, issued by the Saskatchewan Government 

Employees‘ Association. You will find a scale in there which shows that since 1963, wages in 

Saskatchewan have dropped $3.25 below the Canadian average. Figure it up – 52 weeks in a year - 

$3.25 per week - $169 per year – 270,000 employees. It has cost the people approximately $45 million. 

They are that far below the average Canadian wage of $101.73. This is one of the areas, because of the 

activities and the program of the Government opposite and their attitude toward labor, where you can 

measure what the net result of their attitude and their program is. Wages in Saskatchewan are rapidly 

falling behind. Letters come to me almost daily from hospital employees. Their wages are so low; it is 

beyond comprehension how they can combat the present cost of living and at the same time maintain a 

decent standard. It is no wonder to me that hospitals are seeking employees and are unable to get them. 

It is no surprise to me that wings of hospitals in a city like ours have had to be closed because of a 

shortage of personnel. The Government, by ignoring the needs of these people, who look after the sick, 

is taking advantage of their dedication and carrying out a policy that is unappreciative and the essence of 

ineptitude. If by any chance we are able to negotiate any Federal money for Medicare, the first group 

that needs attention and must be paid a decent salary are the hospital workers who have been chained to 

their jobs by compulsory arbitration. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

236 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, in my constituency there are a good many RCMP personnel, recognized 

among the police forces of the world as the best in the field of crime detection and public relations. 

These public servants have given our province and the people of Canada, a record of proud achievement 

in combatting crime. We know how diligently and effectively these officers prepare their cases, and we 

would urge the highest degree of co-operation with them in law enforcement and assisting the courts in 

their responsibilities. 

 

Our urban municipality has been discriminated against by this Government in payment of library grants 

and in payment of health grants. I would hope that the health grants to Regina City would be exactly the 

same as they are to the city of Prince Albert. For Prince Albert, they are $2.75 per capita; for Regina, 

they are 75 cents. I would hope that the library grant would be in the amount recommended by the 

Library Enquiry Committee in 1967. They recommended a dollar. I would hope that the 

recommendations of the Library Enquiry Committee are followed out. The recommendation of $1.00, 

we will be looking forward to. 

 

Many committees in this province, Mr. Speaker, receive complete police protection. The city of Regina 

is asked to foot the bill for the entire cost of police protection and this is a sizeable expense. Well, they 

receive a portion of the fines but there are some communities where you pay the whole shot. You pick 

up the tab. The city of Regina should be given some consideration to pay in part for the policing of the 

capital city. This would be in line with the policy practised in some other centres in this province. 

 

Our city has many problems. It is a rapidly growing and expanding city. The Department of Municipal 

Affairs should have a fully staffed, research department which would study and make recommendations 

on the financing of urban centres like Regina. There should be available to the city complete planning 

facilities, information regarding the cost of extending transportation facilities and parking facilities. 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Henry. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I hear someone talking about Henry. All I can say is they did everything they could, 

they threw everything at him but the kitchen sink and they were trying to pull it off the wall. But he is 

sitting here and he‘s got a majority of 425. Do you want another crack at him? Take it, if you like. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

237 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — You know what the score is, every time somebody tries to run again him. It is a waste 

of time, isn‘t it? 

 

The city of Regina is entitled to and should receive grants for snow removal. The proper research 

facilities and a properly staffed Department of Municipal Affairs might be able to find a solution. 

Perhaps using salt from the Esterhazy area or from the potash mines would cut the cost of snow 

clearance in centres like Regina City. I think, in addition we should have research facilities for parking. 

Parking in Regina is a problem at the present time. The citizens of Regina have been paying more and 

more gasoline tax each year. In return they are receiving a small percentage to help with the construction 

of arterial roads. This year, according to the Estimates, as a minimum amount, the citizens of Regina 

will pay $5,500,000 in gasoline tax. In answer to a question the other day, the Hon. Minister for 

Highways (Mr. Boldt) indicated that we got $650,000 of this back for arterial roads. We paid out $40.00 

per capita, we got $5.00 back. There is no argument against using the largest portion of this to develop 

the Provincial highway system, but if there is going to be any relief for Regina taxpayers, when one 

realizes the tremendous mileage travelled on Regina streets, I think it is only fair that at least $1,500,000 

of this amount should be returned to Regina City each year to assist and aid this urban centre in the 

construction of arterial roads. At the present time the city has to put up 50 per cent of the cost, before 

they can get a grant for any arterial road that is being built. I think this is unrealistic. I would suggest 

that a grant be given without any strings attached for arterial roads. In addition, I would suggest that a 

grant for library, health, and police protection of $6.00 per capita is reasonable and possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituency I represent has within its boundaries a good many senior citizens. We are 

proud to have them located in our riding. A large group of them live in Pioneer Village, Mutchmor 

Lodge, Hewitt Place and Eventide Home. Last year, the Social Welfare budget was reduced. Reduction 

came about because of the $30 payment for pensioners received from the Federal Government. 

Meanwhile, the rent for Pioneer Village accommodation was raised $9.00 per month. While the rate is 

not high, the $9.00 increase represents a large bite out of a very small fixed income. It would have been 

a very practical way to say to the pioneers of this province, ―We appreciate you‖, if the Department of 

Welfare had picked up the $9.00 increase, rather than passed it along to the pensioners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the senior citizens in my 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

238 

riding, I must protest the Provincial Government‘s confiscation of the $1.50 a month cost of living 

payment which was paid by the Federal Government to all the pensioners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The $9.00 per month increase on the Pioneer Village accommodation and later the 

$1.50 per month confiscation, spell out to the Pioneer Village residents, in the strongest terms, that the 

people who operate the Provincial Government and who are in charge of payments to our senior 

citizens, have inherited the same philosophy, are practising the same principle, as the famous Six Buck 

Walter Harris. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I am ashamed to say that I sit in a Legislature, which, in spite of 

the fantastic cost of living, engineered by their monopoly friends who own the food-processing 

establishments, would rob pensioners of a miserable $1.50 in order to balance the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The Premier said he would do anything within his power to maintain the economic 

stability of this Province. Mr. Speaker, I believe it. Mr. Speaker, this Government‘s treatment of senior 

citizens proves to me beyond any shadow of a doubt that he will do anything to balance the Budget. 

 

The Regina hospital situation remains the same. It is acute. The Liberals were elected in 1964 because of 

the promise to immediately erect a general hospital. I have a photostatic copy of that little pamphlet. It 

was well written and sounded pretty good. 

 

Action on city problems. Aid will proceed immediately to correct the critical hospital bed 

shortage, for the erection of a general hospital free of political interference. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they added a wing to the Regina General. Taxpayers of Regina City paid through the 

nose. They took out some old beds and added some new ones. When you total it up we still don‘t have 

any more beds. Now they are going to have a new hospital. We are going to get it quick. They have 

changed the name of the Geriatric Centre to the Wascana Hospital, and so now we have a third hospital 

in Regina City! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The employees have been written a letter though. Because they are now hospital 

employees they are subject 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

239 

to compulsory arbitration. They cannot dispute; they must accept; they can negotiate so far but when the 

times comes, they must take it or leave it. Their benefits have to be negotiated. They are at the tender 

mercy of the board of directors of the Base Hospital. They are now under the South Saskatchewan Base 

Hospital. This is the little letter they received and I quote: 

 

Because the centre has only recently been established there is no existing scheme of employee 

benefits. Details of the terms of transfer relative to employee benefits and credits built up in the 

public service will have to be negotiated. 

 

These people, who have worked for the citizens of Saskatchewan for a long period of time, don‘t have 

their benefits guaranteed. They are now under compulsory arbitration. Their benefits have to be 

negotiated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me summarize: 1) Education in this province and particularly Regina City is facing a 

crisis, the crisis, instigated, planned and organized by the Government opposite; a crisis that will cost us 

many of the best teachers in the province, that will leave us without vocational training and without 

student counselling. 2) Hospital workers are in desperate need of decent wages. 3) the RCMP in my 

riding have an enviable reputation and should be allowed to operate as effective police officers. 4) The 

whole are of municipal financing needs attention and we feel that Regina is entitled to increased 

assistance for libraries, police protection, health grants and arterial roads. 5) We regret the financial 

mistreatment of senior citizens. 6) The transfer of the Wascana Hospital to the jurisdiction of the Base 

Hospital Board, without guaranteeing pension rights, is not conducive to good employee relations or 

representative of the wishes of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, the Leader of the Government (Mr. Thatcher) has told this House that he 

would do absolutely anything to maintain the economic stability of the Province. If you look at the 

records, if you go back to the day that Members opposite became the Government, you will find that 

anything, includes a shocking, irresponsible, and harmful list of activities. 

 

Let‘s review some of them. I mentioned our senior citizens. He would rob them of $1.50 in recognition 

of their services to this country. 2) He would act as a fight promoter, a modern day tax gatherer and 

professional troublemaker between the teachers and trustees by introducing compulsory arbitration, and 

thereby bringing about an exodus of teachers unparalleled in the history of our province, in order to 

bring about his so-called economic stability. 3) He would hold back temporary wages of hundreds of 

temporary employees, as much as three months 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

240 

at a time, while they finance by borrowing. These same employees must sit quietly by, unable to protest. 

They are not even in a union. Their car allowances, too, have not been paid for months at a time. Yes, he 

would do anything. He would finance on the wages and car allowances of temporary Government 

employees, outside the union scope. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — This Government and its Leader, would do absolutely anything. They would deny 

small contractors payment of necessary funds for months at a time, payments months overdue, payments 

that have to be used to pay gas bills, grocery bills, for heat and light, denied to the small contractors in 

order to maintain, I suppose, his kind of economic stability. He would impose on sick people, widows, 

pensioners – we are being warned this is in the offering – even on people who die in the hospital. He 

would impose on them a penalty for being sick, whether they go home or whether they go to the 

graveyard. In spite of the fact that the Federal Government is going to put up $10 million for Medicare, 

the Government is going to say, while these people are desperately ill, ―Pay up.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Those who are chronically ill and need check-ups and who are financially unable to put 

up the fee, will refrain from taking the necessary check-up. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Premier would 

do anything to maintain economic stability. Although a recent request by a Member of the Provincial 

Government in Ontario, asking for letters from those who had been unsatisfactorily dealt with by private 

automobile insurance companies, brings to his desk as many as 30 letters a day, Government Members, 

here led by their Premier, keep talking of selling or making a financial arrangement with the private 

insurance companies. Although there was no request from the owners – and the owners are the citizens 

of this province – and although the company, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, enjoyed large 

profits, Saskatchewan Government Insurance rates on homes and farms were raised 50 per cent in the 

interest, we suppose, of his type of economic stability. 

 

Although the cost of living has risen rapidly right across Canada, the Premier sits quietly by, waiting for 

a report from the Royal Commission, we suppose, in the interests again of his kind of economic 

stability. Although wages have risen in other parts of Canada, in Saskatchewan they have begun to lag 

drastically behind the Canadian average. Again, we suppose, this proves that the Premier will do 

absolutely anything in the interests of his kind of economic stability. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

241 

Well, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we look at some of the programs where he isn‘t moving, and look at 

economic stability. The Premier‘s inactivity in seeking potash markets by contacting the Federal 

Government or through his Department of Industry and Commerce, for this $650 million investment, 

suggests that he is doing nothing in the interests of this industry‘s economic stability. 

 

Whether he is doing nothing, or whether he is doing anything, and whether it is insurance, the cost of 

living, wages, teachers‘ salaries, old age pensioners, potash markets or deterrent fees, we suspect, Mr. 

Speaker, that the economic stability that he seeks is sought and developed only after he had protected the 

economic interests of his friends, of his sponsors, and his political allies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Saskatchewan needs a Government that will not burden the sick with deterrent fees, 

that treats teachers and trustees properly, that fights the high cost of living, that will reduce the price of 

insurance, that is responsible and seeks economic stability in accordance, Mr. Speaker, with the wishes, 

first, last and always, of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have talked about the need for assistance and the special problems in my riding and in 

Regina City. I have outlined the unbelievably ineffective programs introduced and practised by the 

Government in the name of economic stability. I have suggested, Mr. Speaker, that there is another 

choice. With the evidence before me, my conscience is clear. I couldn‘t possibly support the motion and 

I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to participate in this debate, I 

would like to congratulate you personally in your re-election as the Speaker of the House as well as your 

personal re-election. I know that your keen interest in Parliamentary procedure will contribute 

considerably to the decorum of this Legislature. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I must also sympathize 

with you in having to hear these repetitious broken records from the other side of the House. I would 

like to congratulate as well, Mr. Speaker, all the newly elected Members of this House and all those who 

have participated in the debate. I think I would be remiss if I wouldn‘t give a special thanks to members 

of my constituency who have worked so hard to get me elected, as well as all the people of the 

constituency of Gravelbourg for their support. I would be remiss if I do not extend my sincere thanks to 

my new Deputy Minister 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

242 

of Labour, Mr. Ron Parrott; the directors, the field staff and all the staff in the Department of Labour, as 

well as the new Deputy Minister of Co-operation, Mr. Gardiner; the directors, the field staff and all the 

members of the Department of Co-operation. And of course I would like to give a special mention to my 

right hand, my personal secretary, Miss Wolfe. 

 

Sometime during this debate, Mr. Speaker, a Member opposite said that the CCF wing of the New 

Democrat Party, Saskatchewan section, was a clumsy title. Of course I wholeheartedly agree with him. 

Now it has become somewhat of a clumsy party. That is evident from what we have heard so far from 

the other side of the House. One thing that does concern me, Mr. Speaker, is that some of the Members 

opposite, I believe, were elected under some false pretences. Some were elected as CCF and others were 

elected as CCF-NDPs, and now according to the Commonwealth, they are NDPs. Now by changing 

their political affiliation or party while representing the people of Saskatchewan, they are not 

representing them as they were elected. Well in my personal opinion, Mr. Speaker, I think it is quite 

improper, but I am willing to condone the fact that they have been elected as CCF, CCF-NDP, or 

whatever they want. But it seems to me strange, Mr. Speaker, that not one of them has dared to get up 

and say publicly what he stands for. Is he a CCF? Is he an NDP? Is he a CCF-NDP? I am sure that the 

people of this House, the people of Saskatchewan, would like to know. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Where were you on Friday? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, they don‘t know what they are. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak in 

support of His Honour‘s Speech from the Throne. My friends opposite have often indicated that the 

Government has forgotten the people and that we have lost sight of the people. The Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker, indicates that people come first; economic growth for the welfare of the people; 

agriculture, better advantages for agriculture; education for our young people; libraries for the people so 

that they can avail themselves of these services; Indian and Metis, grave concern and action taken by 

this Government to help these underprivileged people, to give them better opportunities; health, to 

safeguard, and the concern for, the health of the people in this province; Commission of Alcoholism; the 

Frazier Report, a concern for the mental health of the people; Collections Act; Expropriation Act; 

housing – all these are legislation that is going to be brought down and has been brought down because 

of grave concern for people. Parks and recreation. What is it? For the people so that they can have their 

relaxation. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Speech from the Throne relates very clearly that we are 

concerned with the people, not so much with pressure 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

243 

groups, but the individual people. We have heard from across this House, Mr. Speaker, charges that we 

are anti-labor. I am anti-politically oriented to labor bosses. We have some across the way, who . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . have taken advantage of the sweat on the brow of labor for political advantages. It 

seems to be fashionable, Mr. Speaker, for some Members opposite to say that the present Government in 

Saskatchewan is anti-labor. Obviously it is hoped that their constant repetition of this charge will wear 

the citizens‘ resistance down so that they may start to believe it. 

 

I have heard this record, Mr. Speaker, ever since this Government has been in office. I would like to take 

a few moments of your time, Mr. Speaker, to examine these assertions and implications. One of the 

actions performed by this supposedly anti-labor Government after assuming office was to raise the 

minimum wage on two different occasions in a very short while. The Government again discriminated 

against the working people, when in 1965, the minimum wage was raised to $38.00. Again, we 

discriminated by raising it to $40.00 in the next year. I might as well make a clean breast of it, Mr. 

Speaker, we are so anti-labor that we are going to raise it again very shortly, substantially, in the very 

near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The question of increase in the minimum wage is under continual study, Mr. Speaker, 

in the likes of such factors as growth, the rise of the cost of living, the trends towards higher average 

incomes and so on. 

 

It has been said a number of times lately by a few of these individuals that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is preventing employees from joining the labor unions. It might be said that this 

Government has pursued these anti-labor tendencies in that direction very successfully lately, so much 

so that labor unions in Saskatchewan have increased over the last three years more than in the previous 

seven years of the CCF Administration. In the last fiscal year alone, Mr. Speaker, almost two thousand 

employees were added to the total number of employees certified in bargaining units, as a result of a 

total of 112 certification orders issued by the Labour Relations Board. 

 

I have mentioned The Pension Benefits Act, which was enacted last year and which is now in force. The 

passage of this Act represents another example of this supposedly anti-labor bias, in as much as it is 

intended to promote the establishment, the extension and improvement of employee pension plans 

throughout Saskatchewan. Other steps taken by the Government, Mr. Speaker, in the labor field include: 

enactments of improvements of The Workmen‘s Compensation Accident Fund Act. Accordingly we 

have 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

244 

recently appointed a Committee of Review to review the work of the Compensation Board expansion; of 

training facilities under the apprenticeship program; designation of new apprenticeship trades; and in 

co-operation with the Federal Government, Mr. Speaker, granting of increased allowance for persons 

receiving training. 

 

One might expect that an anti-labor Government would be beset be a terrific flood of industrial disputes. 

However, this is not the case again in Saskatchewan. Over the past three years, Mr. Speaker, annual 

average time-loss per wage earner in strikes under Provincial jurisdiction has been one one-sixth of the 

national average of Canada as a whole. 

 

It might be interesting to discover what has happened to wages in general under the present 

Administration. Average weekly industrial wages and salaries in Saskatchewan in April, 1965, averaged 

$80.37, in September, 1967, the average amounted to $97.14, representing an average increase of 20 per 

cent. It seems very strange, Mr. Speaker, that almost everyone gets the impression that Saskatchewan 

wage earners seem to be flourishing under this supposedly anti-labor Government. The truth of course is 

this, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan isn‘t anti-labor at all. 

 

In the first place, Mr. Speaker, any logical individual would realize that no Government would last who 

would discriminate against any group, that is as large as that formed by our wage earners, who with their 

families make up almost half of the population of Saskatchewan. Did you notice, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

election that more Members were re-elected from urban areas? Did you notice that in the second place 

that a government of course has no right to discriminate against anybody? An elected government has a 

duty and an obligation to serve all citizens of this province. And this I submit this present Government 

of Saskatchewan is doing it in a mature and responsible way. 

 

In the case of labor legislation, it must not be overlooked that most of the labor statutes currently being 

administered were originally passed in 1944. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is 

keeping legislation under constant review, with a view to facilitating the social and economic 

development of the province. Having in mind the indispensable contribution being made by the working 

people to the continued progress of the province, how are we doing that? By industrial development, just 

creating job opportunities. 

 

I would like to say a few words about industrial development and job opportunities in Saskatchewan. 

This is something to which the Government assigns and has assigned and will assign very high priority. 

We assigned very high priority when we took office in 1964 and this is a continued priority. Since that 

time we have encouraged new industry to come to Saskatchewan in increasing numbers and, as a result, 

a previously agriculturally oriented economy is becoming more and more diversified. One of the most 

obvious products of this industrial program has been 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

245 

the growth of our non-agricultural labor force, very close to 270,000. I have a hunch, Mr. Speaker, that a 

few of the diehards across the way still doubt this figure. But I can assure you, Sir, that that is still so. If 

it were not, this province would have been afflicted with the worst case of under-employment since the 

depression years. 

 

There are two reasons for this. Firstly although agriculture is still our largest single industry, the trend in 

farm mechanization and larger farms has been resulting in a continuous decline in our agricultural labor 

force. The thousands of persons who in earlier times would have found employment on the farms are 

coming into the urban areas to find work in non-agricultural industry. The fact that employment 

opportunities have been made available to these persons has averted a serious employment crisis. In the 

second place, the election of this Government has coincided with the entry into the labor force of the 

so-called post-war baby crop. The percentage of the labor force formed by persons, say under 25 in 

1961, was only 19.6 per cent; in 1964 it was 22.1 per cent. Last year 26.2 per cent of our labor force 

consisted of persons under the age of 25. It has been imperative therefore that the Government take steps 

to create employment for our young people; and this we have done and will continue to do and put every 

effort behind it, so that we can provide jobs for young people so that they will not leave the province 

like they did under the previous 20 years of Socialist administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — To illustrate this point, let‘s take a brief look at the unemployment data available. The 

average number of unplaced job applicants registered with Canada Manpower Centres in Saskatchewan 

during the three months of January, February and March, the period of the year when unemployment is 

at its peak because of the climatic conditions, was lower in 1967 than in any corresponding year since 

1953. What do you think about that, fellows? Moreover according to DBS, the Saskatchewan 

unemployment rate in 1967 was just three per cent, the lowest rate in Canada; on January 13, 1968, the 

second lowest, desirable to be much less, but still very, very good, thanks to the industrial development 

. . . 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Of B.C. and Ontario? 

 

An Hon. Member: — That‘s right. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . of Saskatchewan, right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

With regard to job opportunities, the increase in Saskatchewan employment index between 1965 and 

1966 was the largest average annual increase in the history of the present statistical series, which was 

started in 1949. The index continued to 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

246 

increase in 1967. Up to October, the latest month for which the data were available, monthly indexes in 

1967 were significantly higher than the corresponding figures in 1966, and it‘s progressing. If there has 

been a problem at all, it has been related to a shortage of manpower, especially in the skilled 

occupations. At the end of September, 1957, there were approximately 3,400 jobs, unfilled job vacancies 

registered with Canada Manpower. 

 

There are of course many other indicators of industrial progress in Saskatchewan. Here are some. The 

aggregate labor income increased by 43 per cent between 1963 and 1967, 42 per cent in that short time! 

The value of manufacturing production in 1967 is estimated to be $447 million, an increase of $76 

million over the 1963 level; the value of oil produced in Saskatchewan over $212 million, 27 per cent 

higher than in 1964-64; natural gas $7 million in excess, more than double the value of 1963-64; copper 

production $1.5 million in 1966-67 over 1963-64, nickel and platinum appeared on the list of metals 

commercially produced in Saskatchewan for the first time in 1966-67. Is this not the index? Sodium 

sulphate is increasing year by year, and there will be more. From this brief outline, Mr. Speaker, it may 

be seen that we have experienced considerable industrial development since 1964. 

 

This has a two-fold effect. It has created employment for many persons who might otherwise have been 

without work and would have become social aid cases, with the resultant drag effect on progress. It is 

significant, Mr. Speaker, in this connection that it has been possible to actually reduce the number of 

social aid recipients because of this industrial development, because they have jobs today, and that‘s 

what they want. At the same time the industrial policy of this Government has resulted in an expansion 

and diversification of the Saskatchewan economy for the benefit of all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

This will continue, Mr. Speaker, and I give notice to the preachers of gloom across the way . . . you 

know, the sad sacks – that more and more benefits – for the people of Saskatchewan will be 

forthcoming. 

 

Of course this will require good labor relations. The question of labor relations is of vital concern to 

every citizen of this province, whether directly or indirectly involved in the affairs of labor and 

management. Briefly stated, the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan in this area is this. We are 

completely committed to the principles of free collective bargaining, without compulsion or 

Government interference. You can sharpen up your pencil, Mr. Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. 

Davies) because there is a lot more to come. We believe that every trade union has the right to negotiate 

for wages and working conditions, having in mind the welfare of the members of union. We believe that 

every employer has the right to attempt to temper the demands of unions, having in mind the 

continuance of his enterprise as a sound and efficient business operation. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

247 

We do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Government has any business peering over the shoulders of the 

two parties while negotiations are carried on, or otherwise interfering with the bargaining process. 

Collective bargain, Mr. Speaker, is a well-established procedure in Canada and the orderly and 

progressive development of the Canadian economy depends on its successful operation. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that, as a result of recommendations of the Labour-Management Review 

Committee, The Trade Union Act was substantially amended in 1966. We now have a streamlined piece 

of legislation which may be said to provide the ground rules to make the process of collective bargaining 

more systematic and more effective. The Act provides the machinery, Mr. Speaker, in the form of the 

Labour Relations Board to certify the union and to ensure that the terms of the collective bargaining 

agreement between the two parties are carried out. Beyond that the Act does not interfere with the 

bargaining process, and that is at it should be. I imagine at this point, Mr. Speaker, someone on the other 

side would like to bring up the question of what about Bill No. 2? I‘m surprised somebody didn‘t 

mention that. I have no intention of boasting that The Essential Services Act represents a wonderful 

piece of legislation, it does not. It is however, a necessary one. It constitutes an excellent example of the 

firm intention of the Government to protect the rights and the welfare of the people to whom it is 

responsible, the citizens of this province, the people of this province. 

 

Surely nobody in all honesty will question the right and the duty of any Government to take action to 

ensure that services, essential services, will not be denied to the community. At any rate the right to 

collective bargaining continues as before. Legislation as passed does not take away that right; it simply 

provides for the resolving of the problems caused by the collapse of negotiations in vital services, 

without interrupting the services. 

 

Despite the loud protestations to the contrary, Mr. Speaker, which we hear from our small politically 

oriented minority, the labor relations policy of this Government is such that labor unions in 

Saskatchewan are functioning and growing in a natural way, without Government hindrance. The 

Labour Relations Board in the fiscal years I mentioned issued 112 certification orders, which added 

1,996 employees to the total number certified. This represents the larges increase since 1960-61. 

Moreover, labor union membership in the period 1965-67 increased by 4,865, the greatest two-year 

increase which has occurred since when? 1955 and 1957. And then these holier-than-thou apostles of 

gloom – I don‘t know what you‘d call them, the do-nothings – are always preaching that we are 

anti-labor, and here are the facts that disprove every story to be made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The success, Mr. Speaker, of Government policy in labor 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

248 

relations is indicated by the relatively peaceful industrial relations climate which prevails in 

Saskatchewan. Despite the many problems associated with the growth of the non-agricultural sector of 

our economy, and the accompanying increases of the industrial labor force, working time and production 

losses caused by strikes still remain negligible. With the assistance of our skilled conciliation services, 

which are provided by the Department of Labour on a voluntary basis, only a very small fraction of 

labor-management disputes, which actually occur, result in strikes. 

 

Of course a good labor force, Mr. Speaker, must have technical and vocational training. I would like to 

draw this to the attention of my Hon. friend from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). However, over the 

years I‘ve herd a great deal of talk, talk from that side of the House, coming from certain quarters – it 

appears from all quarters – which apparently concerns education and training. I say apparently, because 

it‘s often very difficult to determine what the point of discussion is from over there. In this connection, 

Mr. Speaker, I am reminded of a story of an NDP Member, who happened to come to Gravelbourg 

during the campaign, that was the Leader of the Opposition. He was making a speech in a hall in 

Gravelbourg, the Parish Hall, and after he had been speaking for about an hour, one of those in the 

audience stepped out into the porch for a breather . . . I wouldn‘t doubt it. He was asked by a friend who 

was just arriving at the time, ―Who‘s speaking in there?‖ The guy replied, ―I don‘t know, a Socialist, 

Woody, I think.‖ The other guy said, ―What about?‖ And as usual these guys across the way, Mr. 

Speaker, speak many words, but they don‘t say what they‘re talking about. Now . . . just like that broken 

record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It is rather a shame that so much has been said by some individuals about the need for 

technical and vocational training, but so little has been understood. Actually the problem which exists in 

this area can be stated in fairly simple terms, and I hope they can understand. We are in the midst of a 

technological revolution, which is characterized by rising productivity and the transformation of the 

occupational structure of our labor force. A number of occupations which were there years ago will not 

be there tomorrow, and this is constantly changing. A number of occupations, largely unskilled, are 

disappearing and are being replaced by new and more sophisticated ones. In order to keep pace with this 

revolution and ensure continued economic development, the Government is doing everything it can in 

these areas, as far as the Department of Labour is concerned – we are aware of this – in the upgrading 

and the qualifications of our labor force. There is no doubt that there is a serious problem, particularly 

when on considers the fact that three quarters of the members of the labor force have less than a 

completed high school education. 

 

If they have less than a completed high school today, the 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

249 

responsibility rests on the former Government where they should have been training our people for the 

last 20 years. I have indicated that the bulk of our labor force is below the age of 25. Then they were 

responsible for not having given that education! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — In the case of the apprenticeship program operated by my Department, we have added 

four new trades, Mr. Speaker, to the list of trades designated under The Apprenticeship and Tradesmen‘s 

Qualification Act. I refer to the glassworkers, the heavy duty repair and title setting and industrial 

mechanical trades. The number of apprentices‘ indentures under the apprenticeship program has grown 

from 1,417 in 1963-64 to 2,343, which is double in three short years, representing an increase of 65 per 

cent during this period. 

 

Under a co-operative agreement with the Federal Government, living allowances are paid to the 

apprentices when they are receiving training. The allowances were increased in 1965 and again in 1967 

to encourage the apprentices to take the training, so that it would minimize their financial difficulties 

while they are taking their training, and assist their families. So we end up with good industrial 

advantages, good industrial relations, good established training. 

 

Then we come to the human rights. Then what have these holier-than-thou Socialists done about it? The 

Government of Saskatchewan is equally as concerned for the people of this Province, about the question 

of human rights, as any modern democratic government should be. The Government administers a 

number of statutes which are designed directly or indirectly to protect the rights of individual citizens. In 

this general area, I might mention that the Government has taken specific action since assuming office to 

improve the working and living conditions of our Indian and Metis people. A pioneering piece of human 

rights legislation was introduced last year. It was The Criminal Compensation Act which was passed, 

providing compensation for innocent victims. Saskatchewan is a first Province and then they say that we 

are not concerned with people. We‘re much more concerned with people than you are. 

 

Of course we have to have consumer protection. I heard the Member from Regina North West (Mr. 

Whelan) complaining about consumer protection, about this and that. A great deal has been said these 

days about steps which should be taken by the Government in the area of consumer protection. He has 

always implied of course that the Government has done nothing to promote the welfare of the consumer, 

in fact that it is not concerned with the problems which exist. This argument is as stupid as it is wrong. 

Surely we all disapprove of unjust prices. We all want to abolish poverty, we all want to eliminate 

income inequalities. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

250 

What then is the Government doing to protect the consumer? It was to protect the consumer that The 

Cost of Credit Disclosure Act was passed. Why didn‘t you guys do it when you had 20 years of 

Administration. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What are you doing with that insurance? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . providing for the disclosure by lenders of the cost of credit to borrowers? Why 

didn‘t you fellows do it when you were there? It was to protect the consumer that The Mortgage Brokers 

Act was also introduced last year, to safeguard the public against the actions of unscrupulous mortgage 

brokers, to protect the consumer that The Unconscionable Transactions Act was passed, leaving the 

court powers to relieve the borrowers from transactions which were unreasonable or where the cost of 

loans was excessive. 

 

You could go on and on down the list to show that this Government, this Liberal Government, is truly 

concerned with people. It was the Government‘s desire to assist consumers that resulted in the 

establishment of The Prairie Provinces‘ Price Commission, and we‘ll hear more about that some time in 

the future. 

 

In any consideration of spiralling prices and inflationary trends, the role played by Government 

spending must not be overlooked. At the present time this Government is in a position to demonstrate its 

concern for the welfare of the consumers by refraining from inventing new ways to spend their money. 

Finding a new way to spend taxpayers‘ money is the way you fellows have been doing it for a while. 

This Government does not have the magic forces which are apparently possessed by those persons who 

persist in demanding that the Government increase services and reduce taxes. Boy! you could take the 

list of their promises in the last election. In our experience the more a government tries to regulate 

public life, the more money it has to have, money which must come either from taxes or from the 

printing press. Maybe these holier-than-thous know where it is. 

 

I would like to say a few words about the relation of wage inflation, Mr. Speaker, It is no secret for 

anyone that, when compared with the time a working man needs to earn a certain level of wages, today‘s 

cost of food is almost in fact the lowest in history, almost the lowest anywhere. A pair of shoes, a pound 

of butter, or a gallon of gasoline may be purchased today for an amount of money which is earned in 

less time than in any previous year. Inflation is not necessarily caused by high wages, as some people 

believe. Before I go on any further I would just like to state the estimated percentage of a budget, from 

say a place like Uganda, where 70 per cent of the budget of the wage earner is used to provide food; in 

Czechoslovakia 51 per cent; Hungary 45 per cent; Japan 36 per cent. In Canada 27 per cent of the 

budget is for food. Take 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

251 

for example in 1920, for one pound of beef a person had to work 48 minutes to earn it. Today we work 

31 minutes to earn it, based on the average wage; one pound of butter in 1920, 86 minutes; in 1945 31 

minutes; today 17 minutes; one pound of coffee 68 minutes, 34 minutes, 22 minutes today. 

Consequently if you relate it to the hours of work you will find that your cost of food is generally lower. 

As a matter of fact a recent study carried out by the Canada Department of Labour has shown that 

labor‘s percentage share of the value of the gross non-farm business production in 1966 was no higher 

than in 1949. Inflation comes from continuous bidding on the market, in which labor, industry, Crown 

corporations and Government agencies compete with each other most of the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I go on a minute over time, I hope you will stop the clock. Then I would be finished for 

the evening rather than continue after dinner. 

 

It stands to reason that when some Government is in a hurry to acquire certain types of commodities, it‘s 

going to try to overbid everybody else, and that it is going to be successful, naturally because it has the 

money. Certain Crown corporations also exert certain inflationary trends on the market, when they 

undertake programs for which vast amounts of raw materials, or semi-finished commodities are urgently 

required. 

 

Another inflationary fact is poor administration of business in a number of private and semi-private 

agencies. The evil, Mr. Speaker, is so widespread that people have learned so well to live with it that it is 

almost embarrassing to talk about it. Yet the problem is very real and unless something is done about it, 

much effort is bound to be wasted on less important matters which have an effect on inflation. 

 

I would like to give you an example of waste and inefficiency which will illustrate the situation in this 

regard. Last summer a friend of mine ordered by mail a belt for a washing machine and the cost of this 

item was 85 cents. The dealer took his time, made him wait quite a while, then the dealer expressed the 

fan belt to him by special delivery with the delivery charges of $3 for an 85 cent belt. You will all agree 

with me that this is a silly way of doing business, but you will say perhaps, ―Oh well, this is the sort of 

thing which is bound to happen from time to time.‖ 

 

It cannot be helped, private enterprise, Governments are equally guilty, everybody is guilty, this is no 

indictment of private enterprise or government; everyone is guilty, including you, Bill. Mr. Speaker, I 

suppose we‘ve got to put up with boners like that. But I submit, while the case of the fan belt may be an 

exception, there are many cases where efficiency could be increased by a system of forethought and 

organization. Higher efficiency means higher productivity. Higher productivity means more funds from 

which to pay out higher profits and higher wages. Higher productivity also makes it possible to keep 

costs down. Higher productivity, Mr. Speaker, is the real answer to 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

252 

inflationary pressures. 

 

Those persons who seem to be so fond of uttering these hollow statements on the subject of consumer 

protection would render a service to their province of a much higher order, if they were to actively 

participate in a plan to encourage greater efficiency in all industries of the province. As for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, we recognize the inflationary conditions are a cause for serious concern. I 

am especially worried about people on fixed incomes – the pensioners, the veterans, the widows – who 

are unable to protect their income when inflation drains away the purchasing power of their dollars. We 

shall continue to keep under study, Mr. Speaker, the problems relating to the welfare of the consumer 

and take specific action when required, as we have done in the past, to ensure that all citizens, Mr. 

Speaker, receive a fair share of the prosperity which Providence has bestowed upon us. Mr. Speaker, it 

is quite evident that this Government is doing everything it can to keep the ever-growing costs within 

Government, so that the taxpayers are able to benefit more by it. It‘s quite evident, Mr. Speaker, that I 

will not support the amendment, but I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:30 o‘clock p.m. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, may I extend my 

congratulations to you, Sir, on your re-election to this House. I can say that outside of partisan feelings – 

and I have them sometimes – I must admit that your have brought dignity and decorum to this 

Legislative Assembly in the past and I‘m quite sure that you will do so in the future. I certainly will 

behave myself as you shall see tonight. 

 

I also wish to congratulate your very able assistant, Mr. Howes, who has in the past proven himself as a 

good parliamentarian and just in his decisions. I‘m again very glad, I think with the sentiments, I‘m sure, 

of the Members of this House, when we say that the Chair is in good hands. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — At this time I‘d like to congratulate the Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan 

for re-electing a private enterprise Government. I wish him well and I hope he gives good legislation to 

the Province of Saskatchewan. I hope that he‘ll always be truthful in his statements, whether in this 

House or when he speaks outside of this House. I have some doubts because I received a clipping from a 

friend just the other day, concerning a statement that he made to United States 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

253 

farmers who heard all about the advantages of free enterprise in the Province of Saskatchewan. I notice 

the Premier is here and I‘d like him to listen to this. This is one of the things he said, ―The Canadian 

Province of Saskatchewan has gone in three and one-half years from the bust of Socialism to the boom 

of return to private enterprise.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — He told this to over 5,000 members of the American Farm Bureau Federation at 

the opening of their 49th Annual Convention in Chicago. Now the interesting this is this – I‘m not going 

to quote everything I have here, I‘ll just quote a few paragraphs and if necessary, Hon. Members can get 

copies for their edification – but it says this: 

 

The Head of the Liberal Party Administration elected on April 9th, 1964, characterized 

Saskatchewan‘s fling with Socialism as bitter, disastrous and a producer of skyrocketing 

Government costs. ‗Twenty years ago the Socialists promised to make Saskatchewan the mecca 

of the working man‘, he said ‗Instead we saw the greatest mass of exodus of people out of an 

area since Moses led the Jews out of Egypt more than 3,000 years ago.‘ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Quite an orator, Mr. Speaker. I‘d like to ask Mr. Premier what we‘ve had since the 

Liberals have been in power since 1964 – a crusade? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We‘re getting new industries now. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I quote further, ―The Socialist Administration ran Saskatchewan for 20 years‖, - 

we didn‘t Mr. Speaker, we tried to carry out the directions that the people of Saskatchewan gave to us 

because we on this side are truly a democratic party. Anyway he went on to say – ―during which 

270,000 citizens left the province and the Provincial debt increased from $150 million to $600 million.‖ 

Now I can stop there. It was the same kind of nonsense all through his speech but I can stop and ask him 

one question because as a Premier, we expect him to be truthful and honest and as is done in court, we 

expect him to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Why didn‘t the Premier at that 

meeting pick up (because he certainly had it), Saskatchewan‘s Financial Economic Position and why 

didn‘t he tell the people, that he was speaking to at that time, if he is the kind of dignified person that I 

think he should be as a leader of the Government, that in the two or three years that he‘s been in, the 

debt of Saskatchewan jumped to over $700 million. We took over a debt, he said, of $150 million in 

1944 and it grew to $500 or nearly $600 million by 1964 and we built 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

254 

the Power Corporation and we built up all kinds of assets for the people and Saskatchewan. Now the 

Hon. Members opposite say, ―This is not dead-weight debt.‖ But the Premier tells the people he speaks 

to in other countries that ours was a dead-weight debt. Although he doesn‘t say so, but he leaves that 

impression. Well if he goes that far, let him remember that in 20 years time, he has gone ten times as 

fast, increasing the debt of this Province by $100 million. 

 

I also want to congratulate my colleagues on this side of the House who have been re-elected and to 

express my deep regrets that many able parliamentarians on both sides of the House were not quite so 

fortunate. I think it‘s too bad that after Members get some experience that they can‘t stay and give of 

their abilities. But that is the price we have to pay in a party system. 

 

And I congratulate all the new Members on this side and the other side whose seats have been decided. I 

don‘t want to be too hasty in my congratulations to two Government Members at this time where some 

disputed votes weren‘t counted. I can‘t help but remember when you, Mr. Speaker, sent us some 

instructions and you stated that we are here at the consent of the governed. I would not want to sit in this 

House unless I was certain that I was here by consent of the governed. 

 

Now my purpose, of course, today is to deal with the Throne Speech and with matters concerning my 

constituency and the business of Saskatchewan generally. Before I do that, I‘d like to express my thanks 

to all the voters in my constituency who supported me and elected me for the fifth time. I can assure 

them that I shall continue to serve them, them only and only the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I‘m going to have things to say and I shall not be afraid to say them in this House or any other place. 

Insofar as the Throne Speech is concerned, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that I‘m extremely disappointed. 

I see pages of nothing, no vision, no inspired speech, the only thing that we all can see is higher taxes. It 

is not even a good caretaker‘s speech. It contradicts itself. It has no substance, the usual Liberal hash of 

cover-ups, confusion, callousness and lack of direction, and that‘s the best I can say for it. 

 

In the Throne Speech debate we can talk about our philosophy and, of course, I think the House was 

interested in the political philosophy of the Premier and particularly of the Member for Regina South 

West (Mr. McPherson). If anything, I can say that I was disappointed with both presentations, because 

when one looks around and recognizes that we live in a modern age – and Hon. Members opposite 

certainly know that – how can they believe that the private sector of our private enterprise political 

structure can resolve all our problems and social needs without some universal, equitable tax foundation. 

Can we expect to have the kind of services that we must have in this modern age by accepting the 

generosity of modern robber barons? 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

255 

Yet that is what the Hon. Member from Regina South West meant. What a vision, Mr. Speaker! The 

only thing I can see – and I‘ve thrown it across the House – this is going back to the feudal system, back 

to King Arthur and his Knights, a return at the best to the 19th century and not towards the one ahead of 

us. It certainly means that the people opposite still believe in the rule of vested interests, in the rule of 

the barons of the modern age. I say it is nonsense and nothing else. It certainly is nonsense, that kind of 

thinking. And it‘s difficult for me to stomach this kind of modern Liberalism if you want to call it that 

let alone the kind envisioned by the two Hon. Members opposite, who want to sustain the status quo, 

supplying political goodies in the form of outdated laws and regulations with high-sounding phrases, the 

kind that can be interpreted in different ways by private enterprise-trained lawyers and judges including 

the interpretation of The Saskatchewan Elections Act. This Liberal philosophy of market and 

competition of supply and demand, which is outdated, is neither free nor palatable nor democratic. And 

that‘s my contention. It is the Premier‘s kind of philosophy. It contains no equality because these private 

enterprise capitalists only concede welfare and other public programs to avoid a revolution, such as 

we‘ve seen during our lifetime, such as we read about in France. Some of us remember what happened 

in the Soviet Union because of imperialistic Russia‘s autocracy. 

 

The Premier has expounded and many in his party expounded – I‘ve heard them – that if anyone wants 

an education, if anyone wants security, then he or she must get it by their own efforts. Such Liberal 

democrats, if you want to call them that, forget about millions of handicapped, the underprivileged who 

have been robbed of their resources. They only think of the rat race, how they can be in the forefront and 

how they could join hands with the powerful magnates. I‘ll have something to say on that before I sit 

down today. They know these facts better than I do, because it is the way of their survival and the 

survival of an outdated and vicious philosophy which they uphold. It seems to me that the Government 

in the Throne Speech indicates very clearly that it does not understand that we live in a transitional age, 

an age of social change. It doesn‘t understand that social institutions have become an accepted way of 

life and that these changes, technical and political, have brought definite benefits to our provincial 

community and to our country. The Premier and his supporters opposite know this to be true but they 

shout to the skies, ―Private enterprise will save you; it is the only way to live.‖ The Premier says that‘s 

nonsense. Well it is nonsense. It is so outdated indeed, that it is nonsensical. Let me, Mr. Speaker, advise 

Hon. Members opposite that individual values are weakening and collective values and ideas are 

strengthening all over the world; particularly in the underdeveloped countries they are away ahead of us. 

And maybe the Russians have something that you haven‘t got because they do give free education to 

their youths, which you deny. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That‘s right. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

256 

Mr. Berezowsky: — What do you know about Bolshevism, the Russians or anything else? You don‘t 

even know as much as I do. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I don‘t want to know it, Bill. Show us your party card. The truth is coming out now, 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now let‘s get back to the Province of Saskatchewan and think of the kind of things 

that you should be doing instead of denying. Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Gentlemen had gone to 

public school, they would know that even the United States of America was founded on a former 

revolution or pre-revolutionary ideals, an ideology of freedom and truth. But, because greed and the 

desire to become rich form the only goal that private enterprises have, much of this ideology has been 

lost, so it is true that Madison Avenue rules the roost in the United States and the original idea of 

freedom have been lost there. Our Premier runs continuously to the United States to see if he can bring 

some of that new Liberalism down here to Saskatchewan, which can only destroy the great democracy 

that we built here. 

 

Now after these few words that I‘ve said to the Premier, I now say the Government must give true 

leadership and that our priorities must be people and the needs of our people. Governments must 

intervene if the needs of our people are threatened, governments must recognize that there must be some 

intervention in controls for the good of society. If these controls are good I won‘t disagree with the 

Government. But it‘s strange for me to listen and to hear that the Government wants to control 

education, it wants to control labor, it wants to control all these areas for power. When the Hon. Member 

from Prince Albert West got elected on the slogan that the CCF, the social democrats, who sit here and 

who were the Government believed in compulsion, stagnation, and high taxes, yet, Sir, the Member for 

Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) has been the greatest exponent of compulsion and stagnation and high 

taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What a terrible thing to say! To think that‘s my running mate up in Prince Albert! Very 

discouraging. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know why I‘m wasting my time with these stagey gentlemen, 

but I still hope that there may be some kind of a spark in them that might ignite. Then they‘d be able to 

realize what Saskatchewan and Canada are really facing and what must be done. 

 

Another thing they had a Royal Commission on Health Services. The Hon. Minister (Mr. Steuart) is 

quite aware of this Commission 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

257 

and must have read this in the report of that Commission. I quote one section: 

 

Democratic government is an agency which enables us to transcend exclusively individual and 

selfish drives and to provide benefits for all or at least the majority of the nation‘s individuals. 

 

Does that sink in? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What report was that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I told you what the report was. Look it up and read it. I‘ve got a speech to make 

here, but I‘ve told you what it was. And I say this, that national concern and public responsibility should 

be the prime responsibility of a Government, and this is where my friends opposite fail. And that‘s 

where they failed in the Throne Speech. To them, the private sector has all the answers they say. 

Industry comes first, as the Hon. Member for Prince Albert West has said, and people are second or 

subservient to industry and to the money establishments. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I‘ve got half your people working. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I say this is a narrow viewpoint, Mr. Speaker. Before the last election, Sir, this 

Liberal Government boasted of Saskatchewan‘s industrial growth and prosperity in all the areas of our 

economy. And there was a prophet in Prince Albert who said over and over again, ―Re-elect Dave 

Steuart, candidate for Prince Albert West and you will have even more and greater things than you have 

had in the past.‖ And I said, ―God help the people of Prince Albert West in Saskatchewan.‖ If we are 

going to get more of what you have given the people in the last three and one-half years, but unlike the 

oracles of Delphi, Mr. Speaker, unlike them, the prophecies that he made are not coming forth. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They‘re coming fifth. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — They are not coming forth in this Throne Speech at all. The people of 

Saskatchewan expected great things and did re-elect this Government. Yet immediately after the election 

– I don‘t have to say it – the Premier announced austerity, hard times, the need to tighten our belts. It is 

in the Throne Speech for all of us to read. And I can only say again that this Government is completely 

confused, telling on one hand how fortunate the people of Saskatchewan are in seeing all this industrial 

growth (which really started under the former Government) and then on the other hand saying, ―Tighten 

up your belts, boys, we are going to have higher taxes, tough times.‖ If that isn‘t confusion then I don‘t 

know what is. 

 

I should mention something about welfare, I think. We have 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

258 

a pretty good-looking Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) and I hope he does his job as well as he 

looks. I do suggest that, because we live in an interdependent society, capable, professional people are 

required to administer some of these programs. Under the former Minister as we know – he‘s not here – 

I‘m very sorry to say that we lost dozens if not hundreds of most capable people in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. As a result, welfare programs are suffering. At a later time, maybe on another occasion, 

I‘ll be able to mention a few things of what I have in mind in this connection. 

 

I should talk a bit about education and concerning education, I think that most Members will agree on 

the value of social programs, such as public spending on education. We listened tonight to speakers at 

our parliamentary conference and heard of nations that put education as the priority. Now, education 

should always be a priority, I think. Maybe we don‘t have to go to the extent that they did in Africa, but 

it should be a priority just the same. But the intention of the Government, as I see it in the Throne 

Speech and what we‘ve heard from the various speakers, is an attempt to tighten controls over 

education, try to keep the costs down. They say it‘s very commendable if you can do that, but on the 

other hand you must remember that, if you get out of line with what other provinces are doing or other 

parts of Canada or say the United States, then we may lose our teachers. I have met many people in 

different parts I‘ve been to recently who are very, very concerned, Mr. Speaker, on this particular point. 

They are afraid that we are going to lose our capable teachers and so I would suggest that you could 

withdraw the legislation you have in mind. I don‘t think it‘s that important. The best argument you can 

give as far as setting up, say, negotiating areas is to relieve the local boards from doing that particular 

job. But you should not antagonize hundreds of teachers. I think it would have been better if you could 

have negotiated through the Teachers‘ Association on a provincial basis, instead of trying to divide up 

trustees and teachers. Your original intentions, of course, were very bad because you were excluding 

principals and other members of teaching staffs who have been in this negotiation business. This 

Government should never forget the contribution teachers have made in the past with the exception of 

one or two that I know. 

 

An Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, the Hon. Member if he feels that I‘m referring to him, he‘s perfectly right, I 

am. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — I was going to be kind to you, Bill, and now I‘m going to have to think about it. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

259 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I think that you are on dangerous ground, Mr. Minister, with all due respect, at 

what you‘re trying to do and I‘d be very careful. 

 

Now I do want to talk about library facilities in our province. We heard an Hon. Member on the other 

side of the House the other day – I think it was the Minister, I may be wrong – but he was expounding, 

telling us what a fine report they had from a Library Committee, boasting as to what they are doing 

about libraries in the Province of Saskatchewan. Now let me say something that I saw in the last report 

of the Library Inquiry Committee. Its conclusions are on page 124, Sir, and I quote: ―Existing library 

facilities, public and regional in Saskatchewan are inadequate to meet the needs of the 20th century and 

if we fail . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — That‘s under the Socialists. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You have forgotten that you live in the 20th century. You are always thinking of 

the 18th century or the 17th. That‘s in the report, it‘s your own report. 

 

An Hon. Member: — But they are report on CCF . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You are the Government now and this is just a poor excuse. Why didn‘t you do 

your duty? We did things you would never have done and we‘re proud of what we‘ve done. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You did nothing, so we are acting. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now you show us that you can do as well. Later the Report says, Mr. Speaker, 

―There‘s room for and demand for improvements throughout the province.‖ I challenge this Government 

to do just what that Report says: Put in improvements, do the things that should be done. 

 

An Hon. Member: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And I want to point out to the Hon. Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) 

who calls himself the Member for Prince Albert, he should be ashamed. You are a Member representing 

the jail and the penitentiary. I am the Member who represents the pulp mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in spite of everything I‘m still friendly with the Hon. Member 

for Prince Albert West. I‘m the Member 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

260 

for Prince Albert East. He married me, I didn‘t marry him, but he married me and I have to get along 

with that kind of person. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . Sewage disposal plant and the Catholic cemetery. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Anyway I have some very, very fine institutions and I‘m very proud of them, 

believe me. And I have best of all, the finest people in Saskatchewan, I have the best fish in 

Saskatchewan, I have the only pulp mill in Saskatchewan, mines and wealth of all kinds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And I invite you and the Hon. Member from Nipawin (Mr. Radloff) to come into 

my constituency. By the way I own half of the Squaw Rapids Dam, it‘s in my constituency too. 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, if the Government is to prepare to accept its responsibility insofar as libraries 

are concerned, I suggest to the Hon. Minister from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) that a good place to 

start is Prince Albert. The late John Cuelenaere, as we all know, left a bequest of some $100,000 – I 

don‘t know the exact sum, only what I read in the press – and I think that we should carry out his desire 

that something good should be done with the money that he left behind, and I suggest that this 

Government should act immediately. Whatever purpose he left it for, let the Government contribute 

sufficient sums to see that good use is made of this money. 

 

Now I note in the Throne Speech that an increased amount of money is to be spent for highways. Again, 

the Government is placing priority on highway construction, as we‘ve heard all along. Oh yes, we‘ve cut 

down on education, we cut down on medical care or this and that, but highways? We are going to build 

more highways and its right in the Throne Speech. I don‘t agree with that priority, due to the fact that the 

Government is going to spend, I‘d say, at least $7 million in my constituency in this current year on 

highways, not for the farmers or Saskatchewan people, but for the pulp mill in particular. They will be 

cutting up our land and as a result farm people are up in arms. I‘m getting letters and communications of 

one kind and another telling me, ―Bill, do something. Try to straighten those people out.‖ I have these 

complaints, I can read them. I think the Minister received a complaint from the Municipality of 

Buckland, No. 491 telling him that the road shouldn‘t be constructed across country from the pulp mill 

down to Spruce Home. For the love of me I don‘t know why the Government wants to do so, because, if 

you build the highway in from there, it won‘t be of much use for farmers because the route bypasses the 

city of Prince Albert. It‘s directed to the pulp mill. Why not bring the pulp the way it should be brought 

down? Why don‘t you build a road straight north from the pulp mill? This makes logic and sense. When 

you get into the timber, the timber will be accessible to this road. Then proceed across the north in any 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

261 

direction you want to go and bypass the communities as you are doing now, but leave the farmers alone. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Too far that way. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Too far? That‘s a darn poor excuse. Too far! These people have torn out the trees 

and the roots and they cultivated this land. They haven‘t too much of it. This land is precious to them 

and no amount of money that you can pay will ever satisfy them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — As well, you are cutting through solid Liberal polls, and, if you want to lose the 

rest of the votes in Cumberland, just put another road through Honeymoon and Whitestar and the next 

time your candidate won‘t get enough votes to save his deposit. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I didn‘t know you had those places up there, Bill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Oh yes, you have Honeymoon and you have Whitestar and that‘s exactly where 

the road‘s going through, Sir. Certainly the Minister knows the area needs consultations. You‘ve been 

there having meetings. Hon. Ministers have been out there but you haven‘t been very successful in your 

attempts. I‘ll tell you why. The next time you put up a candidate, you put up a candidate that talks sense 

to the people. I want to refer to that just for a minute. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We did, Bill, but they are so used to you they didn‘t recognize it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — This gentleman went down to a meeting to which he wasn‘t invited, a meeting 

called by the municipality of Buckland, No. 491, at which councillors and the reeve were present. They 

discussed this highway problem. This gentleman who is a defeated candidate went to that meeting 

uninvited. He got up in that meeting and spoke up against your Government. He said they had no 

business to go through there with a highway and with that I of course agree. But he was only doing it to 

make a favorable impression on the people of that area. He said he was representing the Liberal party or 

the Liberal Government, I‘m not sure. If it was the Liberal Government you tell me whether you hired 

him, because you hire people like that all over the province, so maybe he was representing you yet he 

wasn‘t speaking on your behalf, Sir. Mr. Ted McDougall, who is a councillor and was a potential 

Liberal candidate but didn‘t get the nomination, got up and said, ―Let‘s not bring politics into this whole 

picture, because this should be above politics.‖ He said Cumberland 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

262 

should receive consideration from the Government. At this point, Mr. Eldon McLaughlin got up and said 

that it was a defeated constituency, and they don‘t deserve any consideration. Now if that‘s the way you 

people govern, if that‘s the kind of instructions that you give to your candidates, or if that‘s the kind of 

candidates you have, then you should be completely ashamed and disgraced. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Bill, we don‘t give our people any instructions. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Even the editor of the Prince Albert Herald who happens to be a very close friend 

of yours, wrote an editorial on this point, pointing that this was a little bit too much . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He‘s your cousin. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — He‘s not my cousin, he‘s my nephew. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I‘ll tell you another thing you want to know. If you didn‘t write his speeches and if 

you didn‘t threaten him with his job (the Premier said nobody was threatened or afraid of this 

Government) he wouldn‘t write the kind of editorials that you make him publish. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, wait till I tell him that. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes, you can tell him that and you can tell him I said so. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He‘ll get a divorce. What a terrible thing to say! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You can‘t tell me any different for when I write a letter to the Herald, and the 

editor writes an editorial just as soon as I submit my letter that he doesn‘t get in touch with you, then 

you write the editorial and they publish it in reply to my letter before the people even have a chance to 

read what I have said. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I must have lost control the last time. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, I did find what the Hon. Member said and I might as well read it to be 

correct – I can strike out what I said previously – here is what he said – this is one of your men, one that 

was your candidate and probably you are paying his way 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

263 

right now. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, no. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You aren‘t? Well I‘ll ask some questions and find out. I remember the Minister 

(Mr. Steuart) said a year ago, when asked about those trailers that you didn‘t tender them. You said, 

―Oh, yes, we always tender,‖ but when the question came back it was found that you never did tender, 

so I was right and you were wrong. Now, the quote is: 

 

The farmers in the area were justified in their concern. I am always opposed to cutting across 

quarter sections of land. Road allowances were designed by our forefathers to be used for these 

purposes. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Who said that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Your friend, Eldon McLaughlin. I would think there would be some kind of 

liaison between yourself and your people who are defeated candidates. But the most shocking part as I 

said before and I quote again from the press, from the Herald: 

 

Councillor McDougall, a Liberal spokesman, who was serving as chairman of this meeting, 

 

He did run as a Liberal, he didn‘t get nominated. Here is the quote actually: 

 

I shouldn‘t get politics involved but the Government does owe something to the people of 

Cumberland constituency. 

 

And again I agree, and what did the Liberal defeated candidate say: 

 

As far as the Government is concerned Cumberland is a defeated constituency so they don‘t owe 

you that much. 

 

I say that is a disgrace for the Government to have someone saying such things and the people of 

Saskatchewan should know about it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He is on his own, Bill, we don‘t tell our people what to say. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Okay then. I am going to bring out another point and I am going to challenge the 

Government to an investigation. I have it on reliable information that when the bills for the last election 

came into the press, the press was told to send the bills down to Toronto to some advertising company to 

be paid. When the Members advertised their accounts I was wondering, ―How come?‖ I didn‘t go on 

TV, I didn‘t spend money in the 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

264 

press for advertising, I didn‘t have these big sheets that the Hon. Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. 

Steuart) had, costing three or four hundred dollars a page, I had a little ad and yet I spent $2,900. The 

Hon. Member said he only spent $6,000 and yet I can see with all the TV and all the press accounts that 

there must have been $20,000 spent. Now I know where it came from; from your friends in Toronto who 

picked up the bill. The worst part of it is they will charge it up to advertising and beat the Dominion 

Government out of taxes that the Government should get. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Pint of order, can you prove that? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I put in my expense account and it is exactly right. I forget what it was but it was 

exactly what I spent. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Either withdraw that or prove it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member will not deny and there are other Hon. Members 

here too that will not deny, not all of them, but there have been companies that have picked up the tab 

for them and they could charge it up to advertising in their corporation and income tax. It happened here, 

in Prince Albert and you are one of them, and I can tell you something else that will make you blush. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — The Hon. Member has suggested that this party in the last election 

in some way received contributions which were illegal. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, I know something 

about my Hon. friends. They indulge in companies every chance they can get. And may I also say, Mr. 

Speaker, that within two years this party opposite received $40,000 or $50,000 for the Hon. Premier 

from the United Auto Workers in the United States. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sit down. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — On this point of order, I‘ll sit down, Mr. Speaker, 

according to the rules of the House, and not when I‘m told to by the Hon. Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I told you to sit down when I was standing up. Now sit down, if you please. Order! 

Who was on his feet last? Do you want to rise on a point of order? Point of order for the Leader of the 

Opposition. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

265 

Mr. Lloyd: — The Premier tries to make the point that this party has received these many tens of 

thousands of dollars; he is not telling the truth. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — National party. I‘ll table the information in the House tomorrow. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, that is not the national party we are talking about. This is the Saskatchewan 

party. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, may I proceed? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All I can say is this, I challenge the Premier and his 

Government to make an investigation. I will give you all the facts you need to know and where to go for 

them. I am satisfied this is true, that the tab has been picked up by your people in many cases. I‘m 

making this statement and I challenge you to appoint a commission to investigate it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Prove this or withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I will not withdraw. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, you‘ll have to prove it then, you‘ve made a statement . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You prove it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It would be the same thing if I make the charge that you spend most of your money 

buying liquor for the Indians. And I can prove that too. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, this is for the record. As I understand the Hon. 

Member for Prince Albert East-Cumberland has made very serious charges. If he will document those 

charges and make them in writing to me, I will be glad to look into them immediately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I‘ll be glad to do that. The person I know that could give the information, Mr. 

Speaker, might give it to me. I can tell you where it is. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

266 

Mr. Heald: — You made the charges, you give the information to this House. Don‘t go to the outside. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You go to the Herald, to the accounting office and you‘ll get it there. Do you want 

any more? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going anywhere. You made the charges in this House, you make 

the charges to me, chapter and verse or withdraw. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Sir, I am not withdrawing anything. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Pint of order, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that, however much the 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald) may feel that he is in charge of the administration of justice in the 

province, it is not up to him to say whether a Member withdraws a comment in this House or not. It is 

rather improper or discourteous of him to hurl insults across the House and say, ‗You‘ll do this, or you‘ll 

withdraw.‘ I think it is up to the House and I think the House will make its decision in due course. 

 

Mr. Heald: — He‘s quite right, Mr. Speaker, all I am saying is that the Hon. Member has made a very 

serious charge and I think he has an obligation to this House to either document the charge or indicate to 

me when he is prepared to document it or withdraw it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I did not charge any Member opposite, I talked about the Liberal 

party, I said that in the Liberal party somebody had picked up the tab from Toronto, an advertising 

company and they know that it is true. If they don‘t want to admit it, that‘s fine. I said where they can 

get the information. An employee that is working there passed it along to me, but you can go to the 

office. If you appoint a commission to investigate you‘ll find this out. But I will say this, that I am glad 

that I did not have to have anybody else pick up my tab. I paid my way and my paid have paid our way. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I draw your attention to Beauchesne‘s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 

180, subsection 4: 

 

Scandalous charges or imputations directed against Members are equivalent to libellous charges 

brought against the House itself. 

 

That‘s all the Members of the House. I think that almost covers the situation which we find ourselves in 

this evening. Certain charges have been made in connection with expenditures in connection, I think, 

with the last election. I would suggest that 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

267 

the Member contributes some proof thereof or he will have to withdraw the charges he has made. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I didn‘t make any imputations against any Member. I referred to the 

Liberal party. Somebody picked up their tab for advertising. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, if I understand the debate correctly the charges were laid against the Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy). Now there is a possibility that I may have misunderstood. There was quite a lot of 

noise going on at the time but that was my understanding. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Members were interfering with my speech and maybe in the 

heat of debate I may have inferred something about both Members, the Member from Prince Albert 

West (Mr. Steuart) and the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). If I did, then I, of course, withdraw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — But I say again concerning elections, I think that it is preferable that we pay our 

own way. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — You get a lot from unions all over the country. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I spent $2,900 in my constituency. That‘s all we spent, and it is all hard-earned 

money. If you people wanted to have this out in the open, why didn‘t you agree with us a year or two 

ago to have campaign contributions exposed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Maybe you don‘t know they are taking orders direct from the unions. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — What bothers me is this that, if what I have said is the case – and I have every 

reason to believe that it is so – then such companies will charge it up to advertising in a case like this, 

and the Federal Government or the Provincial Government will lose income in corporation taxes to that 

extent. That‘s the point I wanted to make. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No point at all! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That is your opinion. I was shocked by the mover of the Address-in-Reply (Mr. 

McPherson) and his philosophy. I will 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

268 

again try to help him see the light, so that we don‘t have to fight across the floor of the House. Then 

maybe we can arrive at some understanding of what our job here is. As a matter of fact he made a pretty 

good speech except that the contents were kind of outdated. I remember hearing something about a 

McPherson from Ottawa, a professor, so I obtained a book from the library to see if he felt the same way 

as the Hon. Member who is a McPherson feels. I recommend this book to the Hon. Member, ―The Real 

World of Democracy‖ and I would like to read a paragraph or two. On page 6, about the middle of the 

page, it says this: 

 

The claims of democracy would never have been admitted in the present liberal-democracies had 

those countries not got a solid basis of liberalism first. 

 

The liberal democracies that we know were liberal first and democratic later. To put this in 

another way, before democracy came in the western world, there came to society and the politics 

of choice, the society and the politics of competition, the society and the politics of the market. 

 

I hope it is sinking in. 

 

This was the liberal society and the liberal state. 

 

Now I just want to read another paragraph: 

 

This society based on individual choices had of course some drawbacks. 

 

You see what he says about that? This is a learned gentleman, a professor with one of our large 

universities. This society based on individual choices had of course some drawbacks and we see them in 

this House. 

 

There was necessarily great equality, for you cannot have a capitalist market society unless some 

people have got the accumulated capital and a great many others have none. 

 

This is a situation that we see more and more of in Saskatchewan, or they have so little that they cannot 

work on their own but have to offer their labor to others. 

 

This involves an equality of freedom of choice. 

 

I‘ll be through in a minute, I just want to read this paragraph, Sir. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What are you quoting from? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I quoted from the book called ―The Real World of 

Democracy‖ by a prominent gentlemen, C.B. McPherson, the Massey Lectures, fourth series, which is 

used in our University. I didn‘t get it from Moscow. Now I‘ll go on from where I left off. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

269 

This involves equality and freedom of choice, all are free but some are freer than others. 

 

It goes on, I‘m not going to read the whole paragraph, after all I hope you read the book. I hope the 

Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) reads the book. Maybe he may become a democrat someday. I quote: 

 

There is nothing democratic about it in any sense of equality, of real right, but it is liberal. 

 

Now maybe that is too deep for the Hon. Members. I‘ve wasted a lot of time on them. I‘ve got some 

good material here which I must leave for another time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Did you get cut off, Bill? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I try to get points across that affect my people, and that‘s my job here in this 

Legislature. I hope that when this is all finished we‘ll still all be friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The Throne Speech mentions, of course, that there has been a decrease in the 

production of wealth in the province. Of course we always have known that, if the farm industry suffers, 

so the Province has to suffer. I don‘t want to repeat what the Premier said about people leaving this 

province, but I understand that, since they became the Government, about 20,000 people that should 

never have left this province, have left. We were promised that 80,000 jobs would be provided, and we 

thought people would come into this province. But as a matter of fact they are leaving. This is very sad 

for me because I know when I go out sometimes into the country to see half a township of land with 

maybe two farmers residing there where there used to be someone on every quarter, now I find maybe 

half a dozen or less families. It makes me sad because I wonder what has happened to the agriculture 

industry. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . jobs. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — That‘s right, that‘s all you‘re concerned with and that is what‘s wrong with you. 

Your whole intent and purpose is just one, to provide jobs for the people. The resources belong to the 

corporations, give them away and let the people carry water and wood. That‘s your philosophy and it‘s a 

sad one indeed in a Christian society. A sad one indeed, you have said this time and time again, Mr. 

Minister, ―Our first priority is industry and the people to have jobs.‖ As a matter of fact I went to the 

opening of a store the other day in Regina here. The Hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher) maybe didn‘t see me 

but I saw him and I heard him speak, and he congratulated the company for 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

270 

coming to Regina. He said, ―This is another private enterprise business coming into Regina,‖ and that is 

good, Sir. Later he said, ―It is going to provide jobs for the people.‖ That‘s all that you can see – jobs. 

The fact that inherently the resources of this province – everything that is here, bequeathed as by the 

good Lord, belongs to the people. That you forget. You take away the property, the wealth of the people, 

you steal it from them and you give it to the industrial magnates, but the people will have jobs, you say. 

Still you can‘t see it, it can‘t sink into you in spite of what I‘ve said. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What would you do? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I would have let our own people go up there and produce the wealth and benefit 

thereby instead of giving the resources away. The people are paying now, when cutting timber worth 

$1.80 or $1.70 a cord, while you are giving it away for 50 cents to the industry. You are subsidizing 

industry by millions of dollars as you know. How much did you put in Saskatchewan Pulp Company of 

which you are a director? You tell us when you get up to speak, how many millions? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Nothing. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And who is paying the wages of these men? A million and one-half cords at $18 a 

cord, how many millions does that take? How many have you borrowed, how many shares have you 

bought? You answer these questions when you get up. I can only say that all this thinking that we hear 

from the Government about jobs, jobs, jobs, is muddled thinking. No wonder there is wasteful practice 

in the administration. It doesn‘t matter whether it‘s the administration of resources, or of education or of 

Indian affairs, housing, public health, and welfare. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Don‘t you like the pulp mill? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I appreciate that my people have jobs. What I don‘t like is that you have taken the 

prerogative of the people, and you put in $50 million of public money. By the time you get the plant 

going it‘s going to cost $100 million of public funds. Yet we won‘t own the mill. That‘s what‘s wrong. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Thousands of jobs . . . Never put up a cent. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — No wonder that people like John Egnatoff have spoken up. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — What‘s that got to do with the pulp? 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

271 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It‘s got to do with the way you administer things, no wonder that Dr. Howard 

Adams speaks up and no wonder that I speak up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now take the need for housing in the Province of Saskatchewan. What a sad 

situation! There is a greater need in our province today than ever before. Yes, there is some industry, the 

people are moving from the farms into the city and they have no homes. There are 40 homes or so sitting 

in Prince Albert, built by some company friends of the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). They are 

standing vacant now for the second year and pretty soon you‘ll have to be rebuilding these houses. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — There‘s only ten left. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It‘s about time. What is it – three years now? People need homes. What have we 

done in Saskatchewan towards good housing? We see, as the Premier has pointed out in the Throne 

Speech, that interest rates have gone up. Why? Is it not the prerogative of governments, of this 

Government and the Government at Ottawa to see to it that people obtain money for essentials, say 

housing, at a rate of interest that they can pay, particularly the low-income people. No, you‘ve got to 

collect nearly nine per cent from them. They can‘t pay it and so they have no homes. They continue to 

live like they do in Prince Albert in old shacks all around town. On occasion fire breaks out and some of 

them die. Of course, the Governments recognize this need but what do they do about it? As I said 

interest rates are too high and they say it‘s inflation. But who caused inflation? People ask this question: 

why is there inflation? Who is responsible? Then some Liberal gets up and says it‘s because there is too 

much money in the country. The farmer that has had deficits or hasn‘t made any money and the workers 

in the same position say, ―Well we haven‘t got any of it.‖ Just because there is too much money in the 

country you slap on 8 5/8 per cent interest on housing loans to keep the needy from building a house. So 

all I can say is that I hope this Government smartens up in Saskatchewan and makes representations to 

Ottawa and asks, ―Why can‘t you give us money at cost, whatever the cost is. You can give it to 

millionaires in Bermuda, why can‘t you lend it to the people of Canada?‖ 

 

I am going to say a few things about health and this is going to hurt somebody. I am preparing you so 

you had better get out your bow and arrow. You know when we were the Government we tried to 

democratize medicine. When the Medical Care Commission came in a few years ago we amended the 

Hospital Administration Act, Sir, in order that our doctors, because we knew many would be coming in 

from all over the country, would have a little more of a democratic setup than previously existed under 

the private Act that we had at that time. So we enacted 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

272 

in that Act that doctors could appeal to hospital boards in the event that privileges were taken away. I 

happen to be on a hospital board, and I should say that I am very proud of the institution. But over the 

last few years it made me sick to see what the establishment in Prince Albert and the Province of 

Saskatchewan are doing to doctors who are every bit as capable as you can find anywhere. It is a 

disgrace and it is the fault of the Minister, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). He brought in a Bill 

two years ago removing the democratic rights for doctors. It was a surprising thing to do, because 

looking at the kind of thinking all over the world and if you read the Charter for Humanity, article six, 

you find: 

 

Everyone has the right to recognition as a person before the law. 

 

Yet here are doctors working in our community clinic denied privileges. Persecuted! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Name one. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I‘ll name them. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, name them. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I‘ll name them, lots of them. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, go ahead. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Dr. Corvin was one and he left this province. He was qualified. Corvin was 

qualified enough. He went to Vancouver and as soon as he got there began to teach the subject for which 

he was refused privileges in the Victoria Union Hospital in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He hasn‘t got hospital privileges there. He wasn‘t qualified, Bill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You can‘t tell me that, I‘m on the board and I know what‘s been going on. Your 

stooges have been trying to persecute the doctors from the community clinic and you know it. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, that‘s not right, Bill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It‘s about time you smartened up or the people of Saskatchewan will smarten you 

up. This will be your last chance, believe me. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Tell the truth now. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I can say this, Mr. Attorney 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

273 

General, that you will protect the criminal before the law and under the Charter of Humanity, that 

everyone is entitled to, everyone is entitled to full equality for a fair and public hearing by an 

independent and impartial tribunal and the determination of his rights. The obligation we have is to see 

that our doctors in community clinics have a place to appeal to, and that is not to the establishment 

which does not agree with the idea of community clinics. Yet they cannot appeal to the board. The 

establishment in Prince Albert, and I suppose in other areas where they have such co-operative 

community clinics, has the majority of the doctors. They appoint their doctors to the advisory 

committees. They appoint their doctors to all kinds of other committees and I don‘t need to list them. 

Our doctors are ignored and our doctors are persecuted and prosecuted and they are threatened. They 

told one doctor in Prince Albert, because he had lost one case, which was much less than some of the 

other clinics had – they started to persecute him – to go before a psychiatrist. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He only killed one person, didn‘t he. Shame! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — He didn‘t kill anybody. When you say he killed that person, you get outside and 

say that and you will see what will happen to you. He didn‘t kill anybody. The child died at birth. 

 

Mr. Guy: — You said it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I did not say it. It was a death at birth. As soon as they could get that one case 

against him, then they started persecuting him, taking away his privileges. This was a doctor who saved 

my wife‘s life. I have letters here, indicating where, in one case involving a family and a woman who 

could not have children, this doctor was able to help them with advice and medical care. Now they have 

a child and the mother is having another one. You never saw a happier couple than these people. This is 

a medical man that knows what a doctor is supposed to know and yet he is being denied privileges and 

being persecuted. You had a doctor here in Regina – I‘ll give you his name if you want – an eye 

specialist and one of the best in Saskatchewan and in Canada, and he also was denied privileges for over 

a year by the establishment in Prince Albert, because of the fact that you removed his medical rights 

under the law. And I want to say to the new Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) that I hope that you will see 

the necessity, if you are going to have doctors come into this province and you are short of them now, to 

give these doctors the right to appeal to some independent tribunal instead of being at the mercy of an 

establishment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — We are proud of our Prince Albert community clinic and it was as the Hon. 

Members know, formed as a result of the 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

274 

withdrawal of services by Prince Albert doctors and the establishment during the medical care dispute in 

1962. A great number of people have co-operation as their philosophy, such as many of us in Prince 

Albert. For example, 2,000 of them have by now assembled their personal financial and administrative 

resources and offered Dr. Hjertas to take over the clinic. We offered him space to work in the clinic and 

he has been getting doctors. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Does he work for you? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes, he works for all of us. I mean he rents out the premises. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Oh, that‘s better. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — But it is our clinic. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He just about lost his licence there for a minute. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Of course you would do that, if you could get a chance. You‘d jump him right 

away. I know that and I am glad that you admitted it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Even Dr. Hjertas would like to admit that he worked for you. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Anyway, as a medical director we hoped that he would lease these premises and 

we hoped that he would provide medical care in time of need for our people. Now these citizens of 

Prince Albert and district shared the beliefs with the doctors that we contacted, that it was possible to 

have a medical clinic in Prince Albert, in which we could have group practice of medicine and which we 

now have. We have done very well in the last few years since we established the institution. We have 

added another storey and we can now put another eight or ten doctors there. 

 

But the difficulty now is that the legislation that the new Minister brought in a year ago – and I have it 

here in the Act – removed from section 29 of the Medical Profession Act, part C. It had said that if 

certain doctors had registration in the United Kingdom they could then be licensed in Saskatchewan. 

Now, however, a doctor who has LMSSA, which is a British qualifying qualifications and probably has 

FRCS, Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons, and a few other degrees as well, cannot be licensed 

in Saskatchewan. The College does not give him a licence. On one hand you hear the medical profession 

saying, and the people saying we haven‘t got enough doctors in Saskatchewan. On the other hand you 

are refusing these doctors from Great Britain. That is not the purpose of this legislation, surely. So I 

hope that the Minister will take a look at it and 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

275 

see that justice is done. Why should the people of Saskatchewan who are paying the shot and want these 

doctors to come here, be denied the service of these doctors, just because you have an institution and 

establishment which calls itself the College of Physicians and Surgeons, which persuaded this 

Government to amend that Medical Profession Act in the way that it did. The amendment is regrettable. 

Apparently we are stuck right now and can‘t get some doctors that would otherwise come here and who 

are very capable people. I could go on into specific cases, but I prefer not to mention any more names of 

doctors as it has been a very sad situation there. We are sad in the hospital board, we are sad in the 

community clinic board, and the people, over 2,000 of them, who are members are unhappy at what is 

going on. I think it is up to the Government to see that it corrects the situation. I am pleading with the 

Minister of Health to do something about it. 

 

There have been questions asked as to why the people in the north didn‘t vote for the Government. Well 

I can tell you why. When you ignore the rights of people, when your people make promises before an 

election, and break these promises, which I can prove by letters I have here. I can file them if you would 

like, Sir. Here‘s one. This is a member of the reserve just eight miles out of Prince Albert. He had to 

come to me eventually. And it is a good thing he did because, when I went down to Cumberland House 

just before the election, I said that all you have to do is vote for me and you will get power from Squaw 

Rapids. The first thing I knew when the election was over this Government began building power lines 

into Squaw Rapids. So now they know the person they should vote for. But seriously this gentleman 

writes to me and says this: 

 

Four years ago our superintendent and two officials from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation 

came to our reserve, the Sioux Wahpatten and held a meeting there. At this meeting they 

promised us that they would get power in our homes. So far nothing has been done about it. All 

we have been getting is promises year after year. 

 

Note that, Mr. Minister of Indian Affairs. 

 

Our white neighbors living adjacent to our reserve have power. Our reserve is only seven miles 

from the city of Prince Albert and that should not be too much of a problem to the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation. And on behalf of the members of my reserve, I am asking you, Sir, would 

you please enquire into this matter for us. 

 

I have other letters from this same reserve, signed by Edward Goodvoice. I think he is disillusioned and 

you will never get his vote again. I do hope you bring power shortly there. Then again I have other 

representations for some time, as a matter of fact years ago from Deschambault, to build a road. I have 

communications from Deschambault where they want a trail so that in the wintertime they can take their 

fish out overland because of the slushy ice on the lake. They have to have flour for 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

276 

bannock, groceries, sugar, and surely it isn‘t much for the Government to carry out its promise, because 

it did promise and I have it here, all these Liberal promises to build access roads into the north to these 

communities. These people are only asking for a trail so that they can travel and carry freight overland 

in the winter and summer. As a matter of fact, a local man up there that has a resort at Deschambault 

started to build the road himself. I wrote a letter to the Minister, Mr. Steuart, on November 23, asking 

him to consider the request of these people and I was very sincere about it. I am not going to read his 

reply in order to embarrass him. I just want to point out that I think the Government is wrong in its 

policy of not acceding to the request of these people. The Minister thanked me for the letter of 

November, 1967, in connection with this trail to Deschambault settlement and he said, ―We are aware of 

the accessibility problem at Deschambault.‖ Yes, they are aware of it. ―On a number of occasions my 

officials have discussed this matter with the Indian Affairs Branch. As you know 90 per cent of the 

population of Deschambault was comprised of Treaty Indians. The Federal Government has advised us 

that no funds are available in the budget for access roads.‖ So the Federal Government isn‘t going to 

contribute anything and the Saskatchewan Government isn‘t going to contribute anything. That‘s what 

the Minister says. I would like to point out to the Minister, that this isn‘t a reserve, that it is your 

responsibility. Deschambault is not a reserve. As citizens of this Province these people should have 

access to the jobs that are available to them at Share Mines or Flin Flon, to take their fish out to market, 

associate with other people, to work in the pulp industry. They are entitled to this much. For goodness 

sake, can‘t you find $10,000 or $5,000, or even less than that, to build a trail into Deschambault. These 

people have been hounding me and pleading with me and I am sure that the Minister has had numerous 

requests. I have been talking to the new Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) – I am sorry he is 

not well – but I think that I will get better results from him than I did from the former Minister. I can 

only say this to the former Minister (Mr. Steuart), ―You hit foul balls when you were the Minister of 

Natural Resources. You hit foul balls, as I pointed out, when you were the Minister of Health, and if you 

hit any more foul balls into left field, this is the last chance you will have. Believe me.‖ 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That‘s a pretty good trick. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And don‘t rip up any more Indian graves at the Cumberland House because you 

won‘t get any votes there either. Concerning Indians, may I say this: Pauline Johnson said, ―They but 

forgot we Indians owned the land. From ocean onto ocean that they stand upon the soil that centuries 

ago, was our kingdom and our right alone.‖ 

 

Let‘s not as Legislators, gentlemen, forget that. Let us not forget that this is a land of the Indian, and 

whether he has treaties or not, we have a responsibility to give them all 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

277 

that we possibly can so that they can mingle with us and become part of the Canada as we envision it in 

the future. The Human Relations of June, 1967, I think that is from Toronto by E.G. Mortimer, 

summarizes a report and you can read all of it. I can give you the date of the article and he says this: 

 

Indians should be full citizens of each province and should move under provincial jurisdiction 

for welfare purposes, yet they should not lose anything by the transfer. The quality and the 

services they get should go up not down. Every change should win the Indians‘ consent before it 

is made. 

 

Don‘t start telling the Indians what is good for them. Ask them what they want and let them develop 

slowly so they can get to the same status that we have. 

 

The main emphasis in economic development should be on education. 

 

That is what these people need. 

 

Vocational training techniques of mobility to enable Indians to take employment in wage and 

salaried jobs. Development of locally available resources should be viewed as paying a 

secondary role for those who do not choose to seek outside employment. 

 

There is a lot of good in this report. I suggest that the Minister and other Government Members read it. 

And maybe we will find some of the answers. 

 

Well there are so many things when you come to this Legislature that pile up in one year, that one could 

talk on for half a day, but I don‘t intend to today. I have a few things to say in the Budget debate, I hope. 

 

There is one other matter that I want to bring to the attention of the Legislature. It is on this matter of 

extending and making the French language official. I welcome the suggestion in the Throne Speech that 

the French language is going to get a place in Saskatchewan. But I would like to point out that although 

I welcome the principle, I would hope that the Government would not be politically expedient but that 

they be democratic. I will explain what I mean. First of all it is recognized and considered that a cultured 

person or a civilized one, should know more than one language. I am very fortunate that I can speak two, 

and from this vantage point, I say why not make it official to teach any mother tongue in addition to 

English, if there is a large enough demand for it. Let me remind Hon. Members that Germans, 

Ukrainians, and certainly Indians have been here for a long time. Some of the Members who sit in this 

House are of my ethnic origin and are of a third or fourth generation and they are all Canadians. The 

mother tongue they speak today is not a foreign language, it is a 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

278 

Canadian language, which is either Ukrainian, German or Hungarian or whatever it might be, in their 

churches. They use it in their cultural institutions, not to build another nation here, but to hold on to the 

traditions and customs that they have had in the past and that they want to contribute to an eventual 

Canada. I agree that, in time it doesn‘t matter whether it is French or any other language, it will probably 

disappear, but much good will remain in Canada. And if we really want to be democratic, I think that we 

should make it possible, not only for the French to be official, but for other languages to be taught, in 

particular, the Indian language. For example, if you were an Indian today, poor, pushed around, and you 

didn‘t even have the right to teach your native tongue in the schools, in a land that was originally yours, 

just how would you feel? Would you feel like integrating? I don‘t think so. Now we have of course, as 

Ukrainian Canadians, organizations in which a great number of people are members, and I certainly 

support these people. I refer to the Ukrainian Canadian Committee. I hope that all of you received a 

copy of this pamphlet here in which they present what I would say in the course to follow. 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — My wife thinks you are crazy, Bill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, of course, she may think you are too! Mr. Speaker, a paragraph in this letter 

says this: ―However we are against constituting small English-French districts. We don‘t want small 

English-French districts any more than others.‖ And then it goes on to say: ―We believe that not only 

one or two, but all elements of our national structure should be used in building Canada‘s future growth 

and unity.‖ In essence, Mr. Speaker, if you make only one or two languages official, then we will be the 

same as Indians. We will be second grade citizens very soon. I am a Canadian. The French have 

historical rights, I grant that. As I said I welcome what you propose, but I think if you are really 

democratic, you could go one step further and say to the other ethnic groups whoever they might be; ‗If 

you want to teach your language in the primary grades or in higher grades then it is officially possible.‘ 

Have it in the statute books that this is really a free and democratic country and that we recognize people 

of all origins as being equal. I say particularly, the Indian people. This could be the first step in their 

integration. I am not going to oppose what the Government proposes, I am only suggesting that it could 

do a little more than it has said it would do. Now, I have said a great deal. I have pointed out to the 

Government that I am not entirely satisfied with all of their programs which are indicated in the Throne 

Speech and I will certainly vote for the amendment and against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, in taking part 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

279 

in this debate, first of all I would like to extend my congratulations to you as other Members have, for 

your election to your high office. I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate all the new 

Members in the House. Certainly all of us have enjoyed their initial remarks. In taking part in this 

debate, I wish to challenge one theme, Mr. Speaker, the theme that has permeated this House since the 

inception of this Legislature, people before dollars. The Socialists have attempted to perpetrate this 

slogan upon the people of Saskatchewan for the past four years. Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a 

misrepresented, hypocritical, inconsistent, misleading, deceitful slogan, a statement at complete variance 

with the facts, it is this phoney criticism by the Socialists opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Let me give you a few examples of this hypocrisy. During the election campaign 

the benevolent Leader of the Opposition is quoted in the Leader-Post on September 27th as saying that: 

―The CCF program puts people before dollars. This means a reversal of the policy of the present 

Government.‖ Again, a few weeks ago he took to the news media with charges that the Government was 

stealing from the senior citizens in calculating his income the two per cent increase in Federal 

Government payments on their old age security and the guaranteed income supplement. He is again 

quoted in the Leader-Post: 

 

I strongly object to this chiselling by the Provincial Government to the extent of $1.50 per 

month. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Patience, patience! Mr. Lloyd said that the Federal Government granted the two 

per cent increase which amounts to $1.50 a month, on the basis of old age security, to help those people 

to keep pace with the rising costs of living. To top it off, he made the following comments in this debate 

and I quote: 

 

When the Government tightens its belt, it is the lean people who feel the pinch. 

 

He went on to say that this reduction was at the expense of the leanest of the lean people in 

Saskatchewan. As always the Socialists with the arrogance of solemnity place themselves on a pedestal 

of virtue and blindly close their eyes to the truth. Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of the lesson in the 

Scripture, Luke 18. The parable describes two men who went to the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and 

the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed, ―Oh God I thank thee that I am not like the rest of 

men, thieves, dishonest, robbers, or even like the publican. I fast twice a week. I pay tithes of all that I 

possess.‖ The lesson further states that he that exalts himself, shall be humble. This self-proclaimed 

virtue of the NDP is exactly the same kind as the Pharisee‘s. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

280 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, if the Pharisee walked into this Chamber, I would say that 

automatically he would take his chair on your left, and I suggest, front and centre. Mr. Speaker, when 

we judge a political party, we judge it not by what they say, but by what they do. If ever a political party 

has betrayed the people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the senior citizens, it is the NDPs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — 20 years! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, let‘s examine their record in dealing with the old age pensioner and 

the need of Saskatchewan. Let‘s go over their record. Without going into the entire history of the 

inauguration of pensions by a Federal Liberal Government and their subsequent development, let me 

begin in 1947. In April, 1947, the Socialists increased the supplementary allowance to $5.00 per month, 

thus providing a maximum pension of $30. This pension was shared on the following basis: The 

Dominion paid $18.75 and the Province, $11.25. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Province 

extended this generosity of $11.25 for one month only. Effective on May 1, 1947, the Dominion paid 

$22.50. What did the generous Socialists opposite do, Mr. Speaker? Did they pass this on to the senior 

citizens? They did not. The CCF instead of passing on this increase to the pensioners, reduced its own 

contribution from $11.25 to $7.50. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Shame! Shame! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — They discontinued the supplemental allowance and kept the maximum pension at 

$30 per month. This action, said the Deputy Minister, would save $675,000 annually. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Stealing it! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Socialists chiselled from the leanest of the lean. Such concern for people must 

have touched the hearts of our senior citizens. How did this affect the pensioners of Saskatchewan under 

Government that puts people before dollars, compared to the other Provinces. Following the increase by 

the Dominion, Ontario raised the maximum pension from $28 to $40; British Columbia from $35 to 

$40; Alberta from $30 to $35; Nova Scotia from $30 to $35; Saskatchewan remained at $30. As a result 

of these increases the Provincial contributions to the senior citizens were as follows: Ontario - $17.50; 

British Columbia - $17.50; Alberta - $12.50; Nova Scotia - $12.50; and the humanitarian Socialists in 

Saskatchewan - $7.50. Such concern for people must have touched the hearts again of our senior 

citizens. The next step in this dismal record of shoddy 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

281 

treatment of our senior citizens took place a year later. On February 19, 1948, during the debate on the 

Speech from the Throne, the Liberal Opposition moved the following amendment. Mr. Speaker, I have 

the journals from the Saskatchewan Legislature, 1948. Here is the Resolution moved by Mr. Herman 

Danielson, Liberal Member for Arm River: 

 

That this Legislature regrets that your Honour‘s advisers decided in 1947 to discontinue payment 

of supplemental allowance to old age pensioners. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this Resolution was defeated. Every Socialist with their hearts bleeding, 

with the exception of one, voted against this Resolution. And it is also interesting, Mr. Speaker, in 

noticing this, some very distinguished Members are voting against it. Douglas – Weyburn; Lloyd – 

Biggar. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Yes. A fellow by the name of Dewhurst from Wadena. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Fred, shame! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The same fellows. Then on February 8, 1948, after all the pressure from the 

Liberal Opposition the rich philanthropist, Clarence Fines, announced that effective April 1, the 

maximum pension would again be increased to $35 after months of cutting off this poor supplementary 

allowance. The next step in this sordid record took place on May 1, 1949, when a Liberal Government at 

Ottawa increased the basic pension to $40 of which the Dominion Government paid $30. While other 

provinces made increases in their contributions, the CCF made none. Again this spirit of concern for 

people must have touched the hearts of our senior citizens. Since April, 1948, the contributions of the 

CCF Government had been $12.50 per month. This consisted of $7.50 as 25 per cent of the basic 

pension of $30 and $5 supplemental allowance. With a new Dominion increase to $40, the Provincial 

contribution of 25 per cent of that, was $10. By keeping their contribution to $12.50, the supplemental 

allowance was therefore reduced by $2.50. It represented another $2.50, chiselled out of the pockets of 

our senior citizens. By this time, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the senior citizens wish that this concern 

for people would shift to another segment of the population. Next, Mr. Speaker, believe it or not, 

following the 1949 Federal Government increases, British Columbia increased its maximum pension to 

$50 and Alberta at first to $47.50 and then to $50. Once again, the party that has such concern for people 

failed to raise their pensions. Then, Mr. Speaker, the next step and the most vicious in a long tale of 

shoddy treatment, this party that in the House of Commons shouts loud and long against any form of 

means tests, imposed one here in Saskatchewan. It was the most vicious, repugnant piece of legislation 

ever enacted by any Government in this Province. 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

282 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Dominion Pensions Act and Regulations impose no limit on the 

supplementary allowances paid by the Provinces. The party that puts people before dollars, the NDP 

imposed by Order in Council No. 404/1948, dated March 9, and effective April 1, 1948, a means test to 

all its supplementary pensioners. Every chicken, every egg, every carrot and every potato was calculated 

in the means test. Its result was that the miserable, small, niggardly supplementary allowances of $5 was 

reduced for hundreds of Saskatchewan pensions to $1.50, $2, $2.50, according to their means. They 

deprived 40 per cent of the pensioners in Saskatchewan of all or part of their supplemental allowance. 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, there are still hundreds of our senior citizens in Saskatchewan 

receiving this miserable $2.50. Once again this concern for people must have touched the hearts of our 

senior citizens. 

 

The next step in this vicious tale didn‘t occur in 1950, it occurred in 1962-63. The Old Age Security was 

raised from $65 to $75. Benefits under the supplemental program were adjusted in each occasion to 

match the Federal increase, except, Mr. Speaker, for persons in nursing homes and boarding out homes. 

This party that has such concern for people and particularly the sick people, Mr. Speaker, refused to pass 

on this increase to those senior citizens lying sick in nursing homes. Once again the leanest of the lean 

were made to suffer. This concern for people must have touched the hearts of our senior citizens, 

especially those sick in our nursing homes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, be careful, this story of the Socialist treatment . . . 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Now there ain‘t no Santa Claus! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — You know, the Member for Melfort should remember that the good Lord gave him 

two ears and one mouth and if he would open his ears and flap his mouth in the ratio of two to one, his 

contribution to this House would be doubled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this story of the Socialist treatment of the senior citizens would be incomplete without 

examining briefly their treatment of other needy people in Saskatchewan. In his address the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) made a great shout of distain because of the high cost of living and I quote: 

 

The cost of living has gone up 6.6, this increase in the cost of living has to come out of the 

already low standards of living of these people. 

 

Isn‘t it tragic, Mr. Speaker, that this sympathy, this compassion, this understanding for the underdog, 

wasn‘t in evidence when he was the Premier of Saskatchewan. Despite the tremendous 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

283 

rise in the cost of living from 1959 to 1964, the benevolent Socialists failed to raise the allowances for 

the needy in Saskatchewan by one thin dime. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, they did raise very little the 

clothing allowance in 1962. Despite the increased costs in food, rent and all the other necessities of life, 

the blind, the disabled, the widows and the senior citizens received not a crumb, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again this concern for people must have touched the hearts of the needy. 

 

Let‘s look at another area, in Child Welfare Resources. One of the most distressing policies of the 

Socialists when they were the Government of Saskatchewan was their complete lack of development of 

resources for Child Welfare in this province. Mr. Speaker, up until 1964, the Province of Saskatchewan 

had the poorest child welfare resources of any Province in Canada. Until that time we had resources to 

look after 92 children, 10 in Embury House, 36 in the Boys‘ School, 18 in Dales House and 28 in 

Kilburn Hall. Of these 92, Mr. Speaker, 46 or half, were in receiving homes that offered neither 

treatment nor long range planning. A receiving home is merely a place where you take a child that‘s 

under protection or neglected, you deposit for two weeks or a month until such time as you find a 

permanent plan. Saskatchewan had to depend on the charity of other Provinces to look after the 

unfortunate children after 20 years of Socialist Government. We had children, Mr. Speaker, in 

Edmonton, in Winnipeg and as far away as Toronto. A disgrace to our Province and a disgrace to the 

Government of the day. Let me enumerate some of the resources we used in other provinces: 

Mapleridge Girls‘ School in Edmonton; Manitoba Home for Girls, Winnipeg; Knowles School for Boys, 

Winnipeg; Warrendale for emotionally disturbed children in Toronto; Kiwanis Group Home, Edmonton; 

St. Agnes School for Girls, Winnipeg; Marymount Home for Girls, Winnipeg; Roslyn Home for Girls, 

Winnipeg. With the development of Ranch Ehrlo, Brown Camps, six new group homes, a new Dales 

House, we have now a capacity for 197, more than double four years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, we are still suffering from the Socialists lack of concern in this field. 

We still have no school for delinquent girls, we still must develop more treatment facilities. Once again 

the NDP‘s concern for people must have touched the hearts of the unfortunate children. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, despite this rise in the cost of living, these generous Socialists refused to raise 

the per diem cost of foster home care for years and years and years. This man who generates such 

compassion for the poor and the cost of living refused to raise these per diem costs when he was the 

Premier. Immediately after we became the Government we raised those per diem costs on two separate 

occasions, the first in September, 1965, and the second in April, 1966. Once again, Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP‘s concern for people must have touched the hearts of our unfortunate children. No, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDPs 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

284 

don‘t put people before dollars, they put politics before people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — By propaganda, their writers and speakers are constantly attempting to build an 

image of a party concerned with people. But when it comes to action and performance, it is the exact 

opposite. Their treatment of our senior citizens is a record that all of us should be ashamed of. The best 

example of politics before people is in the way the Socialists handled the Christmas bonuses. Here was a 

program, Mr. Speaker, that our Socialist friends engendered with great publicity. Our friend the Mayor 

would announce with all the fanfare that bonuses were to be paid. The NDP would proudly announce 

from the rooftops that once again they were opening the purse strings to render a little Christmas Cheer. 

But what were the facts, Mr. Speaker? It was one of the most discriminatory welfare programs ever 

conceived. This discrimination existed not only between communities and municipalities, but even 

between the needy in the same cities. 

 

Let me take 1965 for an example, the year that we inherited the program. First of all, only Regina, 

Saskatoon and Moose Jaw provided these bonuses. How could a Government accept the principle of a 

policy that treats welfare recipients from the larger cities differently than those of the smaller urban 

centres and rural areas. Second, Christmas bonuses were not provided even in the cities of Regina, 

Saskatoon and Moose to the majority of welfare recipients. None of these people receiving benefits 

under the categorical programs ever received Christmas bonuses. Those recipients on Disabled Persons‘ 

Allowance, Blind Persons‘ Allowance, Mothers‘ Allowance and other categorical programs were denied 

Christmas bonuses. For example, in the city of Regina, 830 people under social aid received a Christmas 

bonus in 1965, but a total of 1,753 who received benefits under other programs were denied bonuses. 

How can a Government say that a person on social aid has a greater need than a seriously disabled 

person. How can the Socialists subscribe to a policy that discriminates between individuals because of a 

program under which they receive assistance. Mr. Speaker, this is politics before people. The Socialists 

spent more money advertising and on propaganda about Christmas bonuses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let me outline briefly the policy of this Government in regard 

to the needy in Saskatchewan. Let me also outline our policy in regard to benefits to be passed on from 

the Federal Government. I want the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) to listen carefully. In 1966 the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Government passed The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. It was the first Province in 

Canada to pass an Act establishing one integrated uniform program for all welfare recipients. This 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

285 

kind of a program was the goal of all welfare-conscious people in Canada. Let me quote from a policy 

statement of the Canadian Welfare Council of June 2, 1958. By the way, Mr. Speaker, this is the same 

council that the Leader of the Opposition referred to so liberally in his speech on Tuesday. I quote: 

 

There should be a Federal Public Assistance Act which would be in effect, an extension of The 

Unemployment Assistance Act and which would enable the Dominion Government to share the 

aggregate costs to a province, and to the municipalities in a province, of providing financial 

assistance to all persons who are in need. 

 

This has now been accomplished, Mr. Speaker, by a Federal Liberal Government that passed The 

Canada Assistance Act and which complements The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. But, Mr. Speaker, 

there is one basic principle imbued in both of these Acts, that principles calls for one uniform program 

that treats all people in need with justice and equality. It does not discriminate between individuals or 

between groups. It treats the blind, the disabled, the widows, the senior citizens, and all people 

according to their needs. It repudiates the principle of giving to one group higher benefits than to any 

other group. It also eliminates individuals receiving substandard levels of benefits on different programs 

and brings them up to a level that is adequate to their needs. The best illustration of this principle is to 

relate it to another discriminatory program of the NDP, The Disabled Persons‘ Allowance. Under the 

Socialists, the blind persons and the senior citizens were provided with a supplementary allowance, but 

not the disabled persons. Mentally and physically disabled people, the people that needed the resources 

and the care and the medical treatment more than any other group in Saskatchewan were paid $75 a 

month on a means test basis, regardless of the size of their family or their needs. No health services were 

provided. How could the Socialists justify this kind of discrimination? 

 

In practical application, the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan calls for increased benefits to be paid to all 

persons equally. This was done in 1966 when the former Minister, the Member from Rosthern (Mr. 

Boldt) increased the allowance schedules for the first time since 1959 by six per cent. They were paid to 

every individual in Saskatchewan regardless of whether they were blind, disabled, widows or senior 

citizens, as long as they received benefits under The Saskatchewan Assistance Act. Similarly, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1967 when the Federal Government initiated the Guaranteed Income Supplement, it decreed 

that it must be calculated as income for all benefits under The Canada Assistance Act. It meant that it 

would not duplicate its share under the Old Age Assistance program. It meant that the Province of 

Saskatchewan would lose the Federal share of that program unless it calculated that increase as income. 

On that occasion, Mr. Speaker, we accepted the principle that all increased benefits must be shared 

equally by all people in need. We did not return the increased benefits to the Provincial Treasury. We 

passed on the one million dollars plus, to every individual 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

286 

receiving benefits under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) in his address on Tuesday made the following statement and I 

quote: 

 

I suggest that the Provincial Government saved in that operation, something like one million 

dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he knows that that statement is false. He is fully aware of what was done with the 

Guaranteed Income Supplement savings. Once again politics before people. Mr. Speaker, on April 1, 

one million dollars of increased benefits to all people covered under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 

were put into effect as a result of the Guaranteed Income Supplement. It was allocated in the following 

manner: (1) increase in food allowances – 10 per cent; (2) increase in personal allowances from $1.75 to 

$3.25; (3) ceilings on assistance payments for nursing and special-care homes were raised from $165 to 

$180 per month for limited care and from $235 to $260 for intensive care; (4) certain other boarding out 

rates were also raised. 

 

Let me state categorically to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan that this Government is 

not interested in saving dollars at the expense of the needy in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Let me also say categorically that we refuse to discriminate between individuals or 

groups who require assistance. We will treat them all equally. Any additional benefits will be passed on 

to every recipient. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to the issue at hand, the 2 per cent adjustment of the Federal Government 

in its payments to pensioners based on changes in the consumer price index. What does this amount to in 

Provincial welfare payments? What is the Saskatchewan Government to do with the increased revenues 

made available by this adjustment? The net amount to the Province of Saskatchewan resulting from this 

adjustment is according to our calculations $28,750. I remind the House that we have already in 1967 

passed on one million dollars in cost of living adjustments to recipients. This $28,750, Mr. Speaker, will 

be used by the Department of Welfare and multiplied many times over to a total of over one-quarter of a 

million dollars. It will be directed to that area of our caseload where the need is greatest. It is also 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this additional one quarter of a million dollars of increased expenditure 

under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan will be spent on our senior citizens. The areas of our caseload 

where we estimate the greatest need exists in 1968, are increased rates for nursing-home care and an 

increase in rent schedules for housing. When this Budget comes in, Mr. Speaker, you will see increased 

expenditures under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan to cover these necessities. We are presently 

assessing the increased 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

287 

costs of renting homes and are now reviewing the maintenance rates in all nursing homes. It is important 

to point out, Mr. Speaker, that over 35 per cent of all people at present receiving care in special-care 

facilities in Saskatchewan are receiving public assistance. The total costs charged to the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan are in excess of $130,000 per month. The average cost of care for all our pensioners 

receiving assistance under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan for nursing care is approximately $110 per 

month to the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. If nursing homes are to continue to provide a high level of 

care, the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan must adjust their maintenance rates for our clients as their costs 

continue to rise. We now estimate that increased maintenance rates will cost over $250,000 during the 

coming year. In addition, Mr. Speaker, new beds now coming into operation during the latter months of 

1967 and 1968, will cost an additional approximately $200,000. This, Mr. Speaker, is where we are 

directing the $28,750. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — I want to repeat again that we as a Government have no intention of saving a few 

dollars like our Socialist friends opposite did on so many occasions. I also want to repeat, if we are to 

treat all people in need equally, we must and we will keep our schedules and allowances the same, for 

all people on welfare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend just a few moments reporting to this House on our program to provide 

special-care facilities to our senior citizens. Here, Mr. Speaker, is the best example I know to indicate 

this Government‘s concern for the elderly people of Saskatchewan. It is also the best example to show 

the ineptitude of our Socialist friends in looking after our senior citizens. The need to provide these 

facilities has received major emphasis by this Government. We believe that our pioneers and senior 

citizens deserve the best of care in their declining years. I am also certain that the projects for which 

many Saskatchewan communities are most proud, are the senior citizens‘ projects springing up all over 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On March 31, 1964, there was accommodation in Saskatchewan for 2,583 persons in special-care 

facilities and accommodation for 2,084 persons in self-contained units. Today, Mr. Speaker, there is 

accommodation for 4,592 people in special-care facilities and an additional 600 beds, roughly, are under 

construction or firmly committed to begin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — This will bring the total to 5,200 beds, more than double what existed in 

Saskatchewan four years ago. Saskatchewan is now a leader in providing special-care facilities to the 

aged. In addition, 805 self-contained living units have been built 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

288 

since 19645. Mr. Speaker, in 1964 there were 77 senior citizens‘ projects in Saskatchewan, today there 

are 118, plus many additions, many extensions and renovations to existing facilities. This did not happen 

by accident. It was a direct result of the conscious dedication and self-sacrifice of many community and 

volunteer leaders. Our Government is proud of the part it has played in making this accomplishment 

possible. These 118 projects represent a Provincial investment of $7,191,649 and of this amount 

$3,372,827 has been paid out since 1964, approximately 50 per cent. 

 

I invite some of our NDP Members across the way to visit some of these nursing homes in their own 

community. Drive down the streets of Regina and see the new nursing homes of the Salvation Army, 

Knights of Columbus under construction or the one at Pioneer Village. Drive to Weyburn, Estevan, 

Bengough, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Southey, Melville, Fort Qu‘Appelle, Yorkton, Saskatoon and a host 

of other communities and you will find the Liberal Government‘s investment in our senior citizens. This 

is the difference, Mr. Speaker, between the NDP and the Liberals, they put politics before people. We 

invest dollars in people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now that I see that I have a few minutes left after making my initial remarks, I want to 

make a few comments on some of the remarks made by previous Members in the House. First of all, like 

all of us, I was most interested in the new Members who have spoken. Some of these new Members 

were ushered into this House with a great deal of fanfare. The greatest fanfare, however, Mr. Speaker, 

was for the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). I have an article and I certainly would recommend 

it to the reading of all the Members of the House. It is in the Star Weekly Magazine of December 30. 

You know that as a matter of fact I found it very interesting; it is entitled ―In Saskatchewan – Roy 

Romanow‖, a new Member who scares even his own party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I enjoyed some of the remarks in the article, particularly after 

listening to some of the comments that the Member had to say. One of the things that struck me most 

was his intent to pledge undying loyalty to the Socialist philosophy and his undying loyalty to the 

Leader of his party. I don‘t really blame him because you know I am really not sure whether he was 

trying to convince his own Leader, his own party or Members or his own constituents. Particularly after 

reading the comments in the story, listen to this: 

 

Romanow refused to discuss his relations with Leader Lloyd – at least for the record – but it‘s no 

secret in Saskatchewan that his views did not endear him to the old guard during the campaign. 

And he further infuriated them by not only failing to adopt the hackneyed party 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

289 

line of incessantly attacking the Liberals and also remaining on such good terms with Liberal 

candidate, Mrs. Margaret Gent that he used to drive her home. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, a little later on it goes on to say: 

 

We don‘t mind so much that he wants to become another Tommy Douglas in Saskatchewan. 

What really worries us is that he may secretly be aiming to be another Ross Thatcher. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if that is the reason that they made so many remarks. Then, 

Mr. Speaker, there is another paragraph that I thought was really amusing. It says: 

 

―Look, fellows‖ he said, ―I am new at this. I don‘t know whether to come on strong and be a 

phoney or what. You could carve me up if I say the wrong thing.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he gave a great performance and he came on strong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, then on top of that – don‘t forget the second part of the quotation. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there were another couple of comments, I just couldn‘t figure out what he meant by 

―My generation.‖ I am not sure whether he meant the 18-year-olds. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, is that the Canadian you are quoting? 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — No it isn‘t. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — It‘s the Red Star. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — It‘s the Star Weekly. Mr. Speaker, he referred to my generation, now I am not sure 

whether he referred to the 18-year-olds in high school, the 21-year-olds in university. The only thing I 

am positive of he certainly didn‘t refer to the front benchers across the way. Mr. Speaker, he made the 

theme of his speech that the Liberals are out of tune with the times. Mr. Speaker, if free tuition in 

university, massive Government spending at a time of fiscal crisis in Canada . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — . . . that‘s the trouble, Mr. Speaker, they haven‘t got 



 

February 26, 1968 
 

 

290 

enough sense to recognize what the problems are. That speech he could have dug out from Tommy 

Douglas in 1944 or even gone back to Karl Marx. Then, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that I really got the 

biggest kick out of was his comments on free tuition. You know, Mr. Speaker, there is another little 

quotation in this article about free tuition. He goes on, he says: 

 

There is a horrible preoccupation in the CCF with being totally honest. You have to use a little 

political expedience. If we promise something like free university education we don‘t have to 

couch it by saying we‘ll get the Federal Government to help pay for it. We can just tell the public 

we‘ll do our best to provide it. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what those young university students would say about his political expedience. 

You know, the only thing I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that he was a little bit refreshing after some of the 

older Members we have listened to, and I am sure that he will make a real contribution to this House 

when he gets a little practical experience in politics and perhaps a slight touch of modesty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can see by my remarks, I will support the Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. 


