



















































Hansard: March 01, 1968


453 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Sixteenth Legislature 

12th Day 

 

Friday, March 1, 1968. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the Members of this Legislature, I 

would like to introduce 46 students of the grade eight class of Ituna school who are with their teachers, 

Mr. Hudema and Mr. Holowatiuk and their bus driver, Mr. Filarchuk. After a visit to the RCMP 

Museum, they have spent some time here. We hope that they are enjoying their stay in this House and 

learning something of the democratic process. I am sure that we all wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure this afternoon to introduce 

through you to the Members of the Legislature, 37 students of the grade seven and eight class in the 

town of Pilot Butte, in my constituency. These students are situated in the top two rows in the Speaker‘s 

gallery, along with their teachers, Mr. Gordon, Mr. Antochow and their driver, Mr. Lawrence Walters. 

Now for the edification of some Hon. Members, who perhaps may not know very much about Pilot 

Butte, I hope I can be forgiven if I quote very briefly this afternoon, from a book written by Bob Moon 

who is known to many of us, ‗This is Saskatchewan‘. It talks about Pilot Butte. I want particularly, His 

Worship the Mayor, the Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker), to listen to this, if he would. 

 

Now on past Pilot Butte, where a large circular-based hill, incongruously set on a flat plain, is used 

for tobogganing in the winter. Before the white man came, Indian sentinels stood atop it to signal the 

approach of the buffalo herds. The tribesman below would corral the buffalo in a natural ravine, 

buffalo pound and there slaughter them. Not too far away, buffalo bones were stacked in large 

regular patterned mounds. They bleached in the summer sun, and later when the railway came 

through, they were shipped out for the white man‘s uses. Some of them lay near Wascana Creek, a 

few miles away from the high butte, gave the district the name Pile o‘ Bones. No one though it 

would amount to much. However, it did become Regina, the capital of the Province, Queen City of 

the prairies. 

 

So I thought that all Members would be interested, this afternoon 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

454 

in knowing a little bit about the history of Pilot Butte. These students are here, they have been here most 

of the day. They have had the very interesting lecture, Mr. Speaker, arranged through you. They have 

seen the buildings and I know that they are going to be very interested this afternoon in listening to the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) present his 1968 Budget. I know that all of us wish them a safe 

journey home and hope that their visit here has been very interesting, informative and instructive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to associate myself with the Hon. Member from 

Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) in welcoming the grade eight students from Ituna. They are here under the 

supervision of two teachers, Mr. Hudema and Mr. Holowatiuk. Their good wives also came along to 

help along with the trip. Now this area, Ituna, is within the Touchwood constituency, but many of the 

students, that are here today, come from south of Ituna and south of Hubbard and Goodeve, and do 

attend school at Ituna. I want to say through you, Mr. Speaker, that I hope that they have a very good 

day here, a very educational day. I also want to say that I wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, again today, I would like to introduce to you and through 

you, to the Members of the Assembly, a group of students located in the Speaker‘s gallery. These 

students, 20 in number, are the grade eleven and twelve students from the Goodwater high school. They 

are accompanied here by their Principal, Mr. Andrew Medwid and their bus driver, Mr. Elmer Erickson. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the seventh consecutive year that the Goodwater high school has visited our 

Legislature during the session, somewhat perhaps of a record. I am sure that I am expressing the wishes 

and the desires of all the Members, when I say that we hope that this day again proves to be very 

educational and pleasant for them, and that their trip back home continues in the very same manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Milestone): — I, too, Mr. Speaker, would like to take this opportunity of 

introducing a fine group of students through you to the Members of the House. They are from Avonlea, 

and are situated in the west gallery. They are accompanied by their principal and members of their staff 

and driver. And I would say that if I was bringing in a grade twelve class to the Legislature in the 

Province of Saskatchewan, I can think of no more appropriate day of all the days than when the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) brings down his Budget. I would think that this would be an 

opportunity for them to see government in action and that no better occasion could be selected. I hope 

that they will 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

455 

have a safe journey home and that their stay in this House will be an educational one this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

FINAL GRAIN PAYMENTS 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Government for some weeks 

endeavored to persuade the Minister of Trade and Commerce and the Canadian Wheat Board to advance 

the proposed date for final grain payments of last year‘s crop. We, as of today, have been informed that 

the final oats and barley payments will commence by about March 10th. However, the Board will not be 

able to mail the final wheat payments until around March 25th or 26th. 

 

CELEBRATION OF SAINT DAVID’S DAY 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with those who have 

welcomed the students here today. I agree with the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) when 

he says that this is an important day for them to be here. I approach this for different reasons. It is 

important for them to be here today, because this is a day of some historical importance. Today is March 

1st, this is St. David‘s Day. I want to make one reservation, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this is St. David‘s 

Day has no relationship whatever to the fact that another David will deliver a Budget Speech later on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I don‘t really think he would claim sainthood, and I doubt very much whether what he 

has to say, today, is going to allow him to approach that position any closer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is one of some historical importance, I think. It 

occurs to me that for too long we have allowed the Spaniards, the Italians, and other groups to claim the 

credit for having discovered America. I have what seems to me to be incontrovertible evidence here in 

the March 30, 1967 issue of the Western Producer. This historical document proves without a doubt that 

it was indeed the Welsh who discovered America. They did so, as a matter of fact, 400 years before 

Columbus came here, in the year 1107 A.D. If there is any further doubt about this, it is documented in a 

book by someone called Lloyd and Powell in 1584. I hope that some of my friends will take the 

opportunity to read it. There is a bit of a gap in historical evidence between that and the next point I 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

456 

make to further prove this fact. So I‘ll have to ask the Members to use their imagination or do some 

historical extra-interpolation perhaps. It is reliably accounted that the Kootenay Indians in British 

Columbia have a number of very marked Welsh characteristics. They speak like Welshmen, they sing 

like Welshmen, they have a numerical system in which the words sound like Welsh words. In addition 

to that, Mr. Speaker, many of them have another well-known attribute of those of Welsh origin, they 

have curly hair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — It seems to me that the evidence is completely without danger of being contradicted. 

Furthermore, they appeared not only in this part of the hemisphere but also in Mexico, at some point 

later on. These are historical facts, which I think we ought to recognize on a day of this kind, Mr. 

Speaker. More seriously, I am sure that the Members of the Legislature will join in paying tribute to 

people of Welsh ancestry at this date, which is an important date for people of that ancestry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION 
 

CLOSURE OF SASKATCHEWAN PULP COMPANY LIMITED, CAMP NO. 1 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the 

Day, I would like to direct a question to either the Premier or the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). I 

have been advised that Saskatchewan Pulp Company Limited, of which the Provincial Treasurer is a 

director, has closed down Camp No. 1 and that about 60 men are involved in this shut-down. Most of the 

men are local people and a few are from Hinton, but I understand that most of the people that are laid off 

are people who farm in my community and who depend quite a bit on wages to supplement their meagre 

farm incomes. I thought maybe the Minister would like to make some comments, if he is aware of this 

shut-down. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Yes, I am aware of it, Mr. Speaker. I wonder what they 

did for a living before we brought in the pulp mill, Bill? The pulp yard is full, and we are getting ready 

for the spring break-up of the highways, and there have been some men laid off. This will be temporary, 

and they will be back at work within the not too distant future. 

 

MESSAGE FROM HIS HONOUR THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The Lieutenant Governor transmits Estimates of certain sums required for the service 

of the Province for the 12 months 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

457 

ending March 31, 1969, and Supplementary Estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1968, and recommends the same to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I Move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Thatcher: 

 

That His Honour‘s message, the Estimates and Supplementary be referred to the Committee of 

Supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to make the time-honored Motion of Supply. It has been somewhat 

of a tradition to wear a certain kind of a tie when you are doing this. I hadn‘t thought of keeping this 

tradition up, so Mr. MacDougall, our Member for Souris-Estevan, suggested maybe it was a thought that 

I should wear a Scotch tie. Now without revealing what is in the Budget, I think it might be a little 

appropriate, so I am an Irishman delivering a Budget on St. David‘s the Welshman‘s day, with a Scotch 

tie on, and I hope that all of the Members behind me feel like applauding me when it is all over. I‘ll try 

and keep my halo on straight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, today I have the honor of presenting to this Legislature, the fourth Budget 

of our Administration and my first as Provincial Treasurer. To begin with I would like to pay a tribute to 

my predecessor, Premier Thatcher, for the responsible and business-like way in which he conducted the 

financial affairs of our Province during the last four years. Saskatchewan has never been in better 

financial shape than it is today. The proof of this statement is evident by the fact that, according to 

financial institutions, Saskatchewan‘s credit rating recently passed British Columbia‘s and is now third 

among the provinces of Canada, just behind Ontario and Alberta. Our present favorable position has 

resulted from both sound Government budgeting and the rapid industrial expansion we have experienced 

in Saskatchewan during the last few years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — This record industrial and business development has been due in no small measure to 

the various incentive programs instituted as part of our financial program. 

 

As this year‘s Budget will indicate, our Administration will continue, in buoyant times, to balance the 

Budget and use surpluses whenever possible to pay off debt. We have used our 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

458 

fiscal powers not only to achieve balanced Budgets and increased development, but for other responsible 

goals as well. In bringing down the first Budget of the new Liberal Government in 1965, Premier 

Thatcher in his capacity as Treasurer stated four principles we would attempt to follow as a 

Government. He said we would: 1. keep our promises to the people, 2. reduce provincial taxes, 3. create 

a new political and economic climate to foster greater development in our province, 4. improve the 

living standards of our people. 

 

I would remind the House that we have maintained those principles. We have kept faith with the people 

of this province. We lowered Provincial taxes. We brought about major industrial and business 

expansion, and the living standards of our people have greatly improved over the past four years. At the 

same time social programs such as education, health and welfare were expanded and improved. We in 

Saskatchewan now enjoy the greatest prosperity in our history and our future prospects are excellent. 

 

However, there are weak spots in the economy, some danger signals we cannot afford to ignore. Mr. 

Speaker, this country faces a serious threat of inflation that must be checked. These inflationary 

pressures have several causes, not the least of which has been the failure of the last two Federal 

Governments to balance their budgets once in the last 10 years. Public demand on all levels of 

government in every part of Canada has also been a contributing factor. 

 

Wage and price increases that have had little or no relation to increased productivity have also helped 

force inflationary pressures to the present dangerous level. Although we have conducted our financial 

affairs in a most responsible manner, we are, after all, only a small part of the nation, and so find 

ourselves faced with the consequences of other people‘s inflationary actions. We have contributed little 

as a Government to the forces of inflation, but we stand in equal danger with the guilty. Inflation, Mr. 

Speaker, is not only Canada-wide, it is almost world-wide. As a result, practically every country in the 

western world is facing an agonizing reappraisal of its fiscal policies. Great Britain is a sad example of 

what happens when a government pushes its expenditures on welfare past the point where they can be 

supported by the productivity of the nation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — When this happens, everyone suffers, the poor even more than the rich because they 

can afford it less. Make no mistake, any government that continually lives beyond its means, even in the 

name of humanity, will eventually deal a cruel blow to the very people it professes to help. Inflation 

pushes up prices, wipes out savings and if not curbed, will end our present prosperity and jeopardize our 

great future as well. All governments in Canada have finally recognized the seriousness of this problem 

and are now taking corrective measures. 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

459 

Mr. Speaker, we have already begun to face our responsibility in this regard by curtailing Government 

expenditures wherever possible, by instituting a freeze on public employment and by reducing our 

borrowing to an absolute minimum. Though these actions have been timely and helpful, much more 

needs to be done to solve our immediate problem. Frankly, even though our tax base has expanded 

greatly these last four years, it has been outpaced by the rising cost of many governmental services. 

Higher wages, rising costs and increased public demand have combined to push education, health and 

welfare costs to levels undreamed of a few years ago. 

 

We are thus faced with four alternatives: 1. we could cut back on these vital programs. Mr. Speaker, we 

have trimmed and cut costs wherever we could in spite of protests from many quarters. We have gone as 

far as possible in this direction without endangering our basic responsibility for the education, health and 

welfare of our people. 2. We could embark on deficit financing. This might be necessary during a 

recession, but would be indefensible during an inflationary period such as we are now experiencing. 3. 

We could borrow the money for some of our highways, hospitals or university buildings. Again under 

certain conditions of easy money or low interest rates this course would have much merit. But with 

money as tight and as high priced as it now is, we would be adding to the inflationary pressures as well 

as piling up added costs for the years ahead. 4. Our fourth alternative is to raise taxes. This is the most 

difficult and probably the most unpopular alternative, but I am convinced it is the responsible and proper 

course to take at this time. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will ask the House to approve certain tax 

increases when they consider the Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before going into detail concerning the Government‘s plans for spending and raising funds 

in the coming year, I would first like to review the highlights of Saskatchewan‘s economy for the past 

year, and outline some of our plans for the year ahead. 

 

In 1967, most sectors of the Provincial economy showed modest gains over 1966. In some instances 

these gains were not as great as in previous years, but this reflected a slowing down of the Canadian 

economy as well as the reduction in our 1967 grain crop. Because of this, decreases were shown in the 

agricultural sector which affected such areas as total production, personal income and retail trade. 

However, in areas such as capital investment and housing, Saskatchewan‘s gains were greater than those 

made in Canada as a whole. Even with the problem of tight money and higher interest rates, housing 

construction was one of the bright spots of our economy in 1967. Total investment in housing was 

approximately 7.7 per cent higher than in 1966, an increase which was twice as great as that made in the 

rest of Canada. The increase in capital investment in Canada was down slightly. Again our increase was 

much greater, percentage-wise, than was Canada‘s. While the value of retail trade in Saskatchewan and 

across Canada did not show its usual great gain, it did rise slightly. This slow-down is further 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

460 

exemplified when we look at the non-agricultural sector of our economy. While unemployment was 

over 4 per cent in all of Canada, Saskatchewan only had about 1.3 per cent of its working force 

unemployed. Net value of non-agricultural production in Saskatchewan kept pace with or exceeded the 

increases nationally, and the increase in labor income was much greater than that for the rest of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that, if farm income had kept up to the levels of 1965 and 1966, we 

would have had another boom year. So if in 1968 we maintain the increases that were made in 1967 and 

have a better crop, our economy may again show the tremendous upward surge of the two previous 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal with some aspects of Federal-Provincial fiscal relations. Two major 

issues were the subject of recent Federal-Provincial meetings of the Tax Structure Committee and 

Ministers of Finance – the Carter Commission Report on Taxation and National Medicare. The 

Government of Saskatchewan‘s views on the Carter Report were presented at the last Finance Ministers‘ 

meeting in January. While we cannot take issue with any tax proposals which would remove the 

inequities of our present tax system, we expressed strong reservations over the Carter Report‘s 

recommendations on the agricultural and mineral industries. A study carried out by the Department of 

Agriculture and the Treasury showed that there would be a substantial increase in taxes on 

Saskatchewan‘s farmers if the Carter Commission‘s proposals were adopted. It was evident that the 

Carter Commission failed to grasp the problems of the farmer and the nature of his farming operation. 

We concluded that, while the implementation of the Carter Commission‘s proposals on agriculture 

might be a windfall for accountants, it would be one more blow to the farmer in terms of increased taxes 

and the costs associated with a complicated accounting system to calculate these taxes. We rejected 

outright the proposal to withdraw mining tax incentives on the basis that incentives are required to 

encourage early development of Saskatchewan‘s primary resources. 

 

A preliminary assessment of the potential impact of the Carter Commission‘s proposals on the mineral 

resources industry in Saskatchewan and Manitoba by Hedlin, Menzies and Associates Limited, 

confirmed our fears that the growth prospects of Saskatchewan, which are dependent on mineral 

resources, would be undermined. We supported the Federal Government‘s decision to reject the radical 

system proposed by the Carter Commission. Mr. Speaker, we agreed that the practical and sensible 

approach should be to make specific reforms of our present tax structure. 

 

We are pleased the Federal Medical Care Plan will go into effect July 1, 1968 and I will deal with this 

subject in more detail when I outline the public health spending proposals. Two other meetings of the 

Federal and Provincial Ministers of Finance were held to discuss the economic outlook and each 

Government‘s spending and financing plans in general terms. The 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

461 

Federal Government, for the first time, revealed its expenditure and financial targets for the 1968-69 

fiscal year. The Provincial Governments disclosed, also for the first time, general information on their 

fiscal and financing plans and problems. This was an important start towards the hoped-for achievement 

of co-ordination of fiscal policies among all levels of government. However, this goal will be difficult to 

achieve. All Governments will have to agree to provide confidential information regarding their 

spending plans on a uniform and consistent basis. These should include municipal spending, particularly 

the large metropolitan centres. The basic obstacle to achieving this goal has been the failure of the 

Federal Government to devise fiscal policies that recognize and take into account regional and 

provincial differences. At the same time, we admit the failure of the provincial and municipal 

governments to recognize the nation‘s interests, needs and goals in formulating their fiscal policies. We 

all hope we are now on the road to solving these problems. 

 

I will turn now, Mr. Speaker, to our fiscal position for 1967-68. In the last few years the Province has 

reaped the benefits of successive bumper wheat crops. In 1966-67 revenues exceeded original estimates 

by $15 million. In the current fiscal year we have appreciated the traditional wisdom of setting 

Provincial Budgets on the assumption of an average wheat yield. We calculate that total revenues in the 

current fiscal year will exceed estimates by about $3 million, or less than 1 per cent of those original 

estimates. Sales tax receipts may exceed the original estimate of $50 million by $1 million, representing 

a 7 per cent increase over 1966-67. If we note that, in 1967 as compared to 1966, retail sales increased 

by only 3.5 per cent and the capital investment rose by 8 per cent, we can appreciate the significance of 

sales tax returns resulting from the high level of capital investment in the Province. Gasoline tax receipts 

will not quite reach the original estimate of $36.3 million. While oil royalties levelled off due to a 

temporary decline in the demand for Saskatchewan crude oil, bonus bids will exceed the original 

estimate of $6.5 million by $2.2 million. Significant deep-well discoveries, encouraged by the 

Government‘s oil incentive program, resulted in active oil exploration in Saskatchewan this past year. 

Revenue from the Federal-Provincial tax-sharing arrangements based on Federal Government estimates 

will be some $3 million below the original estimate. Provincial individual income tax receipts will be 

$750,000 higher than estimated. Provincial corporation income tax will be down $1.2 million. The 

post-secondary education program equalization payments will be $1.5 million higher than we estimated. 

 

However, the Province‘s financial position received a serious setback when the Federal Government 

informed us of two overpayments totalling $6.8 million. Saskatchewan was overpaid $2.4 million in 

payments during the period from 1962 to 1966, and this will be deducted from the receipts over 12 

months in 1968-69. We also received an overpayment of $4.4 million in 1966-67 which will be deducted 

from the March cheque. And 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

462 

finally, revenues from the Federal Government under various shared-cost agreements as well as 

increases in other departmental revenues will exceed original estimates by $3.5 million. 

 

On the other side of the ledger, Mr. Speaker, we estimate that total net expenditures in the current fiscal 

year will exceed estimates by $3 million. For example, expenditures on the highway program will be 

over-expended by $3.1 million as a result of a longer construction season. The cost of fire suppression, 

which is an uncontrollable expenditure, will exceed the Budget by $1.2 million. Welfare expenditures 

were overspent by $1.4 million. This over-expenditure on welfare was largely due to three factors: we 

placed more welfare recipients in nursing homes; second, more children were admitted to child 

treatment centres; and third, we paid increased assistance for the special needs of welfare recipients. Mr. 

Speaker, when it became apparent that surplus budgetary revenues would not cover these major 

over-expenditures, the Government undertook measures to reduce spending in other areas to ensure a 

balanced budget. These deliberate measures included the staff freeze and deferment of capital projects. 

 

As a result the Liberal Government will not only record its fourth successive budgetary surplus, but will 

also set aside $750,000 for the South Saskatchewan Base Hospital, another $750,000 for the addition to 

the University Hospital in Saskatoon and $1 million for the Medicare Care Insurance Fund. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I will now, Mr. Speaker, briefly review our capital financing for 1967. 

 

1967 witnessed bond yields reaching historically high levels. While monetary policies were not overly 

restricted, and the rate of real growth in the economy was moderate, bond prices fell drastically. The 

main reason for this substantial decline was the large volume of Government debentures and public 

disenchantment with Government fixed-income securities in the light of sharply rising cost of living. 

Also the Canadian market is sensitive to the United States bond market which has reacted to the high 

Federal deficit caused by the Vietnam War and the United States balance of payments problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the calendar year 1967 the Province borrowed $64.5 million, an increase of $15.4 

million from the previous year. I would like to comment briefly on the debentures issued in 1967. Sales 

of Saskatchewan Savings Bonds, Series No. 7 amounted to $14,844,000 – an increase of $2.5 million 

over Series No. 6. The yield to investors on these bonds, if held to maturity is 5.54 per cent. The 

Province was fortunate in the timing of its last long-term issue dated March 1, 1967. The 20-year bond 

was offered to the public at a price to yield 6.2 per cent. The timing of the issue was very favorable to 

the Saskatchewan taxpayer. In fact the bonds were issued at a time 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

463 

when interest rates were at their lowest level in 1967. 

 

During 1967 we borrowed from the Canada Pension Plan $29 million. We were pleased to take 

advantage of this offer because of the lower interest rates that were available from this source. These 

amounts were advanced to the Saskatchewan Government Telephones, Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, University of Saskatchewan, and the Water Supply Board. We also authorized a 20-year 

debenture issue dated November 15, 1967, up to a maximum of $6.5 million to finance the four-lane 

highway construction program. This issue was sold to various Government and Crown corporation funds 

at par with interest at 7 per cent. As of December 31, $5.6 million of this issue had been sold. 

 

Because of the extremely high interest rates, the Government authorized the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation and the Saskatchewan Government Telephones to arrange for separate three-year bank 

loans of $15 million each without a Provincial guarantee. Mr. Speaker, these loans increase greatly the 

flexibility of the corporations to manage their cash positions and will permit the Province more latitude 

in obtaining long-term borrowed funds at more favorable terms. 

 

Total debt redemption during 1967 amounted to $19.6 million. The Government continued its policy of 

paying 3 per cent of the outstanding debt into sinking funds. A total of $168 million was held in the 

sinking funds available for debt retirement as of December 31, 1967. 

 

Mr. Speaker, local governments obviously faced the same difficulty marketing their debentures in 1967. 

Local government officials are to be commended for controlling capital spending in order to avoid 

borrowing at excessive rates of interest. The success achieved in selling debentures in the local market at 

interest rates lower than debentures marketed by large cities in other parts of Canada is remarkable. The 

Government under its present policy of assisting local governments in selling their debentures purchased 

$2.8 million of the debentures issued. This represented almost 10 per cent of the total estimated $29.9 

million of these debentures that were issued in 1967. This total includes $3.5 million of local authority 

debentures purchased under The Municipal Development and Loan Act. Mr. Speaker, I will next review 

the Province‘s Crown corporations. 

 

Our Government believes the interests of Saskatchewan and her people will be served best by private 

enterprise development of resource and manufacturing industries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — To the extent that Crown corporations can facilitate this economic growth or operate 

efficiently to achieve specific objectives not being met by private companies, they too can serve a useful 

purpose. Most of the Government business enterprises 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

464 

achieve satisfactory progress during 1967. Hon. Members will recall that, with the exception of the two 

large utilities, Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation and the Water Supply Board, the 

corporations are financed through the Government Finance Office. Two of the Government Finance 

Office (GFO) enterprises supplying the construction industry, the Estevan Brick Plant and the Timber 

Board experienced strikes in 1967 and will report less favorable operating results than in the previous 

year. However, in total the GFO group of corporations will again record a combined operating surplus in 

excess of $2 million. The plant of Estevan Brick Limited was out of production from mid-July through 

the construction season, as a result of a strike called by the United Glass and Ceramic Workers Union. 

The company will report a loss of $48,465 compared to a profit of $35,000 in 1966. Now with sustained 

operations throughout the year, a much improved result is anticipated for 1968. The Saskatchewan 

Timber Board encountered depressed lumber prices and difficult market conditions during the year. A 

strike called by the International Woodworkers of America halted production and sales through August 

and the first part of September. The profit earned by the corporation was reduced to $200,000 compared 

to $332,000 last year. The lumber market is showing an improving trend and, with the benefit of new 

production efficiency now being put into effect, a more satisfactory return should be forthcoming on 

public funds invested in this operation. 

 

The Saskatchewan Transportation Company established a new volume of business, standards of service 

given and net operation surplus earned. Profits after provision for reserves reached a total of $255,000 

compared to last year‘s record of $236,000. The Sodium Sulphate Division of Saskatchewan Minerals 

likewise set a new record for product tonnage. However, rising costs resulted in a slight decrease in net 

earnings, to $855,000 compared to $880,000 in 1966. The new 150,000 ton per year plant at Ingebrigt 

Lake was opened in August. The increased capacity made possible by this third plant will permit the 

corporation to maintain its fair share of the growing market. 

 

The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office general business has continued to expand in free 

competition with private insurance companies. Net premiums earned by the corporation increased seven 

per cent and net profit reached a total of $726,000 in 1967. Other small business enterprises in the GFO 

group of corporations operated normally during the year, returning a combined surplus of $93,000. 

 

The corporations established to supply power, telephone services and water to individual residents and 

the expanding industries in our province experienced a challenging year in 1967. Of these, the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation is the largest. In the past our Government has been very dissatisfied 

with the rate of return on investment for this utility. We were not satisfied, for example, with the fact 

that, when we came to power, the people owned 7½ per cent of the Saskatchewan Power 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

465 

Corporation, while 92.5 per cent was financed by bondholders. Mr. Speaker, this Government does not 

believe the overall profit picture can be improved until more of the Company is owned by the people 

and less financed by the bondholders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The Government is pleased that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has made 

gratifying improvements in its financial picture. In 1967 the debt-equity ration has now improved to 

86.14 as compared to 89.11 in 1966. During 1967, after setting aside normal depreciation and reserves, 

the net profits will be $10.9 million, or 2.3 per cent of the net plant investment in service. This is an 

increase of $500,000 over the 1966 profit. In the past year the cash flow position increased from $30.8 

million to $32.2 million. In this present fiscal year a dividend payment of $3 million will be paid to the 

Provincial Treasury or approximately 25 per cent of the 1967 net income. Mr. Speaker, this is the first 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation dividend payment in the history of the Corporation and represents 

tangible tax savings to the people of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In 1968 total revenues of the Corporation are expected to exceed $100 million, 

reflecting a continued and sound expansion of the Province‘s economy. In 1968, we expect overall 

power consumption in Saskatchewan will increase by 11 per cent. Slightly more than $20 million of the 

$44.2 million capital program will be used to increase plant generating capacity. Work will continue on 

the following projects: the 187 megawatt hydro station at Coteau Creek, $5.7 million; and the 300 

megawatt steam plant at Boundary Dam, $14.2 million. These projects are scheduled for commission in 

1968 and 1969 respectively. Engineering and design work is expected to commence in 1968 on a 100 

megawatt construction at Queen Elizabeth Power Station, Saskatoon, at an approximate cost of $16 

million. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation plans extension of electrical service to 11 Indian 

reserves, not presently being served. The estimated cost for this project is $486,000. Mr. Speaker, the 

present economic boom in Saskatchewan has created many new mines and industries, all of them 

requiring vastly increased quantities of gas and electricity. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation will 

extend electrical services to three potash mines in 1968. In connection with the gas utility, gas pipeline 

extensions were built to supply potash mines at Delisle, Allan, Viscount, Lanigan, and the pulp mill at 

Prince Albert. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation plans to continue its gas extension program to 

approximately 20 new towns in 1968. In 1968 the Saskatchewan Power Corporation will require 

advances from the Provincial Treasury of $34 million to finance its capital program. 

 

During 1967 further progress was made in improving the financial structure of the Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones. 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

466 

Net profit of this Corporation in 1967 will be $8.3 million, an increase of $1.5 million over the net 

income earned in 1966. On a basis of calculation consistent with that of last year, the portion of total 

capital represented by Government advances was reduced from 82 per cent at the end of 1966 to 80.5 

per cent at the end of 1967. Construction spending for Saskatchewan Government Telephones in 1968 

will total $22.6 million. In 1968 a second micro-wave route across the province will be completed. 

Telephones in service should increase by 17,000 or approximately 6 per cent. Twenty-nine manual 

exchanges will be converted to direct dial systems, and our Government is pleased to announce that at 

the end of 1968 nearly 92 per cent of all telephones in the province will be dial-operated. An amount of 

$750,000 has been provided to extend telephone service to unserved areas. This represents a 50 per cent 

increase over the amount provided for this purpose in the current year. Mr. Speaker, the unserved area 

program will extend service to seven areas, with a potential of 650 new subscribers. Since its inception 

11 areas have received telephone service including an estimated 581 subscribers. 

 

Funds from operations are expected to increase by over $1 million in 1968. A continuation of the policy 

of permitting the Corporation to retain approximately one half of its net income will result in 

requirements of new capital in the amount of $9.3 million to finance the 1968 construction program. The 

Government will receive a dividend in 1968-69 of $4,150,000 from the telephones. This is 50 per cent of 

the Corporation‘s net profit earned in 1967. Mr. Speaker, before outlining the major expenditure 

proposals I would now turn to the Government‘s fiscal forecast. 

 

Concerning the Government‘s fiscal forecast for 1968-69, again we have based our revenue forecasts on 

the 10-year average wheat crop of 19 bushels per acre. Mr. Speaker, it is expected that the Education 

and Health Tax will increase by $2 million over the revised estimate in the current year to about $53 

million. Gasoline tax revenue should increase by $1.8 million to about $37.8 million. Liquor profits 

should yield $24 million, an increase of $2.5 million. Tobacco taxes are expected to yield $3.8 million. 

In total, we expect revenue from the consumption taxes will yield $118.6 million. 

 

The Province‘s share of income taxes, excluding the Federal Government‘s unconditional transfer of 

funds based on post-secondary education, we estimate will exceed this year‘s receipts by $6 million. 

Twenty-nine percentage points of the individual income tax should yield $49.5 million, an increase of 

$5.3 million above the current year‘s revised estimate. The 20 per cent Provincial corporation income 

tax is estimated to yield $14.5 million, an increase of $.7 million. We estimate that we will receive $17.3 

million from the Federal Government based on the formula of 50 per cent of eligible post-secondary 

operating costs, an increase of $1.7 million over the current year‘s revised estimate. This unconditional 

transfer of funds will be received in the form of: four points of individual income tax, which will yield 

$6.8 million; 1 per cent of corporation taxable 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

467 

income, which will yield $1.5 million; and an adjustment grant of $9 million. 

 

During 1968-69 under the transitional arrangement, total equalization payments will be $19.8 million, a 

decrease of $6.6 million. Mr. Speaker, in two years the Government will have lost almost $20 million in 

equalization payments. From the estimate of the equalization payment a total of $2.4 million has been 

deducted to repay the Federal Government for the overpayment of equalization in the 1962-66 period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, receipts from mineral resources should yield about $38.7 million, a decline of $1.4 million 

over this year‘s revised estimate. While it may be possible for bonus bids in 1968-69 to reach the high 

level of $8.7 million in the current year, this is an unpredictable source of revenue. We believe it is more 

realistic to assume $6.5 million from this source. Oil and gas revenues excluding bonus bids are 

estimated to bring in $26.8 million, slightly above this year‘s revised receipts. Potash revenues are 

estimated to increase by $330,000 to a total of $2.4 million. In total we forecast all revenues, assuming 

no change in rates of taxation, would be $313.7 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, turning now to expenditures, I would point out that, if the Government had approved the 

original request of all Government departments and agencies, we would be facing a $61 million deficit. 

By working under the toughest possible criteria that, if an expenditure was not absolutely necessary for 

the welfare of the Province, it was deleted or postponed, we reduced this coming year‘s deficit to $20 

million at present levels of taxation. I now intend to outline our major spending plans for 1968-69 and 

the measures the Government proposes to implement in order to balance the Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will first outline our plans for the coming year in regard to education. The total cost of 

education to Saskatchewan taxpayers will be over $200 million in the coming year. Local taxpayers 

through their municipal taxes will have to bear approximately $78 million of this total. The same people, 

as Provincial and Federal taxpayers, will pay the other $24 million. Our Government‘s net expenditure 

in education in the coming fiscal year of $111.9 million represents an increase over this year of $19.1 

million, a new high for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I put these figures before you in this manner to emphasize that we in 

Saskatchewan are spending more money by far on education than on any other governmental service. I 

would point out that Provincial spending on education represents one-third of our net Budget, and is 

more than we allocate to any other department. These then are not the actions of a people or a 

government that downgrades education. These figures indicate in the strongest possible terms that we 

have given top priority to education. Education costs to the taxpayers of this Province 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

468 

have risen in the last four years by $70 million, and we are told there is no end to these increases in 

sight. With the total yearly costs to the Saskatchewan taxpayer approaching a quarter of a billion dollars, 

is it any wonder that the Government has asked everyone concerned with education to take a new look at 

how these funds are spent? We have asked the school trustees and the teachers, as well as university 

officials, to cut costs and hold the line wherever possible. We have insisted in closer scrutiny regarding 

the spending of tax dollars on education. Mr. Speaker, we are as concerned as anyone, probably more 

concerned than most people, with the quality of education in Saskatchewan. We must also be concerned 

with these ever-mounting costs and so we will insist that all phases of education, as they affect our costs, 

be examined in detail to ensure full value for the taxpayer. 

 

A review of the major expenditures planned for the coming year will indicate the importance our 

Government places on education. We propose to increase operating grants to schools by $2.7 million to 

a total of $60.3 million. This amount will cover almost one-half of the total projected school operating 

costs for the coming year. We estimate that the total enrolment will level off this year with some 

245,600 students in elementary and secondary schools. The Budget will provide construction and 

building grants for comprehensive high schools totalling $12.5 million – net cost to the Province after 

Federal reimbursement will be $5.1 million, an increase of $2 million. 

 

We are currently training more persons than ever before in the skills required to meet the ever-increasing 

demand for people with technical and trade skills, required for the expansion of industrial activity in our 

Province. Mr. Speaker, during the past three years, enrolments in our technical and vocational institutes 

have increased from 2,700 students to over 4,800 students, an increase of almost 80 per cent since we 

took office. Completion of the extension of the Institute of Applied Arts and Science in Saskatoon this 

fall will provide for more than double the present enrolment of 1,000 students in the trades and 

technologies. We propose to spend $6.8 million for technical and trade training in 1968-69. In the 

coming year the Government will provide $20 million operating grants to the University. This is an 

increase of $3.6 million or 22 per cent, by far the largest increase of any major spending program in the 

Budget. No one can deny the fact that this Government is giving top priority to university spending. We 

proposes to make a construction grant of $10,475,000 out of budgetary revenues instead of borrowing. 

We commend the University of Saskatchewan for organizing a private fund-raising campaign to assist in 

financing its capital requirements over the next seven years. I wish to announce today that the 

Government proposes to match dollar for dollar of the funds received from this campaign to a maximum 

of $1.5 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

469 

Mr. Steuart: — This, Mr. Speaker, will be over and above the $50 million capital grant commitment by 

the Government over a four-year period. We understand that the response from the campaign so far is 

excellent. $1 million is included in the $10,475,000 construction grant to the University to match any 

funds received before March 31, 1969. Total grants to the University will be $30,475,000 which is 

almost 9 per cent of the total Government Budget. We have been assured by the Board of Governors that 

the proposed level of grants will enable the University to accommodate any student who meets the 

required academic qualifications. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The University expects about 1,100 more full-time students enrolled in the coming 

academic year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) has accused the Government of overstating its 

level of financial assistance to the University of Saskatchewan. He claims that under the new 

Federal-Provincial financial arrangement the Province will be receiving $12 million from the Federal 

Government solely for the University of Saskatchewan in 1967-68. Either the Leader of the Opposition 

is deliberately misleading the public, or he is incapable of understanding the new Federal-Provincial 

financial arrangement. Under this arrangement the Provincial Government receives an unconditional 

transfer of funds which the Government may spend according to its priorities. The basis upon which this 

transfer is calculated is $15 per capita, or 50 per cent of eligible post-secondary operating costs. On the 

basis of $15 per capita the Province is assured of a minimum transfer of funds of $14.3 million, even if 

the Province does not give a single cent to the University of Saskatchewan. However, if the Province 

chooses to increase its present level of operating grant to the University of Saskatchewan, we will 

receive an additional transfer of funds based on 50 per cent of the increased spending by the University. 

 

What the Leader of the Opposition has failed to comprehend is that the Provincial Government would 

also receive an additional transfer of funds, if it increases its spending for technology programs in 

Provincial technical institutes, or increases its operating grants to the local school boards for grade XII 

education, or increases its grants to other post-secondary colleges in the Province. For that matter, there 

are numerous other non-educational programs for which the Province receives Federal cost-sharing that 

also have a strong claim on Provincial funds. We have given education top priority, but this does not 

mean that our Province has no other pressing demands for public expenditures. Since we don‘t have 

unlimited funds, the more we spend on education the less we will have for these other essential services. 

We feel the balance which we have struck is the most realistic and beneficial to all the people of the 

province. The idea that Saskatchewan taxpayers get something for nothing, because we receive Federal 

assistance through cost- 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

470 

sharing programs is no longer valid. 

 

Due to the economic growth of the Province and the resultant prosperity of our people we are no longer 

subsidized by taxpayers in richer provinces through Federal transfers of funds to this Province. So, Mr. 

Speaker, whether or not this grant is cost-shared, the fact still remains the Saskatchewan taxpayer is 

paying the Government‘s share of university financing. Now, Mr. Speaker, in the Public Works capital 

budget, a net amount of $2.6 million or an increase of $800,000 is provided to complete the extension to 

the Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences in Saskatoon and the capital building program for northern 

schools. In summary, this Government proposes to spend a net total of $111.9 million on education, or 

an increase of $19.1 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this increase cannot be met on our present tax base, so, if we are to 

keep pace with the demands of education, we have no choice but to widen the base and increase the rate 

of tax. Consequently as of midnight tonight the Education and Health Tax on its present basis will be 

raised from 4 per cent to its former rate of 5 per cent. On April 1st the 5 per cent Education and Health 

Tax will be charged on hotel, motor-hotel and hotel rooms, as well as on commercial cabins and 

cottages. We propose to exempt persons who reside in this type of accommodation for a continuous 

period exceeding 30 days. On April 1st the 5 per cent Education and Health Tax will be charged on 

meals sold at prices in excess of $2 or more. Also commencing on April 1st, 1968, the 5 per cent 

Education and Health Tax will be charged on all forms of telecommunications which will include 

telephones, telegrams, teletypes and private wire. Increasing this tax to 5 per cent and widening the base 

will produce added revenue of $12¼ million in 1968-69. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — What about turkey saddles? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — If we put in donkey saddles you might be in trouble. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — While the revenue from this tax will still be earmarked for both health and education, I 

have announced it at this time to emphasize the great financial burden we must face, if we are to keep 

our educational system ready to answer today‘s needs. Even on the widened base and at 5 per cent our 

sales tax will still be lower than Quebec‘s at 8 per cent, lower than Newfoundland‘s and New 

Brunswick‘s at 6 per cent, and the same as in Manitoba, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, Ontario and 

British Columbia. In other words we are still among the lowest in Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will turn to the Health Department. 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

471 

Many aspects of our health services are causing us grave concern. These are: the adequacy of our 

present health services; the public demand on these services and the increasing pressure to add new 

health programs; the shortage of professional and technical personnel in the field of health; and the fact 

that costs for health services in effect are increasing at an alarming rate. Health costs have been rising so 

fast they threaten the very foundation of our existing programs. 

 

Let us first look at our plans to improve present health programs. Now, Mr. Speaker, recognizing the 

need for more beds and improved facilities in the two major cities as well as other areas in the Province, 

we are providing a total of $3.9 million for hospital development. This includes $1 million for the South 

Saskatchewan Base Hospital in Regina, thus a total of $3.2 million has been set aside for this project. 

We will provide $1 million for extension to the University Hospital in Saskatoon. Altogether a total of 

$2 million is now set aside for this necessary addition. We have also provided $1.9 million for other 

hospitals throughout the Province. 

 

Saskatchewan‘s mental health program has been a subject of controversy for over 10 years. In 1966 we 

set up an ad hoc committee of citizens to look into criticisms of the boarding-out policies of our mental 

institutions. We then acted upon the recommendations made by that committee. Last year the 

Government commissioned Dr. S. Frazier to review the entire mental health program. We have received 

his report and have provided $500,000 for the first phase of implementation of his recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The program to extend psychiatric services to all parts of the province will be 

continued by opening the Prince Albert Psychiatric Centre built at a cost of $1.6 million. These then are 

some of the major changes we contemplate for existing health plans. 

 

We face constant demands to increase the coverage under the medical care scheme and even move into 

new fields not now covered by Government programs. Two basic factors prevent us from considering 

these demands at this time. The shortage of professional and technical personnel that hampers present 

programs makes new ones impossible. The second factor is that costs of existing plans have become so 

high as to rule out further advances this year. 

 

This brings me to our final and most serious concern, that is, sky-rocketing costs of health services. The 

over-all cost of the Government‘s health program in 1968-69 will be $136.7 million. This amount is 

allocated to programs on the following basis: the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, $74.1 million; 

the Medical Care Plan, $31.2 million; Mental Health, $14.8 million; additional amount for Frazier 

Commission recommendations, 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

472 

$500,000; Hospital Building and Expansion Fund, $3.9 million; other health spend programs, $11.7 

million; capital works budget for health, $.5 million. Mr. Speaker, I would ask Hon. Members to note 

that the total cost for these programs for the coming year will be up by $16.8 million over the current 

fiscal year. I would also point out that the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan will cost an added $8.3 

million in the next year and has increased by $66.5 million or 880 per cent since its inception 22 years 

ago. I have stated before that I am pleased we will receive Federal cost-sharing for medical care 

beginning July 1st. 

 

To qualify under the national plan we will expand our present coverage. I am pleased to announce that, 

effective July 1st this year, we will extend benefits to include refraction services provided by 

optometrists and ophthalmologists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Coverage will be further extended to Treaty Indians and recipients of war veterans‘ 

allowance. We estimate the cost of adding these services will amount to $2.1 million in the coming year. 

 

This $2.1 million added to the normal increase of $2.3 million will face us with a total cost for Medicare 

in 1968-69 of $31.2 million. We estimate that the Federal medical care scheme will provide us with 

$10.7 million. Another $6 million will be received from premium payments, leaving $14.5 million to be 

found from other sources to pay the total Medicare bill. It should be noted that while both the hospital 

and medicare programs are in fact insurance plans, the premiums would pay less than 18 per cent in the 

coming year. In passing I would also note that, in spite of an offer of Federal cost-sharing, rich 

provinces like Alberta and Ontario are extremely reluctant to institute comprehensive medical care 

coverage. Their fears are based on a realistic recognition of the tremendous burden such a plan will 

place on their taxpayers, a problem, Mr. Speaker, we must solve or eventually face a serious financial 

crisis. For example, these two health plans alone, will cost $105 million next year, based on what has 

already happened; and based on what has already happened, we can look forward to this total rising to 

over $200 million within the next seven years. Imagine only two programs in one department costing the 

people of Saskatchewan over $200 million. Even though some of this money comes from Ottawa, with 

cost-sharing on a national basis, the taxpayers of our province are, in reality, paying almost the total 

cost. Mr. Speaker, we must find a way of controlling these costs or given one or two crop failures they 

could undermine the financial position of the Province and possibly jeopardize these important 

programs. 

 

We feel the vast majority of our people want these plans maintained and to do this they must be 

financially secure. Our Government believes that the amount people pay for such a 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

473 

service should be related to the use they make of those services. We also feel that, if those who use a 

service are required to pay even a small portion of the cost, their demands may be more reasonable. We 

believe that even a small fee will discourage abuses of these services. For this reason, we will introduce 

utilization fees for hospital and medical services. The fees will be $2.50 per day in hospitals. The 

utilization fee of $2.50 per day in the hospitals will be reduced to $1.50 per day after the first 30 days. 

This will reduce the burden on chronically ill and long-stay patients. These fees will be payable to the 

hospital. With a few exceptions the utilization fees for medical care will be $1.50 per visit to a 

physician‘s office, and $2.00 on all other types of visits by a physician, for example, home, emergency 

and hospital outpatients. There will be no charge for a physician‘s visit to a hospital inpatient. These 

charges will be payable to the doctor concerned. The Government will of course assume responsibility 

for paying the fees on behalf of those in need. The effect will be to reduce the gross expenditures of the 

hospital plan by $3.4 million and of the medical care plan by $4 million. These reductions will be partly 

offset by increased administration costs, lower Federal reimbursements and the assumption of 

responsibility for these fees of indigent people. The net saving to the Provincial Treasury will be about 

$5 million. Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that this action will avert what could develop into a disastrous 

financial situation. We have made this difficult decision because we are convinced the only way to 

guarantee the continuance of both these plans is to keep them within the financial means of the Province 

and its people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, when we became the Government of this Province, we promised to do 

two things regarding the problems of social welfare: find employment for those able to work, provide 

greater assistance for those in real need, and we have done both these things. In the past three years the 

numbers on the welfare rolls have decreased but the cost of assistance has increased. Public assistance 

payments in 1968-69 will total $21.6 million, an increase of $3.2 million over 1967-68. The reduction in 

the number of welfare cases has made available additional funds to increase blind persons allowance, 

provide more assistance for widows, orphans, and others in need, expand our adoption program, and 

provide more nursing and special care homes. In an effort to further reduce the number of public 

assistance cases we are going to expand our upgrading courses in the two Provincial correctional 

centres, so that when these people leave the prisons they will not be forced to return to welfare. We will 

also enlarge our rehabilitative programs for public assistance recipients to enable as many as possible to 

obtain jobs. We feel this is money well spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our adoption programs are a source of pride to this Government. Despite the progress we 

have shown, there remains a real need to find good homes that will accept the 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

474 

hard to place child. Additional funds will be made available for the hiring of four trained social workers 

for this purpose. Emphasis will continue to be placed on our Adopt Indian-Metis Children Program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government also recognizes and is prepared to assume its share of the responsibility 

for providing housing for the aged and the infirm. At present, the Government operates or assists in 

operating four geriatric centres, 82 special care homes through direct subsidies, and six others indirectly. 

But we have just begun to scratch the surface. The demand for these facilities is growing at a spectacular 

rate. Your Government feels that every effort must be made to provide these services. Therefore, 

$750,000 will be made available through construction grants for this purpose. The total net expenditure 

for the Department of Welfare will be $20.2 million, up $3.1 million from the current year. This again 

indicates that our Government recognizes its responsibility to provide more assistance to those in need 

and also realizes that all the money spent on these services comes from the wage earners, the farmers 

and the businessmen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the 1967 Provincial election campaign, our party promised during the next four years to 

spend $250 million on Provincial highways and another $50 million on municipal and urban roads and 

streets for a total of $300 million. As a first step in keeping this promise, we propose to maintain the 

record level of highway spending set in the 1967-68 fiscal year with overall expenditures during the 

coming year of $58.5 million. Total highway spending during the coming year will exceed the $24.2 

million spent in 1963-64, the last year of the CCF Government, by more than 140 per cent. An amount 

of $5.4 million has been provided for the construction of 50 miles under the accelerated four-lane 

construction program. In the past year 42.8 miles of paving and 35.5 miles of grading were done under 

this program. This year we propose to finance the program out of budgetary revenue, instead of 

borrowing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Provision, Mr. Speaker, is also made for the following in 1968-69: the paving of 365 

miles, the oiling of 785 miles and the grading of 500 miles. The Urban Assistance Program will be 

continued at a high level with $4 million provided for this purpose. In the interval since our Government 

took office and the completion of next year‘s program, the Provincial highway system will have 

increased by 15 per cent to over 10,000 miles. The additional miles will consist of 586 miles of grid 

roads taken into the highway system, 458 miles of road constructed by the Department of Natural 

Resources and turned over to the Department of Highways, and 257 miles of new roads. Last year the 

total budgetary provision for Municipal Road Assistance Authority was increased by $1 million to $11.6 

million. This level of assistance will be maintained in 1968-69. 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

475 

Mr. Speaker, it is our opinion that most of the costs generated by our highway system should be borne 

by users of the system. The figures show that our planned spending on highways will exceed revenues 

from users by $20 million based on present rates and charges. To narrow the gap and maintain this 

principle, I propose to increase the gasoline tax by 2 cents per gallon effective midnight tonight. As of 

April 1, 1968, this 2 cents will be extended to all fuel petroleum products except those used for heating 

purposes. The present differential between taxable and currently non-taxable fuel petroleum products of 

15 cents per gallon on gasoline and 18 cents per gallon on diesel will be maintained. We expect this will 

increase receipts from the gasoline tax by almost $8 million. Since even this increase will still leave a 

gap of about $12 million between highway expenditures and revenue from users, I also propose to 

increase the fees for operators‘ licences, registrations of passenger vehicles, school buses and farm 

trucks. These new fees will mean an increase of about $2.3 million. The details area outlined in a table at 

the end of my printed speech. They will be in effect for the 1968-69 licence year. In spite of the fact that 

Saskatchewan has a far greater mileage of highways per capita than any other province in Canada, our 

gasoline tax and licence fees will not exceed the national average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Government continues to encourage diversification in agriculture so that a crop failure 

or loss of export market will not totally cripple our farmers. Grants will be made to farmers for the 

construction or improvement of hog production facilities in the Rural Development Area of 

Saskatchewan. In the current year, the Department of Agriculture expects to make grants totalling 

$165,000 on 75 approved applications. In 1968-69, we will make approximately 148 grants totalling 

$350,000. This means that collectively the farmers in Saskatchewan will be spending $1,400,000 before 

receiving the Provincial grant. The community pasture program will include five new pastures for the 

year 1968-69. Of these, four will be cattle pastures and one will be a sheep pasture. This will bring the 

total number to 51 cattle pastures and five sheep pastures. Currently 608.000 acres are being utilized for 

cattle pastures and 10,900 acres for sheep pastures. Mr. Speaker, our progress in developing the South 

Saskatchewan River Irrigation System has been encouraging. It is anticipated that in 1968-69 we will 

spend a total of $13.5 million on agriculture. This is approximately $2 million higher than in the current 

year which will make it the fifth highest spending department in government. The Government will offer 

crop insurance in the coming year to 12,000. This is an expansion of 41 per cent from the 8,200 

contracts taken up in the current year, an increase of almost 4,000 farmers. We are estimating 

expenditures of $331,300 to administer these contracts. This amount is higher than the estimate for the 

current year by $92,500. The Federal Government will reimburse the Province for 50 per cent of these 

expenditures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past year our Government established programs for legal aid to indigent persons 

and compensation for 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

476 

victims of violent crimes. In 1967-68 expenditures for these programs will amount to $65,000 and 

$15,000 respectively. In 1968-69 we are increasing this to $120,000 and to $40,000 for the continued 

development and operation of these programs. 

 

I turn now to the Government‘s proposal for expenditures on parks and recreational areas throughout the 

province. We propose to continue the development and operation of Provincial parks and recreational 

areas at the same high level for 1967-68. Approximately $3.3 million (gross) or $2.9 million (net) will 

be spent for this purpose in 1968-69. It is the intention to concentrate on the following four areas: Lake 

Diefenbaker, Moose Mountain, Greenwater Lake and Echo Valley. Not only do such developments 

provide all areas with attractive recreational facilities, but they also act as a tourist attraction disclosing 

the natural beauty of our province. Up to the present time, Mr. Speaker, 64 regional parks have been 

established in Saskatchewan and the Government presently has before it seven new applications for 

assistance. We are proposing to increase grants to regional parks by $71,540 or 25 per cent. 

 

Value of mineral production in 1968 will go up from $376 million to $403 million, for an increase of 7.2 

per cent. The increases in mineral production are represented by a $2 million increase in the value of 

metallic minerals and a $25 million increase in non-metallics, largely potash. Three new potash mines 

will commence production in 1968 – Duval (west of Saskatoon), Allan Potash, and Alwinsal (near 

Lanigan). The high level of interest by mining companies in northern Saskatchewan, which is largely 

attributable to the Government‘s dollar for dollar incentive program, continues. 92 companies are 

carrying out a $5 million program under this scheme at the present time. This Budget provides for an 

additional $100,000 or a total of $750,000 in incentive grants to encourage continued exploration in the 

pre-Cambrian Shield. 

 

The Provincial Youth Agency established in 1965 to promote the expansion of youth and recreation 

programs for youth has proven successful. Communities with a full-time recreation director have 

increased by 67 per cent. Communities with local co-ordinating boards are up by 125 per cent. The 

Lighted School House Grant Program has opened the doors of 390 schools in 260 communities 

involving over 30,000 young people. To keep this program going we are providing $100,000 in 

1968-69. Next year, our grant programs will receive a total of $228,000, an increase of $54,000. The 

Provincial Youth Agency opportunity caravan will continue its very successful operation in 1968-69 at a 

cost of $39,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize the problems facing municipalities in regard to their ever-mounting costs, 

coupled with the already high burden of property taxes. In an effort to ease the burden on local 

government, the Province has taken over most of the financing of welfare and hospital care programs 

from the municipalities. We intend to again increase our direct grants to local governments. We estimate 

that total direct Provincial 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

477 

assistance to local governments will be $88.3 million in 1968-69, an increase of $4 million. May I also 

remind members that the homeowner grant, which was first introduced by our Government two years 

ago, has directly reduced the property tax burden, particularly for lower income groups. For many 

homeowners, property taxes have been reduced by as much as 50 per cent. Total grants paid, amounting 

to $8.6 million, are the equivalent of a 7 per cent reduction in the total property tax in this province. 

When the Province‘s finances permit, we intend to increase the amount of the homeowner grant as well 

as our direct assistance to the municipalities themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ever since taking office in 1964, the present Government of Saskatchewan through the 

Department of Municipal Affairs has placed a high priority on the housing needs of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. This Government recognized several years ago that a housing problem was developing, 

and therefore has, in the intervening years, placed increasing emphasis on housing programs. In 1968-69 

a record amount will be made available for subsidized rental housing projects, and we will continue to 

invest large sums in land assembly programs. Expenditures on these programs in 1967-68 and 1968-69 

have been estimated as follows: advances for subsidized rental housing projects, 1967-68 - $706,000; 

1968-69 - $1,450,000; advances for land assembly projects, 1967-68 - $688,500; 1968-69 - $625,000. 

The Department‘s program for assisting in the construction of housing for people of Indian ancestry will 

continue to receive high priority. In addition, this Government has launched two new housing programs 

which are intended to further alleviate and prevent housing shortages in this province. In 1967-68, the 

Government initiated a program to provide housing units in resource and other areas for economic rental 

to employees of resource companies and service industries. Under its program the CMHC, the Province 

and the municipalities invest in housing projects on which economic rentals are charged. The 

Government proposes to spend $500,000 in 1968-69 to develop economic rental housing units at 

Outlook, Watrous and special rental housing units at Assiniboia and Broadview. Also, in 1967-68 the 

Government provided housing units in resource areas for immediate sale to employees. Under this 

program the Province invests in housing projects and recovers its investment from the down payment by 

the employee and the balance from CMHC. In 1968-69, the Government proposes to spend $424,000 to 

build more of this type of housing. We have also announced a program of acquiring and holding land for 

future development. CMHC and the municipal governments will participate in these programs with the 

Province. Mr. Speaker, this program of assistance and initiative will generate an expenditure of over 

$10.7 million in housing in this Province in the coming year. Under this program 760 additional units 

will be built. Compare this figure with the 730 existing units which are occupied and were built over the 

past 14 years. This is the largest Government housing program ever undertaken in this Province. Mr. 

Speaker, these combined with the housing starts developed by the private sector of the economy should 

result in a substantial housing program for Saskatchewan in the coming year. 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

478 

Since its inception, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Research Council has been contributing to the 

development of our province through advanced research. During the coming year it will devote its 

energies towards the following areas: water supply, greater utilization of our mineral resources, and 

agricultural research. For these proposed projects, the Government will make available a grant of 

$900,000. This amount, given to the Board by the Government, represents an increase of over $200,000 

over 1967-68. 

 

Our Government, Mr. Speaker, takes great pride in the fact that new life has been injected into the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board during our term of office. Last year the premier announced the creation of the 

Saskatchewan Summer School of Arts at Fort San. It is anticipated that 600 young people will attend the 

1968 summer school. during the coming year we intend to provide an additional $60,000 for this 

program. The Government intends to continue its support of cultural activities in Saskatchewan through 

the Arts Board. To enable it to carry out its program, the Government will make available a grant 

totalling $338,900 in the coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a gross amount of $2.5 million has been provided to continue the construction of the 

Saskatchewan Centennial Auditorium in Regina in 1968-69. An additional $750,000 gross expenditures 

will be required to complete the project in the following year. The estimated total cost of the auditorium 

is $7.1 million and will be shared as follows: Government of Saskatchewan, $4.9; Federal Government, 

$1.25 million, and city of Regina just under $1 million. In Saskatoon, where they have shown excellent 

progress in the construction of their auditorium, the Government will be making further financial 

assistance available in the form of an operating grant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during 1967-68 a third regional library, designated as the Wheatland Regional Library, was 

established in the province. In 1968-69, your Government intends to continue its program of providing 

more and better library facilities to the inhabitants of rural areas. A provision of $100,000 has been 

made for the establishment of a fourth regional library. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, total budgetary expenditures in 1968-69 will be some $338.4 million, an 

increase of $35.6 million over 1967-68. However, if we add to the 1967-68 original estimates, the 

amount of $9.3 million for the University of Saskatchewan capital construction and $6.5 million for the 

four-lane highway program which were financed by the borrowing in 1967-68, a more comparable 

figure is an increase of $19.8 million. Education received the top priority in terms of percentage of total 

Budget, 32 per cent, an increase of 20 per cent. Public Health will receive almost 19 per cent of the total 

Budget. The net budget will be lower than the level of last year due to the Federal sharing of medicare 

and the decision to charge utilization fees. Total highway spending will be 17 per cent of the total 

Budget. Budgetary expenditures will be $9 million higher, larger because of the decision to finance the 

four-lane program out of revenues. Total Welfare spending will 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

479 

be up by $3.1 million and will be 6 per cent of the Budget. Agriculture‘s budget will increase by $1.9 

million and will now be the fifth largest spending department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look again at the total budgetary expenditures, provided for in 1968-69, of $338.4 

million. Compare this with the total revenue from all sources, which, including the new taxes and 

charges that I have already announced, will amount to $336.1 million. We have a deficit of $2.1 million. 

 

To help bring this Budget into balance, I propose to raise the tax on cigarettes, tobacco, and cigars 

effective midnight tonight. The details of the increases are outlined in Table 9 at the end of my printed 

speech. I estimate another $1.8 million in revenues from this increase. I also propose to increase the pari 

mutuel tax from 5 per cent to 10 per cent which will increase revenues by about $160,000. I propose to 

remove the exemption of the Automobile Accident Insurance Fund from the 2 per cent insurance 

premiums this year. This will increase revenues by some $500,000. These tax increases will produce an 

added revenue of $2.5 million, now bringing the total revenue from all sources to $338.8 million. This, 

Mr. Speaker, will leave us with a surplus of $380,000 for the fiscal year 1968-69. 

 

Finally, I turn to our capital financing. In view of the extremely high costs of borrowing and assuming 

that the prospects of lower interest costs appear unlikely before the end of this year, we have reduced 

substantially the Province‘s borrowing program for 1968-69. We have established the level of the 1968 

advances to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation at $35 million, to the Saskatchewan Government 

Telephones at $9.3 million, and to the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation at $4.9 

million. Other non-budgetary requirements will total $8 million. Non-budgetary requirements will be 

$56.2 million. This amount may be higher, depending upon savings bond redemptions during 1968. We 

expect to finance these requirements as follows: Canada Pension Plan, $29 million; bank line of credit 

for Saskatchewan Government Telephones, $9.3 million, a total of $38.3 million. This leaves a balance 

of $17.9 million to be financed from other sources. We anticipate the sales of the Saskatchewan Savings 

Bond Series No. 8, which commenced last week, will result in net cash in excess of redemptions. 

Depending upon the net amount of savings bonds sold during this campaign, it appears that the 

Government will only need to borrow in the long-term market one $15 million issue in 1968. Mr. 

Speaker, we have taken every possible step to refrain from committing the Province to pay over 7 per 

cent in interest over the next 20 to 25 years. We trust that we will see some lowering of interest rates as 

soon as the international financial markets improve, particularly in the United States, and if all levels of 

government take positive measures to reduce the rate of growth of spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on concluding this address, leading up to the traditional motion of supply, I want to 

emphasize that this is 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

480 

a responsible Budget. The Economic Council of Canada, in its last report, has issued a note of warning 

to all levels of government to assume more responsible fiscal management. At my first meeting of the 

Federal and Provincial Ministers of Finance, I found all Canadian governments facing staggering 

demands compared to a relatively slower increase in their tax base. Canadians everywhere must face the 

hard fact that if they insist on ever-increasing governmental services, taxes must inevitably rise and 

Saskatchewan is no exception. I am convinced the measures I have proposed in this Budget are timely 

and necessary. I am also confident that we can bring the costs of our vital programs under control, if we 

recognize the problems and have the courage to face them. I only ask those who will criticize the tax 

increases to show enough courage to name the programs they are prepared to dispense with, along with 

the tax cuts they may suggest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, for the last seven days Members of the Opposition have been urging us to 

spend more and more on Government services. I hope they now show some measure of responsibility by 

supporting the tax increases necessary to spend some of the money that they have proposed in this 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that you do now leave the Chair. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has just 

taken his seat and has told us that this is a responsible Budget. All I can say is that it‘s the quietest 

Budget that I‘ve heard delivered in this House since I have been here. I‘m not surprised that Members 

on the Government side of the House had nothing to cheer about. We on this side of the House are 

certainly not going to cheer the imposition of new tax after new tax and they on the other side had 

nothing to cheer, because there are no new programs, there is nothing in this Budget to offer anything to 

the people of Saskatchewan but more blood and toil, tears and sweat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No more Socialism anyway. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That‘s right. And I fancy now that the people of Saskatchewan would hearken back 

to those dark days of stagnation with a little bit of nostalgia. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

481 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think that if in fact we do arrive at a new flag, it better be edged in black . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . because we‘ve seen this Government undergo a complete transformation. Some 

of us that recall the old song ―What a Difference a Day Makes‖, that day was October 11th and what a 

difference it made to the Government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — What a change! I remember the Budgets brought down by the Hon. Premier. We 

remember him; he came in here and he used to bounce down those steps with a big smile on his face 

with those little bags of goodies. It was then just like a second Christmas. It was certainly a different 

story then. We saw the Premier taking his seat and beaming at all the assembled company just as if he 

was Father Christmas in his reincarnation. There was the Premier, the jolly old elf, so jolly and red; he 

caused visions of sugar plums to bounce in our head. But Father Christmas is gone, gone without a trace 

and we are left with nothing but Ebenezer Scrooge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In fact the Treasurer has done Dickens a little better, he has made it Ebenezer 

McScrooge. I certainly felt like advising the Provincial Treasurer, that, if he had gone into a Land Titles 

office and had looked at their records he would have found that they charge 50 cents as a search fee. 

That‘s a tax, and I‘m sure the Provincial Treasurer didn‘t know that because I‘m sure there isn‘t a single 

tax, that he knew about, that he didn‘t increase. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I‘ll mark that one down. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I‘ve no doubt about it. You‘ll mark it up to a dollar because we have seen every 

major tax increased. In the last few months we have seen liquor prices increase, we‘ve seen the sales tax 

just now go up by 25 per cent. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Back to where you had it. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That‘s right. But we didn‘t at the same time increase the gasoline tax by 14 per cent. 

The Government has put in deterrent fees. When we were the Government, we paid for the health 

program out of the revenues of the people and not out of the backs of the sick people of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

482 

Mr. Blakeney: — We didn‘t put a sales tax on meals, we didn‘t put it on hotel rooms. I know that some 

of the Members opposite who have ventured into matrimony are probably thinking they just ventured in 

in time now that there‘s a tax on hotel rooms. This is really the greatest tax increase in the history of the 

Province, insofar as I‘m aware. I don‘t know when, on a single occasion, the sales tax has been 

increased by 25 per cent, the gas tax by 14 per cent, licence fees by 20 per cent, a deterrent charge, 100 

per cent or 1,000 per cent – it is a new tax – the tobacco tax increased by a percentage which I haven‘t 

yet calculated. I imagine that at this rate, next fall we will see an increase in the Medicare and Hospital 

Plan family tax. Never, as I say, have all these taxes been increased in one year. And this by a 

Government which, as the Provincial Treasurer had the crust to say in his Budget Speech, on page 2, 

was elected on a promise that they would reduce taxes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Good old double talk. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Government has dropped its face of Dr. Jekyll and we see the alter ego, Mr. 

Hyde. Provincial Treasurer Hyde has been wielding his knife today. Is there a person in Saskatchewan 

who isn‘t bleeding? He did what he had to do, I suppose, because of the financial chaos in which the 

Province is in. I suppose one has to ask how we got in this mess. What brought about a condition where 

every major tax has to be increased in one year? Well, there are two basic reasons . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — 20 years of Socialism. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . and four years of Liberalism. The two reasons that I want to mark particularly 

today are the failure of the present Government in the field of Federal-Provincial relations and its 

rob-the-piggy-bank tactics that it practised during the past three years. In the field of Federal-Provincial 

relations, all of us know that this is absolutely crucial and any Provincial Government ought to be 

judged by its performance in this field. Members will recall that in the 1940s and 1950s, it was agreed 

that we in Canada would share the income tax, the corporation tax, and the estate tax which were 

generated all across Canada. First it was agreed that these tax yields would be averaged to the highest 

three Provinces. Saskatchewan always argued that these should be averaged to the highest Province. 

Next we got the Federal Government up to agree to increase these to the average of the highest two 

Provinces. Then in 1963 we thought we were home free, because in that year a Federal Liberal 

Government was elected on an election pledge which read as follows: A new Liberal Government will 

make equalization payments which will bring the other Provinces up to the level of the richest in 

revenue her head from shared taxes. We know the Federal Liberals were elected. In 1964 the Liberals 

were elected provincially in Saskatchewan. And at that very time a 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

483 

revision of Federal-Provincial taxes was in store. All the Premier had to do was to go down to Ottawa, 

cash in on the election pledge by the Federal Liberals and bring back the money. Never had a Premier 

faced Federal-Provincial relations in better shape. He had an election promise from a newly elected 

Government. But what happened? He didn‘t get the Federal Government to honor its pledge; he didn‘t 

even get it to hold to the old formula. What it did was change the formula on him, with drastic 

consequences for Saskatchewan. No longer were we to be brought up to the level of the highest three 

Provinces; no longer the highest of two Provinces, certainly not the highest Province. Rather we were to 

be brought up to the national average. Now it just happens that Saskatchewan has a yield from these 

taxes which is pretty close to the national average. So we really don‘t get much out of a proposal which 

brings us up to the national average. Instead, we lose perhaps $10 - $20 million a year. Now I want to 

say again: this has nothing to do with Saskatchewan being a have province or a have-not province; in 

fact the calculations were based upon 1964, and whatever happened in 1964 was as a result both of the 

efforts of my free enterprisers on your right, Mr. Speaker, and the Socialists on your left, Mr. Speaker. 

Our problems are due, not to any have or have-not status, but solely and exclusively to the change in 

formula. Mr. Sharp, although he doesn‘t always look too bright these days was bright enough to take our 

Premier to the cleaners, and in Saskatchewan we are paying the cost of his rather expensive 

incompetence. It is perhaps significant that of all the Provinces in Canada, we are the only one which 

lost. Six of them gained, three stayed about the same and one took a real hosing. That one was 

Saskatchewan. Our Premier had evidently left his salesmanship at home. Symbolically, at least, he went 

down to Ottawa with a full treasury and he came back with a patch on his pants. Never have we done 

worse in our dealings with Ottawa. We‘ve never been more ineffectively represented, and the results 

have never been more devastating. We are seeing the results here in this Budget which raises every tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — You may say, ―Surely even $10 or $20 million a year couldn‘t make all the difference 

revealed by this Budget.‖ The facts are that you‘re right. Another factor is the short-run 

rob-the-piggy-bank tactics that the former Provincial Treasurer practised in his three years in office. 

During the first year in office, the Government systematically stripped a whole series of separate funds 

and took this money into revenue. His next step was to treat as an asset, which could be capitalized, his 

investment in the universities and in highways. Now by these devices he failed to pay for university 

capital projects out of revenue and he failed to pay for highway construction out of revenue. This 

allowed the Government to pretend that it was balancing its Budget when in fact it was running a deficit 

year after year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

484 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now it may be that not one of those things was of sufficient size or sufficient 

importance to distort the accounts of the Province. But taken together one after another they have 

substantially distorted the picture. The former CCF Government believed that we should, generally 

speaking, balance our Budget. We operated on those principles, and the Premier in his first Budget 

departed from these principles. It wasn‘t by very much perhaps but like a little bit of pregnancy, it 

doesn‘t take it long to grow. Members will recall that in 1965 the Premier dressed up his Budget by 

providing the capital funds for the University by a guaranteed loan and then, you‘ll remember, he 

stripped the medicare fund of $9 million. Not bad for a start. Then in 1966 he repeated the process. He 

stripped the Student Aid Fund, he stripped the Saskatchewan Public Administration Foundation. And 

once again he called upon the University to finance its capital building by borrowings. In last year‘s 

Budget he went one step further. The piggy banks were pretty well gone and he undertook to deficit 

budget in a pretty serious way. Not only did he provide that the University had to continue this process 

of borrowing for capital construction but he decided that he was going to borrow for highways. This 

simply means that $6 million spent on highways built last year was not shown as a budgetary 

expenditure. The Provincial Treasurer pretended that he had a balanced Budget when in fact he had a $6 

million deficit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now I want to compliment the new Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), who evidently 

has seen the error of these practices, for laying aside these very sloppy, imprudent and improvident 

financing tactics. He has decided that he is going to pay for university buildings out of revenue, he has 

decided that he is going to pay for highways out of revenue, and he has decided apparently that he is 

going to show the more or less true picture of the Government in the accounts. I compliment him for 

that. 

 

Now just how tough things are for the Government of Saskatchewan is illustrated by the lengths which it 

has had to go to in order to see that it grabs a headline on the day that the financial critic for the 

Opposition stands up and says something about its Budget. Now there was a time when the Premier used 

to board his announcements of new industries, so that he might announce one on the day that the Leader 

of the Opposition spoke, and one on the day that the financial critic spoke. But we have fallen on evil 

days and we had nary an industrial announcement this whole session. So he has come up with another 

tactic. It is not as good as an industry, but when driven to the extremity, the Royal Commission Report. 

So this year he has decided that on the day the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) spoke he would 

table the Frazier Report. And I confidently predict that on the day that the financial critic speaks on 

Monday, he‘ll 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

485 

be tabling the Batten Report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Eleven o‘clock Monday morning, I‘m very sure of it, that‘s right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, this really can‘t be a wholly satisfactory solution for the Premier because 

certainly he can‘t pick many roses out of that Frazier Report. It‘s a story of neglect and mismanagement 

and I think that not even the plaintive reports by the new Minister of Health that he‘s going to do 

something about it, aren‘t very convincing. Certainly not on a Budget showing a $500,000 increase. As I 

recall it, Dr. Frazier said it would take $2 million to patch the gaping holes created by the wrecking crew 

brought in by the man who is now Provincial Treasurer and was previously the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Steuart). Now we don‘t really expect the Batten Report to be quite as frank and forthright as Dr. Frazier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But all I can say is that, if it says anything about what a government should do to 

control the cost of living, it is bound to be critical of this Government. For certainly this is a problem 

which has been wholly ignored by the Premier and his Ministers. Now these royal commissions are a 

poor substitute for the annual list of colorful announcements by the Government which we used to look 

forward to. But these announcements were sometimes a good bit more colorful than they were accurate. 

I remember the occasion in 1965 when I spoke. On that occasion – I have the paper here – one headline 

said: ―Deficit financing already started – Blakeney.‖ But on that day, the newspaper headlines had two 

other banner announcements, the one by the former Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher) which said, 

―Big heavy water plant at Estevan‖ and the one by the new Provincial Treasurer, ―Steuart says small 

hospitals won‘t close.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Treasurer, that wasn‘t one of your better days, I could see that. That crystal 

ball was a bit cracked. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Name a hospital which closed. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Prince Albert pulp mill? 



 

March 1, 1968 
 

 

486 

Mr. Blakeney: — On the other hand, if I‘d been where the Provincial Treasurer was today, I think I 

would have tabled the Batten Commission Report today in the hope that someone wouldn‘t look at this 

Budget. But then again I don‘t suppose the honeyed words of the lady judge are likely to obliterate the 

record of this Black Friday. There‘s a great deal more that must be said about this Budget and there‘s a 

great deal more that will be said. I‘ll be saying some of it on Monday. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:32 o‘clock p.m. 

 


