



















































Hansard: April 22, 1968


2249 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

45th Day 

 

Monday, April 22, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

STATEMENT 

 

BOARD OF TRADE WEEK 

 

Mr. J.H. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University):  Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 

would like to remind all Members that this week is Board of Trade Week. And on behalf of the Board of 

Trade of the city of Saskatoon, I am pleased to present all Hon. Members this morning with a little shot 

of potash. As you know Saskatoon is now potash country and I would suggest that the Members take a 

good look at this but be careful that you don’t take too much at one sitting. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition):  Mr. Speaker, we ought to thank the Board of Trade of 

Saskatoon. We have here oil from Weyburn and potash from Biggar and wheat from Redberry, I am 

told. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  On behalf of the potash capitol of the world, may I also extend our very best wishes to 

the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 84 — An Act to amend 

The Mental Health Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, most of the amendments in connection with this Act are concerned with the 

expenses of providing care and maintenance to patients in our institutions. The four institutions in the 

province are the two mental hospitals at Weyburn and North Battleford and the two training schools for 

mentally retarded persons at Prince Albert and Moose Jaw. 

 

Prior to 1945, each patient in an institution, then only in the two mental hospitals, was charged for the 

cost of care in the institution. The cost of care and treatment provided from January 1, 1945 on has not 

been charged against the patients. However, contrary to a fairly popular belief, this care and treatment 

has not necessarily been free. When the patient died, these expenses became a charge upon the patient’s 

estate. It 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2250 

stated in the Act that the Minister’s claim does not extend to that portion of the estate passing to a father, 

mother, husband, wife, brother or sister or child of the deceased patient if residing in Saskatchewan. The 

Act also provides for an exemption for any such relative who is resident outside the province but is 

dependant upon the estate for support. 

 

Another provision in the Act also gives the Minister broad authority to waive all or any part of this 

claim. It may be thought that will all these exemptions the amount realized by the Government against 

these estates would be very small. The facts are that the Minister has collected substantial sums each 

year since 1945. For example, the total properly chargeable against estates in recent years has been as 

follows: 1964-65, $306,000; 1965-66, $233,000; 1966-67, $335,000. These totals represent the total 

amount actually charged when collection seemed likely and are close to the totals of the amounts 

actually received. I think it is reasonable to expect that in the long run the cost of mental hospital 

services in Canada will become shareable under the Federal cost-sharing legislation. If and when this 

comes about our provisions for charging estates will be terminated. However, in the meantime this 

provision will be terminated. However, in the meantime this provision will remain since, although it is a 

rather peculiar provision, it must continue to be recognized as an effective method of raising revenue. 

 

While some of the exemptions from the Minister’s claim are entirely valid, others seem to me to be open 

to question. For example, why should the part of an estate passing to a brother ordinarily be exempt. The 

Government has decided to revise these exemptions. There are no direct precedents for these new 

provisions, but it will be noted that the new categories of the exemptions are already mentioned in 

existing legislation for other purposes. 

 

The first exemption will be mandatory, that part of the estate passing to a husband or wife up to a value 

of $10,000, will be exempt from the Minister’s claim. In addition, the Minister may waive all or any part 

of this claim by the husband and wife, child under 21, or incapacitated child over 21 who is dependant 

upon the estate for support. The exemption of $10,000 has a precedent of a kind in The Intestate 

Succession Act where if a person dies without a will, the first $10,000 in the estate passes to the 

surviving husband or wife, with the balance being divided between the husband or wife and children. 

 

The persons who may be exempted from the Minister’s claim if they depend on the estate for support are 

similar to the persons who are entitled to apply to the court under The Dependants’ Relief Act for 

adjustment in the distribution of the estate. These are the surviving spouse, children under 21 and 

children over 20 who are unable to earn a livelihood because of physical or mental disability. As is now 

the case, the Minister will have the general authority to decide to defray the entire cost of the care and 

treatment in the institution in any given case. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2251 

May I now refer to the actual amendments, new Section 8, which entitles a person with 12 months’ 

resident in the province to care and treatment in an institution, is similar to subsections one to four of the 

existing Section 8. New Section 8A which provides for the expenses of care and treatment to be charged 

to the estate of the deceased patient is similar to existing subsection 5 of Section 8. Section 8B sets out 

the exemptions applicable to the estate of a person dying prior to April 15. These are similar to the 

exemptions set out in the existing subsections 6, 6A and 7 of Section 8. In other words these sections 

remain the same pretty well. Section 8A is new. It sets out the new exemptions applicable where the 

patient dies on or after April 15. Section 8D which provides general authority for the complete waiving 

of the Minister’s claim is similar to existing subsection 8 of Section 8. Section 9 is similar to the existing 

Section 9. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not know just what difference these amendments will make to our revenues under this 

Act. It is likely that there may be some increase of revenue but it is just not possible to attempt an 

estimate that could be relied upon to any extent. I intend to apply these new provisions fairly and 

consistently, keeping in mind the reasonable needs of all persons who are dependant. The amendment to 

Section 19 is of a technical nature and I believe that reference in this section to a person detained under 

Section 15 was inadvertently omitted when this section was enacted in 1961. The amendment merely 

makes this correction. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North):  Mr. Speaker, I was a little disappointed and shocked if I heard 

the Minister correctly. I heard him say that this was an effective method of raising new revenue. I think 

that this is another indication that it is the intention of this Government to erode every health plan, every 

health service, under the jurisdiction of the Government. 

 

The Minister of Health it seems has been assigned the unsavoury task of cutting deeply into almost 

every public health service under his jurisdiction. It appears that the Government is dedicated to making 

public health services unpopular by imposing imposts after imposts upon the users of this service. 

 

Since the House met about two months ago, Mr. Speaker, we have seen this Government introduce 

legislation to provide for deterrent charges, for hospital services received. We saw the personal 

premiums raised by $20 per family directly following the 1964 general election, at a time Mr. Speaker, 

when there still was a very healthy surplus in the fund. We have seen deterrent charges imposed for 

medical care during this session. We have witnessed a frontal attack on the time-honoured tradition for 

free care and treatment for cancer patients with the amendments to The Cancer Control Act. In less than 

four years, Mr. Speaker, under the stewardship of this Liberal Administration, we saw the finest mental 

health plan in North America eroded 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2252 

and desecrated to the point where it has become necessary to bring an eminent authority outside of the 

country to advise the Government how to correct the plan and clean up the mess. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer):  That we inherited! 

 

Mr. Snyder:  The mess that you, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, created while you were Minister of Public 

Health. 

 

Bill No. 84, Mr. Speaker, is another link as I see it in this Liberal chain. The former CCF Government, 

Mr. Speaker, did more to make the public aware of the importance of public mental health programs 

during its 20 years in office than any other jurisdiction in North America. The CCF took the care of the 

mentally ill out of the shadows and developed a program which transformed the snake-pit type of 

operation of the pre-1944 days into a program of excellence and respectability. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder:  The care of the mentally ill without a price tag attached to it was a good part of the 

basic philosophy which moulded our Provincial mental health plan into one which was cause for pride 

and satisfaction to all Saskatchewan people. Under the old Act, Mr. Speaker, the estate of a mentally 

disordered person was passed on to a father, mother, husband, wife, child, brother or sister if they were 

residing in Saskatchewan. If these amendments pass, Mr. Speaker, remembering the attitude of the 

Government respecting other sensitive matters, I expect they will. It means quite simply that the concept 

of free care for all mentally ill in Saskatchewan will again be a thing of the past. As I understand the 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, the surviving widow or widower will be exempt only the first $10,000 of the 

deceased person’s estate.Tthe spouse of the deceased person would be in all likelihood left with an 

estate that would care for the survivor for probably not more than three years, after which the surviving 

spouse would undoubtedly, or in many cases, become a responsibility of the Province. Surviving 

mother, father, son, daughter, brother or sister, will almost certainly be disinherited if the patient was a 

long-stay patient who dies after the 15th of April. I pointed out to the Minister during Health Estimates 

of a specific case where a sister had cared for a mentally disordered brother for almost 15 years before 

this person’s confinement to a mental institution. That person being in a mental institution for something 

in excess of 10 years, undoubtedly will result in completely disinheriting the sister from the estate of the 

brother, assuming that he passes away sometime after the 15th of April. 

 

The amendments clearly establish the precedent that the care of a mentally ill person is no longer a 

priority item in the new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A surviving dependent other than the legal spouse 

could not inherit a farm of any proportion 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2253 

or any other piece of property of any significant value. The amendments also raise some other questions 

which I hope the Minister will answer when he closes the debate on second reading. I hope that the 

Minister will tell us how a surviving dependent will be affected when a long-stay patient who was 

discharged in 1965 passes away after April 15 of this year. Will the estate in excess of $10,000 be 

confiscated by the Government if the patient dies after discharge from the institution? There are many 

other questions which may be better answered in Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe in total that the amendments to The Mental Health Act are a manifestation of the Government’s 

wish to erode and weaken another valuable public program which was developed and nurtured by a 

former socialistic Administration. For 20 years, Mr. Speaker, the Government attempted to build an 

image of public acceptance for those who were mentally ill. Much was done during the 20 years of CCF 

Administration. I recognize that much more needed to be done. Instead of advancing this cause, the 

Government sold our Mental Health Plan short. 

 

The Frazier Report makes it clear that this Government has shown little regard for the needs of the 

mentally ill. The Act which we are discussing today gives a further indication of the lack of feeling of 

this Government for the survivors of a deceased mental patient. In many, many cases, Mr. Speaker, 

these people will have contributed many ours, weeks, and perhaps years of care to that mentally 

disordered person’s care before they were institutionalised. This Act will almost certainly, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, discourage a relative from making this kind of sacrifice, that kind of sacrifice that they have 

made in the past. I suggest also that it is doubtful if many Saskatchewan people will continue to 

contribute freely to the voluntary agencies who have interested themselves in various voluntary mental 

health programs over the years. 

 

This Act, Mr. Speaker, is another retrograde step. I intend to vote against it on second reading and I 

expect my colleagues on this side of the House will be doing likewise. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer):  Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say a great deal on this 

Bill. Once again the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) has taken the opportunity that 

he feels was presented to him with the introduction of this Bill, which is nothing more or less than an 

effort to make a very unfair and inequitable situation a little more fair and a little more equitable, to drag 

into this Legislature the problems of the mentally ill and attempt to spread more fear and distortion 

about what we have tried to do with the mental health program. I am not going to go into that. We have 

recognized, when we brought in Dr. Frazier, that there was something wrong with the mental 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2254 

health program. We didn’t attempt to sweep it under the carpet. We brought Dr. Frazier in and we gave 

him a free hand. We intend to take action and we are taking action on the recommendations that he 

made. 

 

I might say that when we inherited the program all was not well with the mental health program. When I 

became the Minister of Health and took over from the former Socialist Government, there were 

problems and some very serious problems. I am not going to stand up here and say that we solved them 

all or that some of them didn’t get worse. We faced our responsibility then and we all have a serious 

responsibility now and I am confident that we will face it in trying to make this program better. I have 

never taken any credit away from the former Government or the people that worked for the former 

Government, in the efforts they made to break out of the old snake-pit tradition to change the image and 

change the fact of how we treated people suffering from mental illness. They didn’t do it the day that 

they came into office. They didn’t do it in 1944 or 1945, 1946 or 1947 or 1948. They did it in the early 

50s. 

 

For many years after they were the Government, the snake-pits continued. I have seen pictures of what 

was going on in Weyburn and North Battleford long after the Socialists were in office. So let the record 

be clear that suddenly when they took over in 1944, they immediately mounted a crusade to save the 

people suffering from mental illness and launched a new and enlightened program. They didn’t launch a 

new and enlightened program until they hired one particular psychiatrist who came down and opened 

the doors and took some very drastic steps which had serious repercussions in Weyburn at that time. But 

the program that was launched worked out and worked to the benefit of the people suffering from 

mental illness and their relatives as well. 

 

All that we are trying to do in this Bill is to make things more fair and equitable. The situation as it now 

exists can have a close relative in Saskatchewan who maybe pays no attention at all, has no thought or 

concern about someone that is in the mental hospital for many years. You can have a close relative 

living in Alberta, Edmonton, or wherever it is across the border. They can be the most thoughtful 

relatives, and come and visit the patients regularly and do all they can for them, maybe have had them 

on boarding-out passes or take them out on weekend leave and so on. Yet because they don’t happen to 

live in Saskatchewan, the way the Act now reads and the way it stood under the former Government, 

they are cut off. They don’t get anything from the patient’s estate unless the Minister decides to use his 

prerogative and give them some of the estate. This has nothing to do with the person suffering mental 

illness. It is what happens to their estate after they die. Again I say that it is just an effort to be more fair 

and equitable. I don’t think anyone can stand up and say that because a near relative happened to live in 

Saskatchewan at the time that they died, and another relative happened to live outside Saskatchewan, 

they should be treated that much different. They might have just 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2255 

moved out of Saskatchewan. It doesn’t take into consideration how the relatives treated the person 

suffering from mental illness. It doesn’t take into consideration their need. It took into consideration 

only whether they lived in Saskatchewan or they didn’t live in Saskatchewan. I expect it was put in 

because if they live in Saskatchewan, they can vote in Saskatchewan. If they didn’t live in Saskatchewan 

they couldn’t vote in Saskatchewan. It was discrimination on the basis of residence of the people. Maybe 

they paid taxes, but they didn’t take into consideration that maybe the family lived here for 20 or 30 

years and paid taxes and then moved out to the Coast to retire and had been out there for six or eight 

months. As long as they weren’t residents they were cut off. 

 

All this does not touch the mental health program. It has no bearing on the mental health program. It 

only has a direct bearing on what happens to the estates of those people who die in a mental hospital, 

and this still isn’t as fair as it might be. If someone is in a mental hospital and happens to move out a 

week before and dies outside the mental hospital, the Act is still very unfair and should be looked at 

again. This has nothing to do with the mental health program. It is what happens to the estates of people 

who die in mental hospitals. 

 

Mr. Snyder:  Mr. Speaker, would the Member permit a question before he takes his seat? I wonder if 

the Minister agrees with the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) that this is an effective method for 

raising revenue? 

 

Mr. Steuart:  It will raise some more money, yes, and no one will deny this. This money will be 

spent on the mental health program. If it were fair and equitable to raise money from people outside 

Saskatchewan whose close relatives died in a mental institution in Saskatchewan, which you did for 

years and we did, why isn’t it fair and equitable to raise money from the same relatives who happened to 

reside in Saskatchewan? I mean if it is fair for one, it’s reasonably fair for all. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre):  Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few comments on this Bill. I 

want to first make a few comments on the remarks of the Provincial Treasurer. I don’t think that the 

mental health program introduced by the Government which was elected in 1944 requires any defence 

from me. And certainly it doesn’t require any defence from me from the strictures levelled at it by the 

Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart), whose knowledge I suspect is minimal in this area and 

whose comments were certainly very far off the mark. 

 

Mr. Steuart:  When did this policy change? What year, if you know so much? 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2256 

Mr. Blakeney:  Mr. Speaker, the Member for Prince Albert West has made his speech. When the 

Member will let the person who is on his feet get a word in, I will make my comments. I would like to 

point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and to other Members of the House that notwithstanding the considerable 

provocation from the Member for Prince Albert, I didn’t interrupt him once during the course of his 

remarks, and I would request him to extend to me the same courtesy. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney:  Mr. Speaker, the facts are that in 1944 the Government was elected and by the end of 

1944 it had new public health legislation on the books. By the first part of 1945 it had changed the 

financing of the mental health program. By the end of 1945 it had established a new institution for the 

mentally retarded and removed these patients from the overcrowded institution in Weyburn. By the end 

of 1945 a very substantial improvement had been made in the overcrowded conditions in Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Steuart:  Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Blakeney:  This is not nonsense, this is a fact. I don’t expect the Member for Prince Albert even 

to be familiar with these facts, but I will point them out to him, because they are facts. If he calls them 

nonsense, it measures not the facts but his knowledge of the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney:  I concede with him that the next step was to bring in people who could look at the 

program of mental health because nobody knew the answers at that time. It’s perfectly obvious that in 

1945 it was not possible to bring in people who knew how to reorganize the mental health program 

because no one knew how to reorganize the mental health program. The next step was to get first-class 

people in and first-class people were brought in. Dr. Humphrey Osmond was in here in the early 1950s. 

Dr. Grif McKerracher was in before and if Dr. Grif McKerracher is not one of the foremost mental 

experts in Canada, I would like to know who is. And I would like to know when the Liberal Government 

prior to 1945 had in its employ and directing its mental health program, one of the foremost mental 

experts in Canada. The facts are that it didn’t Very shortly after 1945, people like Dr. McKerracher were 

brought in and they reorganized the mental health program. They redirected its aims. It is true that it 

took a few years for these policies to mature. It is not possible, notwithstanding the comments of the 

Hon. Member for Prince Albert West, to have instant research. Research is not possible instantly. When 

the Government of the party which he represents left office there was not a shred of mental health 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2257 

research being carried on. Not a shred! For that he and his party must bear the blame. Let him deny this. 

In 1944 Saskatchewan mental hospitals were among the worst in Canada and by 1950 — and let him 

deny this — they were among the best in Canada and nothing he says will cancel that record. 

 

Mr. Steuart:  I admit it. 

 

Mr. Blakeney:  Good! Fine, that’s fine! And rebuilding a Liberal decimated mental health program in 

five years is a very considerable accomplishment. 

 

Dr. McKerracher was here long before eight years after the election in 1944. And Dr. McKerracher did a 

great deal prior to eight years after 1944. Mr. Speaker, may I . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! We are dealing with an amendment to The Mental Health Act. May I 

suggest that this is a serious subject and should be treated with a little less levity and a little less 

interruptions. 

 

Mr. Blakeney:  Mr. Speaker, I will leave the subject of 1944 and the story of the mental health 

program. As I indicated it needs no defence from me and most assuredly it doesn’t need any defence 

from an attack by the Member for Prince Albert West. I simply want to remark with some surprise, at 

the fact that there were indeed problems in the mental health program in 1964. I happen to know that 

that’s accurate. But had I not previously been the Minister of Health, I would not have known it was 

accurate by my attendance in this House in 1965 and 1966. I did not hear it then freely admitted that 

there were problems in the mental health programs. I did not hear it then freely admitted that there were 

problems that the Government was grappling with. It seemed to me that the posture taken by the 

Member for Prince Albert West is all too accurately described as “sweeping any problems under the 

carpet.” I think that any fair assessment of those sessions and any fair assessment of the comments made 

by the Member for Prince Albert West about any Member who suggested that there were problems 

makes it very clear that, while there may have been problems, they were not freely admitted by the 

Member for Prince Albert West. But, Mr. Speaker, we are turning our mind to Bill No. 84 and I want to 

make some specific comments on Bill No. 84. 

 

I have four or five bases of objection to this Bill. I’m a little surprised to hear the Member for Regina 

South defend one portion of it on the basis of precedent from The Intestate Succession Act or an alleged 

precedent and I will come to that in a minute. I’m a little surprised to hear the Member for Prince Albert 

West (Mr. Steuart) say that if someone doesn’t die in a mental institution, the Act doesn’t in effect apply 

and I’ll come to that. I want to discuss my objections to this Bill under four headings. I have very, very 

basic objections 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2258 

to the new principles contained in Section 8C. I object strongly to the fact that the Bill is in effect 

retroactive in its application. I object to the fact that because of the particular wording of Section 8C, it’s 

possible to argue that the exemption provided therein might be very severely limited, and I object to the 

fact that Section 9 applies the new principle to all facilities. Some of these objections I put with more 

force than others and some of them are clearer and simpler than others. 

 

But first to deal with my basic objection. The old arrangement for financing mental health care is that set 

out in Section 8B, that an estate was free from any claim for the cost of mental health if it passed to the 

father, the mother, the husband, the wife, the child, a brother, or a sister of the deceased, if the 

beneficiary was residing in Saskatchewan, and similarly it was free from claim if any portion of the 

estate passed to a dependent whether or not the dependent resided in Saskatchewan. This in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, meant a very wide exemption. Please note two things: 1) the number of people who could 

inherit the estate so that it would be free from any claim by the Crown was substantial, the classes were 

large; and 2) the exemption applied to the whole estate. Keep those two points in mind. The classes of 

people who could inherit without claim by the Crown were large and the entire estate was exempt. In 

effect then, the present Act provides for free mental health care provided by the citizens of 

Saskatchewan for the citizens of Saskatchewan. It is true as the Member for Prince Albert West points 

out that there were problems in applying this inside-Saskatchewan-outside-Saskatchewan rule. 

Obviously where a family were permanent residents of Saskatchewan and where mental health treatment 

was provided to one of his relatives, it seemed or at least it seemed to the previous Government 

reasonable that any part of the estate passing to him ought to be exempt. The basis for that was that the 

mental health care was provided by the citizens of Saskatchewan out of the tax dollar of Saskatchewan, 

and that accordingly a fair way to distribute the cost of that mental health care was on the basis of the 

methods of taxation. It seemed to us that it was reasonable to provide that this health care would be 

without charge against the patient while he’s living or the patient’s estate when he dies. If the estate was 

to pass to people outside the province then a claim was made, and this is entirely consistent with the 

theory, because the theory was that the people, who were receiving the benefit, had not contributed to 

providing the free mental health care; they were non-residents and had not paid the taxes. Now, we will 

concede that if the person had been a resident and moved away from Saskatchewan, this possibly 

created an equity. There was a way to correct that inequity in the Act. It was by ministerial discretion. 

Perhaps that wasn’t the best way to correct the inequity, but it was an available way and the number of 

cases of this was not all that large. Note for example that, if an elderly parent had moved outside the 

province and was a dependent parent, the exemption applied to him anyway. If the person had moved 

outside the province in order to get a better climate and was a dependent, then he was still entitled to all 

the exemptions regardless of ministerial discretion. The only 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2259 

problems arose where a family may have lived in Saskatchewan all their life and then one member 

moved to another province. Admittedly the old rules weren’t perfectly fair but I fail to see how it can be 

made more fair by simply taking away the money from all the children. This is the Provincial 

Treasurer’s approach to fairness — that if one man has one finger off why the simple thing to do is take 

all the brothers and cut off one finger from each of them. That may have been the practice in the Steuart 

family, I don’t know. It may have an element of Irish fairness. But it doesn’t commend itself to me. It 

was further provided under the existing Act that, where the estate was not going to any member of the 

family of the classes mentioned, and the classes included almost everybody who ordinarily takes under 

an estate, then a stranger to the family who inherited was called upon to contribute. You might argue 

that this is hardly consistent on the grounds that the stranger probably paid some taxes too. And I am 

prepared to admit that measure of inconsistency. The theory here certainly was that if a stranger was 

getting a windfall gain, it was perhaps not unreasonable for the Crown to get part of it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, contrast this with the new principle. The new principle is that mental health care is 

no longer free. It must be paid for out of the estate of the deceased patient. I realize that all of this is a 

matter of degree. But the change has been so substantial and the degree of change is so great that I 

suggest that the principle is changed. The single exemption, the single exemption to the principle that 

the entire cost of mental health care must be paid for out of the estate, is that if a deceased leaves a 

husband or a wife behind him, then the husband or the wife will be allowed to keep $10,000 and that’s 

all. This is such a very great change in the basis of paying for mental health that it must be called the 

reversal of the previous principle. One again I suggest we are back to the precise situation of the 

pre-1945 days except for a modest exemption for the widow or widower. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the exemption is not as great an exemption as that available under The Intestate 

Succession Act. The widow doesn’t get as much. Under The Intestate Succession Act the widow gets the 

first $10,000 plus one-half of the balance if there’s only one child or one-third of the balance if there’s 

only one child or one-third of the balance if there are two or more children. Under this Act the widow 

gets $10,000. The Crown gets all the rest until the Crown has received 100 cents on the dollar. Yes, that 

is what is called Steurtship of the Provincial funds. What is the justification for this? Health care of all 

kinds is provided essentially free of direct charge against the estate of a person who is physically ill. If a 

person is in the geriatric centre or a general hospital or a tuberculosis sanatorium, there’s no suggestion 

that his estate ought to pay anything. No suggestion whatever. Why this distinction against the mentally 

ill? Or is this a principle which is just being introduced and will shortly be applied to people in geriatric 

centres and in TB sanatoriums. If this is not the case, I would like to hear the Minister justify the 

distinction between the physically ill and 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2260 

the mentally ill. I concede with him out of hand that there has been some distinction in the past, but the 

distinction in the past has been small. If any change should have been made in it, it should have been 

small. If any change should have been made in it, it should have been eliminated. Mental health 

treatment ought to have been put on the same footing as TB treatment or chronic illness treatment. 

Instead the Government has moved the other way and has introduced a principle which I think is wholly 

indefensible. 

 

Further may I contrast this Bill with the election promises of the Government opposite during the last 

election. You know what they promised, that they were going to refund the Provincial portion of the 

estate tax. Yes, indeed, fancy that. A widow who inherited a $150,000 estate only has an exemption of 

$60,000 and the Crown wants some money from her after she had taken her $60,000. The Liberals said 

this was outrageous. In order to correct this obvious inequity, inequity, and inequity in the Premier’s 

words, we were going to give back the Provincial share, three-quarters of the estate tax which was 

charged against this impoverished widow who only had the first $60,000 and had to pay 10 to 15 per 

cent on the remainder. And they still intend to do it, we are advised by the Premier. But if this widow 

has the misfortune to have her husband in the mental hospital, then is $60,000 thought to be the 

appropriate exemption? Oh my, no. $50,000? $40,000? $30,000? $20,000? $10,000 is the figure which 

the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) thinks this widow can live on, where the Premier thinks that $60,000 

is outrageously small. And this is the way it is. If this difference of view on the part of the Liberal party 

can be justified, I would like to hear the justification. 

 

Suppose a husband was in hospital say since 1950 and he died in June of 1968. What is the situation? 

Let’s take an individual case. A man goes into hospital in 1950 and leaves a wife and a couple of small 

kids and a farm. The farm may be a half section and this woman works through the next 18 years, 

raising her kids without the benefit of a breadwinner. Suppose in 1968 the man dies and leaves her this 

half-section and supply the half-section is worth $35,000. What do the Liberals say the appropriate 

disposition of that farm is? For this family who have grown up without a father who is in the mental 

hospital, for the widow who has brought up this family without the benefit of a breadwinner, the 

Liberals say, “You’ve got a $35,000 farm, you may have $10,000 of it and we’ll take $25,000. You kids 

are 21 now. It doesn’t matter whether they are or not, they could be 10 and it wouldn’t make any 

difference to this legislation. You could leave a widow with five children under 10 and you’d leave her 

with $10,000 that’s what the Bill does. But I want to be a little charitable in my example… 

 

Mr. Steuart:  How long has the man been in the institution? 

 

Mr. Blakeney:  That’s a good point, that’s a good point, but it is 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2261 

unlikely they are his children unless as you say he has a weekend pass. At any rate, my example is one 

that doesn’t involve weekend passes. My example is one where the children are now grown up and the 

widow is left. Is she to be left with the farm? No. With the half-section? No. She will be left with 

$10,000 and the Treasury is to get $25,000. This is what this Bill says. I suggest that it’s a grossly unfair 

Bill and a grossly retrograde step in the financing of mental health care. 

 

The second point I wanted to make was of the essential retroactivity of the thing. People have been 

getting care between 1945 and 1968 and they have believed that this care was provided in a manner 

which could not be charged against the estate of the mental health patient, provided that the 

beneficiaries, the widow and the children were living in Saskatchewan. It is now found that, if a patient 

dies after April 15, 1968, not only will the care after that date be chargeable against the estate, but in fact 

care since 1945 — I could indeed say care since 1905 but I’ll say care since 1945 — will be chargeable 

against the estate subject only to the $10,000 exemption for the widow. The period from 1945 to 1968, 

when people felt that they were free of this unjust burden on the relatives of the mentally ill, will be 

found to have been a period in respect to which a charge will now be made. Mr. Speaker, I would think 

that if this change was going to be made, at the very minimum the change should be limited to care 

rendered after April 15, 1968. I’m by no means agreeing to that, but, if they are changing the principle, I 

would suggest that it be in respect of care rendered after this date and not in respect of care rendered 

since 1945. Note what they are going to do, Mr. Speaker. The care from 1945 1968 has already been 

paid for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. No one expected there would be a recovery of that unless the 

estate was left to a stranger or to someone outside the province. No one was looking for this or 

predicating their budget upon it. And now the Liberal Government will be reaching back into the 1950s 

and into the 1940s in respect of care which has already been paid for and they will be snitching money 

from estates for that care simply because the man died after April 15, 1968. And I suggest this measure 

of retroactivity is wholly indefensible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I digress for a moment to deal with a couple of points raised by the Member for 

Prince Albert West. He indicated that the Bill was to make it fairer. I wonder if it would not be fairer to 

provide that all care rendered to people suffering from mental illness would fall into the same category 

as care rendered to tuberculosis victims or chronically ill people or people who are in active treatment 

hospitals. I’m unable to see why this distinction should be drawn. If the distinction is drawn, and it will 

be drawn now much more sharply than was done in the past, how is it defensible on the basis of equity? 

This is the defence put forward by the Member for Prince Albert West. 

 

I want now to ask people to look at Section 8C and I’m not going to argue the details of it. But as I read 

Section 8A, it 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2262 

provides that where a person who was admitted to an institution after December 31, 1964, thereafter 

dies, then his estate shall be chargeable. It doesn’t say, dies in the institution, it just says dies. I say that 

the Bill says that, if a person dies having had care after 1944, it doesn’t matter when he dies or where he 

dies, his estate is subject to the tax. The only exemptions are those provided in 8B and 8C. 8B deals with 

the situation if the patient died prior to April 15, 1968 and that date is gone. We can forget about that 

because the provision merely restates the present practice. But 8C says that there shall be an exemption 

where expenses are incurred on behalf of a patient. I hope that mean means patient or exemption-patient 

because patient is defined as someone who is receiving care or treatment in a mental hospital. Giving 

those two sections the worst interpretation, one could reach the conclusion that, if a person was ever in a 

mental hospital, his estate shall be chargeable for the entire amount of the expense and the only 

exemption is to his widow if the deceased died in the hospital. Now that may be extreme and we’ll 

pursue this problem in Committee, but right now I simply want to say that, as I read 8A, this charge is 

by no means restricted to people who die in the mental hospitals. Anyone who was in a mental hospital 

and received care can have his estate charged. 

 

I now turn, Mr. Speaker, to Section 9 and Section 8 is a section which has been in the Act or something 

like it at .least has been in the Act for a good while. It says that provisions of the Act can be made to 

apply to mental health facilities. Now the distinction between an institution and a facility is that the two 

mental hospitals and the two mentally retarded institutions at Moose Jaw and Prince Albert are 

institutions as defined in the Act and all of the other mental health clinics, the one at Yorkton, the 

Munroe wing at Regina, the MacNeill Clinic at Saskatoon, the new wing at Prince Albert and all of the 

other clinics are facilities. Some of those you will note are inpatient facilities. This Bill provides that the 

claim against the estate of the patient can be made to apply to anyone who has had treatment in a 

facility. Therefore, note, Mr. Speaker, that anyone who has ever had treatment in a mental health clinic 

since 1945, whether it be in Moose Jaw or Prince Albert, the new clinic in Prince Albert or Yorkton or 

the Munroe Wing or anywhere, can have his estate charged and the only exemption again is the $10,000 

for the widow. I concede that some provision similar to that was in the old Act, although it never was 

applied. I suggest to the Minister that, because the new Act is so very much more wide-spread in its 

application, because it will hit estate after estate after estate which was exempt under the old Act, the 

application of the new Section 9 is very much more onerous and very much less defensible. Mr. 

Speaker, as a matter of fact, a large number of the estates of deceased persons pass to the husband or the 

wife of the deceased person. A very large number. In the old Act there was a virtually complete 

exemption for estates passing to the wife or husband. This eliminated perhaps half of the estates from 

consideration at all. Now with the $10,000 exemption for the widow and with the fact that a very large 

number of estates now 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2263 

exceed $10,000 gross, we will bring into consideration for charges another large very block of estates. I 

would think probably one-third of the estates of all people in Saskatchewan are passed to the husband or 

the wife and are over $10,000 and each of those now is potentially chargeable for these charges and was 

not previously chargeable. Another large block of estate in Saskatchewan, and any lawyer will tell you 

this, pass to children who are resident in Saskatchewan. These were previously fully exempt and are 

now fully chargeable. So we have another 35 or 40 per cent of the estates potentially chargeable. 

Whereas previously we had perhaps 60 or 70 per cent of the estates, because they went to a widow or 

they went to children in Saskatchewan, completely exempt from any consideration, we now will have a 

very small number of estates, namely those passing to a widow or a widower and under $10,000 in 

amount which are free from charge. Those will be the only ones exempt, and I would think that three 

times as many estates will be potentially chargeable as before. Maybe that’s a conservative figure. When 

this is the case, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the application of a section like Section 9, which can charge 

any estate for any person who has ever been in a mental health clinic and which now will apply to three 

times as many estates as before is particularly objectionable. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to confine my remarks to the Bill, to the principles contained in the Bill. 

I can only say again that this Bill is in every sense a retrograde step. It’s an unfair distinction between 

mental illness and physical illness. The Minister admits that if there is sharing under the Federal 

Hospital Program he will abolish these charges. If in fact he feels that they ought to be abolished and 

paid for by the taxpayers, Federal and Provincial, it’s a little bit difficult to discern why he’s extending 

the charges at this time. I suggest that the allowance for the widow is grossly inadequate at $10,000. I 

think that no one can suggest that a man could leave his wife $10,000 and suggest that she is adequately 

provided for. This level of exemption is grossly inadequate and the Government admits it’s inadequate 

when it suggests that the exemption of $60,000 under The Estate Tax Act is too small, I’ve heard no 

defence of this figure of $10,000. It is, Mr. Speaker, a turning back of the clock. It may well act as a 

deterrent to people seeking care for the mentally ill. It is a wholly retrograde step being an unjust 

retroactive charge against thousands of estates in this province. It is all too plainly another indication of 

the approach of the Liberal party to public health programs in Saskatchewan. It is, Mr. Speaker, I regret 

to say, altogether too characteristic of the Government opposite which has decided it is going to finance 

its programs by under-financing health programs. I think this is a conspicuous example of an unfair tax, 

an unfair tax, an unfair charge against people who are among the least able to bar these extra burdens 

and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the Bill and opposing it strongly. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2264 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford):  Mr. Speaker, it is with a very heavy heart that I rise to take part in this 

debate on Bill 84. There seems only one way to assess the Government’s approach to any and all its 

health measures. That, Mr. Speaker, is to view them against the backdrop of Liberal health legislation of 

no less than 20 years ago. The startling and frightening likeness is amazing, the blend, Mr. Speaker, 

against such a backdrop is so complete one can scarcely distinguish Liberal legislation of today from 

that of 20 and 30 and 40 years ago. Bill 84 falls into this regressive area. One cannot forget the days of 

the complete caveat when care of the mentally ill was charged back to the family estate, if there was an 

estate of any value whatsoever. It was not considered enough, Mr. Speaker, that the family should have 

suffered the anguish and the heartache on account of such a tragedy of one of its members becoming 

mentally ill. It was not enough that in so many cases the family had cared for these patients from 

childhood to maturity. There was no concern that parents, brothers and sisters or what have you had put 

many years not only into the care of such patients, but into the building of a farm or a home. It was not 

just an estate of the person who happened to be unfortunate enough to be mentally ill. In most cases, the 

whole family had been involved in the building of the estate. Then to have a caveat of staggering 

proportions, in many cases, placed against it. Once more, Mr. Speaker, there will be a danger that the 

dark pages resulting from Liberal mental health policies of 20 years ago will be re-enacted. From the 

fear of losing farm, home, estate, whatever you like to speak of, mental patients will once again be 

relegated to the backrooms of family homes in places where the public will not see them. This is 

reminiscent of what many of us went through as we saw families battling with these problems 20 years 

ago. In other words, Mr. Speaker, they will be driven underground. I say this out of the bitter 

experiences, as I said a moment ago, of past former periods under Liberal Administration. The $10,000 

exemption that is named in the Bill at the present time, Mr. Speaker, won’t even buy and pay for a 

decent home either on the farm, in the village or in a town. However, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what 

Bill 84 proposes to do. It is not enough that regressive legislation is being applied in so many other areas 

of public health. Now the mental health policy is getting the backward and the regressive treatment by 

allowing the Minister to get his fingers into the estate of family members which for many years now 

have been exempt, by making it all too easy for the Minister in charge to do this, whoever he may be. I 

am fully aware that we will be told that there is $10,000 of an exemption in certain cases and under 

certain circumstances at, if I may use the term, the whim of the Minister (Mr. Grant). May I point out, 

Mr. Speaker, once again this $10,000 exemption is absolutely inadequate for any widow or family faced 

with the rising costs of the present day. The former CCF Government took steps to lick the iniquitous 

caveat system at least for members of the family who were abiding in Saskatchewan and were taxpayers 

of the province. The policy for the mentally ill was virtually the same as that for TB patients or a little 

later for cancer patients. Because these 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2265 

illnesses were for the most part of long and uncertain duration and treatment in most cases was, and still 

is in the experimental area, hospitalization and treatment we considered should be a public 

responsibility. Because of these very factors I have mentioned I am convinced there should be no change 

in the policy, at least no backward approaches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the criticisms I have of the Government is that no mention was made to the people of 

Saskatchewan during or before the 1967 election of October 11, that any legislation so basic in principle 

would be brought forward. The proposed changes are not mere amendments clarifying sections of the 

Act. Bill 84 changes the basic policy and principle of mental health service. There is much more that I 

could say with regard to the Bill, Mr. Speaker, as far as I am concerned the legislation once again 

reduces our mental health program to a dollars and cents policy. This is quite apparent by the Premier’s 

most revealing remark the other day, “That’s another Socialist mess cleaned up”, that the Government 

does recognize many people in very difficult circumstances were getting free services, something that it 

has constantly opposed and something that it has constantly criticized. This is the essence of the 

Premier’s estimation of a mess, that somebody in very grave circumstances was really getting something 

free. Bill 84 is recognized in its proposals as not only regressive, Mr. Speaker, but dangerous in its 

amendments so far as I am concerned. It lowers mental health programs once again to the basis of 

dollars and cents regardless of what it is doing to people. It represents the Liberal party’s determination 

to reduce this legislation to cold, clinking basis of dollars and cents. The Minister need not argue on the 

basis that he as Minister is going to be benign and benevolent. The Minister of Public Health has no 

guarantee of life anymore than any of the rest of us. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I have to judge the Minister 

by the policies and programs outlined at this session in the public health area, I am very unhappy even 

with the present Minister. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the House that the Government is 

breaking faith with the people of Saskatchewan, as I said a moment ago, for the simple reason that not a 

single word has led anyone to believe that legislation of this kind of such a regressive nature, and such 

sweeping changes in the field of mental health were going to be dealt with at this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to just add a few words of disapproval of this 

Bill No. 84 or the Act to amend The Mental Health Act, because I believe it gives almost full authority 

to the Minister in charge to apply for a sum of money to the administrator of the estate of the deceased 

who dies in the mental institution, a sum, which in many cases could be considerable, at least sufficient 

to cover the necessary expenses that were incurred while the deceased was given care while he 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2266 

was in this mental institution. This could, Mr. Speaker, and would in many cases cause great hardships 

on the widow and within a very short time. I would say it would leave no alternative for her but to ask 

for social aid. True enough they are left out of their estate the sum of $10,000, but over and above that, 

if the Minister wishes, he may claim whatever sum is sufficient to cover the charges of this deceased 

gentleman. 

 

Might I state just a couple of examples that could happen if this Bill is passed and enforced. Supposing, 

Mr. Speaker, the widow had left to her in her husband’s estate a little home, perhaps worth $12,000, and 

her small pension which would be left to her to carry on. If I understand this Act correctly, the Minister 

could, if he so desires, leave the widow with this total amount not exceeding the $10,000 of this. She 

could be compelled to sell her house and give over and above the $10,000 in payment for her husband’s 

care while in the hospital. Or if she had a quarter section of land which was helping her and her family 

to make ends meet and this was left to her from her husband’s estate when he died, and while her 

husband had been in the mental institution this total bill, prior to his death, had reached the sum of say 

$10,000, which could easily happen, the Minister at the time of her husband’s death could apply if he 

saw fit to do so to lay claim to this quarter section of land, thus leaving the widow nothing to finance her 

with the necessities of life. This is all at the discretion and judgment of the Minister in charge. She 

would have stricken from her any and all the dignity which she and her family possessed. I think this is 

very unfair and is just another step similar to the deterrent fees on medical and hospital care. It is 

striking in many cases those who are again least able to pay. 

 

In many cases, Mr. Speaker, we must bear in mind and I think we must not forget that the family already 

have had the misfortune of being without the father or the assistance of the breadwinner during a crucial 

period of their lives. They have by hard work saved up enough to perhaps purchase a small home or 

have kept the home quarter free from mortgage by the family working together and perhaps by some 

help and assistance from neighbours. Now when the father who has been in the mental institution for 

several years passes away and leaves this small estate to his wife, the Minister in charge of Mental 

Health can claim anything over and above the $10,000, sufficient to cover expenses that were incurred 

during the deceased’s stay in hospital. Mr. Speaker, I certainly cannot see any justice in this Act and I 

urge all Members to vote accordingly. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Health):  Mr. Speaker, once again the Members of the Opposition have 

rallied to the cause of imaginary circumstances that may develop as a result of the passage of this Bill 

and have played upon the sympathies of people as far as hospitals and medical care are concerned. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2267 

I am going to be a little kinder to the Hon. Member from Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) than he was to me. I 

am sorry he is sitting in the back benches but I guess he can hear me. He questioned my judgment in 

what I might render in the cases of these widows and dependents. I am going to be more kindly to my 

predecessors. As far as I can find, the Hon. Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) and the Hon. 

Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) both used excellent judgment in cases that came before 

them. All I can do is assure this House that I’ll endeavour to follow their good examples and use every 

best judgement in cases that come to my attention. 

 

The Hon. Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) once again cited cases that are utterly ridiculous. Even a 

hard-hearted Minister of Health, such as I have been described, is never going to ask a widow to dispose 

of a $12,000 home in order to collect $2,000 under this Bill. This is just utter nonsense and he knows it 

as well as I do. We have no intention and I sure any conscientious Minister of Health will never do it, to 

strip a widow to the point where she hasn’t the wherewithal to carry on. Now while we have heard a 

number of cases cited that might develop I think we can cite just as many cases on the other hand where 

patients have been absolutely deserted by their relatives and their immediate relatives. I’m not speaking 

of cousins and nephews and nieces. I am speaking of sons and daughters, husbands or wives and are in 

our institutions and have been there for years and years. They not only have not had a visit from their 

relatives, they haven’t had a scratch of a pen for years and years. The only time the relatives come to 

light is when the patient dies and they suddenly discover there is an estate. Then they suddenly conjure 

up many reasons why they should share in this estate. I don’t know of any more practical way than the 

method that the previous Government instituted to get at this type of thing whereby they set forth certain 

requirements that collection would be made against certain portions of the estate, but even in these cases 

discretion was left to the Minister to deviate if he deemed it necessary. I feel that in Bill 84, while have 

extended the sources that we might direct our collection efforts towards, the same discretionary power is 

left to the Minister that the previous Administration saw fit to put in there. It has also been suggested by 

the Hon. Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) that the care of the mental patient is no longer 

free. Well let’s not fool ourselves, it hasn’t been free since 1945. At the time the Bill of the day 

indicated that collection could be made from certain beneficiaries, and it really hasn’t been free in the 

true sense of the word. 

 

I sincerely concur that these patients should be in the final analysis treated the same as any other patient. 

That’s why I indicated that, as soon as they come under the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and 

can be cost-shared with Ottawa, this legislation could be eliminated from the books. 

 

The Hon. Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) said as he quite frequently says — I must agree with his 

basic thinking and I’ve 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2268 

cited my feeling in this regard — that hospital treatment should be a complete public responsibility. 

Well if he feels so strongly about this he should have prevailed upon the previous Administration to 

change this Bill or to change the Act, so that no one’s estate was assessed after death in one of these 

institutions. 

 

It is suggested by the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) that in Section 9 there’s no 

restriction to patients in hospitals. Well there’s no change in this regard and I believe the previous Act 

could have been enforced; if it had been enforced to the letter of the law we could have been collecting 

from patients who died outside of the facilities. To me this is an area of inequity and I’m sure the Hon. 

Member for Regina Centre will agree. He has recognized that there are areas of inconsistencies and I 

think this in itself indicates that no one is too happy with this type of legislation, but under the 

circumstances I feel that the amendments to the Act will bring it more in line with consistency, if such 

can ever be reached. With the discretion of the Minister left as it is no hardships as conjured up by the 

Opposition will actually occur. 

 

Reference to the term used by one Member of the Opposition that it was a fair and equitable method of 

raising revenue and I think the Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) may have used these words too. I 

did not use them. I said it was an effective method. I suppose I’m hanging on definition of words, eyes 

of most people. But when this Act at the present time is producing some $300,000 a year, and I 

anticipate that the changes will produce about the same amount again or twice that amount, then it is an 

effective means of raising revenue. Whether it is equitable and fair and all that is another matter, but I 

didn’t say that. 

 

The Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) said that he felt very strongly against the 

retroactive feature of this Bill. I think this is an area that can be discussed in more detail in Committee. I 

feel the Bill should be supported, Mr. Speaker, and I can assure the Members that in spite of what the 

Hon. Member for Turtleford says that, if he visualizes me as an individual with tail and horns, I will not 

exercise the duties of this depicted individual in imposing the sections of this Act. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  31 
Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Bjarnason Mitchell 

Howes MacDonald Larochelle 

McFarlane Estey Gardner 

Boldt Hooker Coupland 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2269 

 

Steuart Gallagher McPherson 

Heald MacLennan Charlebois 

Guy Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

Grant Radloff  

Coderre Weatherald  

 

NAYS  21 
Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier) moved that Bill No. 89 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

Act be now read a third time. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, may I just say one word on this third reading before it’s passed, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased that Members on both sides of the House have been reasonably unanimous on this rather 

contentious issue. We did as I said earlier take out the conscience clause. I think this is regrettable 

because there were three Members, the Hon. Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek), the Hon. 

Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) and the Hon. Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) who 

stated in no uncertain terms that they were opposed to the principle of this legislation. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, talk is always one thing and action is another, and I think the people of Saskatchewan will 

watch with great interest to see whether the conscience of these three Members will be sufficient that 

they will turn down the $3,000 increase each year. As I say, we have left the matter on a voluntary basis 

and maybe that’s as it should be, but there is nothing preventing these three Members and the other two 

who voted against it from instructing the Clerk or the Provincial Treasurer that they don’t want to 

receive the increases. As I say, I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan will view the acid test with great 

interest as to how far their conscience goes. 

 

Mr. Lloyd:  Among the many words in this House that should never have been said those of the 

Premier at this particular moment must rank first. 

 

Mr. Steuart:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2270 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! We are debating third reading of a Bill. To my knowledge nobody in this 

session so far, until the Premier rose, has spoken on third reading. Now I was in the process of putting 

the question and perhaps I was a little hasty but I never thought for a minute that the Bill would be 

debated on third reading, probably I should not have started the question quite so speedily. The fact of 

the matter is that the Bill can now be debated on third reading. And that’s the question before the House. 

Of course if the Premier wants to he’ll have the privilege of closing debate too because he made the 

motion. 

 

Mr. Lloyd:  Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to detain the House long but I think it is indeed most 

regrettable and unfortunate that the Premier has just made his remarks. I think it is still a privilege that 

this Legislature should not deny lightly for Members in this Legislature to take a personal stand on a 

matter without thinking they are subject to some sort of punitive action following that as a reason of that 

stand. The Premier is in a sense applying the whip of punishment. I think it would be most unfortunate, 

may I say, and say very frankly and emphatically, if any Member of the House were to feel that he 

should refuse or not accept this increase. I think it will be most unfortunate if we are to have some 

Members in this Legislature remunerated at one level and others remunerated at another level. It would 

be bad for the House to have that kind of a situation. I have no hesitation whatsoever in urging 

colleagues of mine who felt that they had reasons for opposing the measures — these reasons were their 

own to say — but I hope that they do accept the remuneration which is paid to other Members of the 

Legislature. I am sure that each and every one of them will make use of it as befitting a good MLA 

which all of them are. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South):  Mr. Speaker, I did not rise to say anything on either of the 

Bills including this particular Bill, on second reading. But I did vote against it and it would be 

unparliamentary I believe for me to say why I did not vote for the Bill at that stage. I want at this point 

to make some reference only with respect to the remarks of the Premier. I think that, had this so-called 

conscience clause remained in the Bill, it would have been a piece of blackmail that would have been 

almost unheard of in parliamentary practice as we know it in this country or and others that follow the 

same kind of practices. I don’t think that anyone wants to visit upon any Member the punitive type of 

sanction that will prevent him from speaking his mind and in doing that which he thinks he should do at 

any given moment. Surely, when we talk about indemnities we are talking about a level for all Members 

in the House. If we start making distinctions of the kind that the Premier evidently thinks it was 

regrettable were not included in the Bill, then we can think of all sorts of occasions where a similar 

practice could be included in other Bills and to other payment practices or emoluments where MLAs are 

concerned. You could go far beyond that. You could start to distinguish between people who are in 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2271 

receipt of benefits by government action with respect to all sorts of programs. I think it’s an outrageous 

thing to consider the sort of principle that the Premier regrets was not inserted in this Bill. I for one was 

glad when this matter was debated in Committee that the particular section was withdrawn. I say that, 

when you begin to think of a principle like this, you then start to make distinctions as between Members 

that would apply in many, many directions. That could be disruptive not of only harmony in the House 

and among the Members but more important, disruptive of the business of the people and parliamentary 

institutions themselves. I have no hesitation in saying this, that there may be reasons why a person might 

oppose at any point in time an increase such as the increase we have before us, while in another year he 

might have no reasons whatsoever for opposing such increases. But to say to Members that have strong 

enough feelings to rise in their places and say something about a Bill, or say nothing and vote against it, 

that there should be some punitive practice attached because of their opinions and actions is a regrettable 

thing in my opinion, a piece of blackmail that I don’t want to see inserted into any piece of legislation in 

this House or elsewhere where we value democratic institutions. 

 

Mr. Thatcher:  Mr. Speaker, I will only make one more comment. I want to emphatically deny to the 

Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) that this was in any way punitive legislation. I want to deny to the 

Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) that this clause was “blackmail.” All it was designed 

to do was to permit those Members who in great conscience said they couldn’t take the raise. We feel 

that if their conscience prevents them from taking the raise, they should not be obliged to take it. Far too 

often I think in Bills of this kind a few Members for political reasons, not for conscience, oppose 

legislation of this kind. Then they are the first ones to go and take the raise. That is what the “conscience 

clause” was designed to prevent. We had three Members make very stout speeches against this 

legislation. We had two more vote against it. That is certainly their privilege. Now we’ll see whether 

their conscience is so strong they will turn down the $3,000 a year indemnity for four years. I doubt, Mr. 

Speaker, if it is. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a third time. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill 87 — An Act to 

amend The Public Service Superannuation Act. 

 

He said: This Bill is confined to employees of the Wascana Hospital who as we know on April 1 were 

taken over, so to speak, by the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre. Those employees were up until 

April 1 covered by The Public Service Superannuation Act and these amendments simply permit those 

employees 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2272 

to elect within a period of one year, to continue under The Public Service Superannuation Act or to 

come under the Pension Plan of the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre. If the employee concerned 

should make the necessary election, that employee under The Public Service Superannuation Act may 

take a deferred superannuation allowance, if the employment amounts to 10 years or more, or in the 

alternative, may receive a refund of his contribution with interest. I do not think, Mr. Speaker, any 

further explanation is required at this time. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South):  Mr. Speaker, the principle of this Bill is one that I can 

support, since it seeks to effect a reasonable transition from one pension plan, The Public Service 

Superannuation Act to the pension plan of the University of Saskatchewan; or in the alternative, to 

provide that employees concerned may remain members of The Public Service Superannuation Act. 

This kind of move was also made as I remember, subject to the correction of the Minister, several years 

ago under somewhat similar circumstances. 

 

While I have no fault to find with the purpose, I do feel that there are other considerations which should 

move the Government to take some additional action. I refer here, Mr. Speaker, to what is generally 

known as portability and to the pension credits of employees who do not have 10 years’ service with the 

Saskatchewan Government, or for that matter with its agencies, because many of the agencies and 

corporations have very similar legislation to the PSSA. As I see it, employees are entitled, should they 

decide to terminate with the public Service Superannuation Act, only to a return of their own 

contributions plus, Mr. Minister, (and I am not quite sure here), 3 or 4 per cent, if they have what is less 

than the 10-year service with the Government. 

 

Last year the Crown and its corporations or agencies were excluded from the Pensions Benefit Act. I 

think there were good and sufficient reasons at the time for that exclusion. The Crown and its agencies 

had not had an opportunity of studying their position with respect to other aspects and I freely concede 

that it was necessary for there to be some period during which that consideration was given. However, 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill reveals the fact that no action has been taken since that time to consider the 

vesting of pension contributions to employees with less than 10 years’ service. Our pension acts of the 

Saskatchewan Public Employee Group, to characterize the Crown and all of the agencies, are in, I 

consider, drastic need of prompt remedial revision in this reference. With the changes in pension plan 

practice, it is inconceivable that the Government should not take some leadership in providing a more 

just basis for the vesting of pension credit. What I am here saying to bring my remarks to a close, Mr. 

Speaker, is, I believe that at this point in time there should be some prompt consideration given in all of 

our pension legislation, to means by which employees, with less than the 10-year service to which I 

initially referred, can take, should they terminate their 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2273 

employment for any reason with the Crown or its agencies, their pension credit and those of the 

Government’s, hopefully that portion which represents the implied contribution of the Government with 

them when they go, because, if they do not, it means that for up to 10 years they have lost the 

employer’s portion of the pension contribution, and portability will have been weakened and injured in 

that particular respect. 

 

I am also saying, Mr. Speaker, that I think that leadership has to be given by the Government, more 

especially because of the passage of the pension benefit legislation; but now is the time to begin. With 

this amendment to The Public Service Superannuation Act some recognition could have been given to 

the matters about which I speak. I would like to ask the Minister, because I know he is new to the 

responsibility of looking after the Superannuation Act, if he would not undertake, if he cannot give an 

answer at this time with this Bill, some assurance that this might be included, to think about these 

matters in the future because I think that the present situation cannot remain as it is. I believe that most 

of the Members would agree that when pensions are considered the Government should be the first to 

give a lead in this regard. At the moment there are many other situations involving employed work 

forces in Saskatchewan where employees leaving with less than 10 years’ service are supplied not only 

with their own contributions to pension plans, but with that portion that the employer contributes in 

greater or larger degree. Some employers give it after five years or beginning at one, give one-tenth, and 

at the end of 10 years the whole portion is provided. We’re in the unenviable position in my opinion of 

being not one of the better employers in this regard, but one of I hesitate to say worse — certainly one of 

the ones that are the least progressive. I would like to suggest to the Minister that this matter needs to be 

looked at soon. I know there are some difficulties because of the funding of the superannuation plan 

itself, (I am now speaking about the Public Service Superannuation Plan), but nonetheless this matter 

needs to be faced, so that employees who leave the Government service with less than 10 years’ service 

will be able to take the lump sum representing both employer and employee contributions and put it into 

another pension plan. Of course I would be very happy personally to see that proviso attached to any 

action of that kind, because I think that pension contributions by both employee and employer are not in 

essence savings. They are deferred earnings, benefits or the building up of pension plan credits for 

retirement. Now the Minister may want to comment on some of those suggestions. Aside from that I 

think the Bill is a pretty good attempt to cope with the particular situation and I can support the 

principle. 

 

Mr. Estey:  Mr. Speaker, in closing the debate I would just like to point out in reply to the Member 

from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) that the Government has not given consideration to a vesting 

period insofar as the Superannuation Act is concerned of 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2274 

being less than 10 years. During the noon hour I made some enquiries as to the public service pension 

plans in the various provinces of Canada. Now there may be one that is under 10 years, but certainly the 

majority of them vest in a similar period to the plan which we have. That is all I have to say about the 

Act on second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Public Works) moved second reading of Bill No. 86 — An Act to amend 

The Public Works Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments for this Bill are for the most part of a housekeeping variety and 

could probably be discussed in Committee better. The Department no longer operates a repair depot, but 

we do operate a small trade shop for the purpose of repairing furniture and heating and plumbing 

equipment, so the heading “Maintenance Services” will replace “Machine Shops and Repair Depot.” 

 

The amendment also provides the Department with the authority to combine labour, materials and 

equipment under the term of “Construction Services”, and to use advance accounts to pay for these 

services as is a generally accepted practice in some of the other operational departments. A second 

amendment increases the limit of the advance accounts for CVA from $4.2 million to $5 million. This is 

necessary due to the increased responsibility of CVA for Saskatchewan Power Corporation trucks and 

also for the transfer of Air Ambulance Service to the Central Vehicle Agency. A final amendment 

provides the legislative authority for the Department of public Works to carry out the responsibilities of 

approving plans, specifications and estimates for university buildings as provided under The University 

Act. With these brief comments I would move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Davies:  Mr. Speaker, I have only briefly gone through this Bill and I must say that I don’t have 

any questions at this time that could not be asked in Committee, but there are a number of aspects that I 

think need some detailed examination because we are to some extent departing from the practice in other 

years. I look particularly at that section that extends the amount from $4.2 to $5 million and there may 

be some good reasons for this, the section which the Minister last referred to with respect to the 

University, I think that I can safely save my comments to that time in Committee. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF MELVILLE ARMY CADETS 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville):  Mr. Speaker, with the consent of this Assembly, through you I take 

great pleasure in introducing to this Assembly a group of 40 young men belonging to the Melville 

Legion Army 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2275 

Cadets. They have made a trip this morning to tour the Legislative Buildings and see the Assembly in 

action. They are under the direction of an outstanding citizen of Melville, Captain Abraham Nagler, and 

with him is Lieutenant Reinson. Captain Nagler and others in Melville have contributed many years of 

work and time with the young lads of Melville and district. With them also are the youthful NCOs, 

Sergeant Major Neil, Staff Sergeant Neil, a brother; Sergeant Herrington, Sergeant Hegan, Sergeant 

Wozniak. The bus driver is Corporal L’Heureaux from Moose Jaw. We wish them all a very pleasant 

afternoon and a very informative stay in this Chamber and a safe trip back home. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted proceedings on Bill No. 86 — An Act to Amend the Public 

Works Act. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair):  It looks, Mr. Speaker, as if the armed forces integration 

is getting under way, when I look at the uniforms in the gallery there. 

 

I just wanted the Minister to comment in his concluding remarks if he could with regard to the matter of 

the recommendations in the Provincial Auditor’s Report. When I questioned him on Public works he 

mentioned that I should ask this question of Treasury. It seems to me that the suggestion is rather 

pointed in the recommendation of the Provincial Auditor, that these practices should be incorporated in 

the Central Vehicle Agency. His recommendations are as follows: Referring to the CVA, the Auditor 

refers to Chapter 12 of the 1967 Statute, and he says that there is a practice established with regard to 

advance accounts, the operating surpluses and deficits are treated in a certain manner. He suggests that 

this consideration be given to proceeding with the necessary authority for the disposition of operating 

surpluses and deficits in this particular area, also the recommendations with regard to the operation of 

aircraft. I can’t help but think that this should come under this Act and not the Treasury. Perhaps he 

could clear me up with some comment when he concludes the debate. 

 

Mr. Guy:  Well I think that I mentioned to the Member when we were in Estimates that the final 

decision to which he refers is a decision of Treasury Board and not a decision of the Department of 

Public Works. However, I am sure that the Committee will be a better place to ask the more detailed 

questions and we will probably be able to give him more detailed answers at that time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2276 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 88 — An Act respecting The 

Medical Care Act (Canada). 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, all of the provisions of this Bill are related to The Medical Care Act (Canada) and 

the expectation that it will have practical effect, July 1, 1968. Some of the provisions clarify the 

relationship between the Provincial law and the Federal legislation, while other amendments bring the 

Provincial law in line with the Federal enactment in all technical aspects. The Medical Care Act 

(Canada) sets out various factors that are to constitute a medical care insurance plan of the Province 

towards which the Federal Government will make payment under that Act. Among other conditions is 

the provision that the plan of the Province will provide for the insurance of all physician services 

provided within the province, except services to which a person is entitled from the Federal Government 

and services received by Workmen’s Compensation cases. In this Province medical services includes not 

only services insured by the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission, but services provided 

to persons with certain specific diseases such as, tuberculosis, cancer and psychiatric illnesses. In 

addition certain preventative medical services are provided by the medical health officers in our 

province. Our Medical Care Insurance Plan is therefore for Federal Government purposes, not only the 

plan of insurance established under The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act, but the plan for 

making payments for medical services established under (a), The Cancer Control Act, (b) The Mental 

Health Act, (c) The Tuberculosis Sanatorium Hospital Act, (d) The Health Services Act, (e) The Public 

Health Act and (f) The Venereal Disease Prevention Act. The Health Services Act is included because 

the authority for Swift Current Health Region No. 1 to operate its Medical Care Plan comes to a large 

extent from this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, actually the Act that I am proposing here makes amendments to all six of these Acts. The 

Federal Act also refers to a provincial authority as the body within a province charged with the 

responsibility for administering the Provincial Medical Care Insurance Plan. You will quickly realize, 

Mr. Speaker, that in addition to the Medical Care Insurance Commission, the Minister of Public Health, 

the Saskatchewan Cancer commission, the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League and the Swift 

Current Health Region Board are all vested with administrative responsibilities in this regard. All of 

these bodies are therefore being stated as constituting the provincial authority in this province for the 

purpose of the Federal Act as a kind of composite authority. It is also stated in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Minister of Public Health will represent the provincial authority in any dealings with the Federal 

Government. This arrangement just has to be the case and is accepted without question by everyone 

concerned. The Federal Act also requires the records of the Provincial Authority relating to medical 

services to be subject to audit by the Provincial Auditor. Provision has been made in this 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2277 

regard. The only two components of the Provincial Authority affected are the Saskatchewan 

Anti-tuberculosis League and the Swift Current Regional Board. 

 

Another condition set out in the Federal Act with respect to a provincial plan is that it requires residence 

in the province for eligibility for insurance benefits shall not exceed three months. It is also stipulated 

that a resident of the province who has established his residence in another participating province shall 

continue to be entitled to insurance benefits until he becomes eligible to participate in the plan of the 

province to which he has moved. The Mental Health Act now requires residence of twelve months in the 

province before admission to an institution as a condition of settlement. The Tuberculosis Sanatorium 

Hospitals Act contains a six-month residence requirement. Neither Act contains any provision 

respecting payment for services received outside the province. Both Acts are being amended so that they 

will conform with the Federal Act requirement respecting residence qualification and other province 

benefits. Both Acts are also being amended to provide more flexibility in the kind of agreement that can 

be entered into with the Federal Government. At the present time the Government pays the 

hospitalisation tax on behalf of war veterans’ allowance recipients and Treaty Indians residing on 

reserves. Both groups are now excluded from the Provincial Medical Care Insurance Plan by the 

regulations. It is understood by both Governments that as of July 1, the Federal Government will pay the 

medical care premium for these two categories of persons. The Federal Government now pays the 

League for providing sanatorium care to Treaty Indians resident on reserves. As of July 1, 1968, the 

Government will pay for the hospital component only of that care, with the medical component being a 

Provincial responsibility. The Federal Government will continue to pay for all services provided by 

mental hospitals and the tuberculosis sanatorium to inpatients entitled to care from the Government of 

Canada, and that is war veterans receiving treatment for a pensionable disability. As previously 

indicated both Acts are being amended to give sufficient flexibility to authorize the various kinds of 

agreements to be made with the Federal Government. You will also note, Mr. Speaker, that Section 21 

of The Tuberculosis Sanatorium Hospitals Act providing for grants by the Province to the League is 

being revised. The basic change is to provide that in addition to the $5 per patient day grant, the 

Province will pay for all medical services provided by the League. The remaining provision of this Bill 

repeals Clause House of Section 14 under the Medical Care Insurance Act. This clause excludes a 

service from being an insured service if it is not rendered by or at the request of the physician. A repeal 

of this clause is necessary in order that optometric services may be added as an insurance service. This is 

because optometrists are independent practitioners working separate and apart from the physician. 

 

Mr. Speaker, reference is made in this Bill to the fixed date. It has also stated that the Act will come into 

force on the day to be fixed by proclamation. As the Federal Act now 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2278 

stands the date in both cases will be July 1. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East):  Mr. Speaker, I don’t intend to take long in discussing this 

Act. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the way this Bill is being introduced, amending several statutes is 

a bad form of proceeding and amending legislation, particularly since several Acts that are included in 

here are open this year, for example The Mental Health Act, The Medical Care insurance Act. It would 

seem to me to have been better to have these particular amendments included in the legislation that is or 

has been up for amendment. It will create a great deal of confusion in terms of reference. While 

admitting that there is nothing to prevent these kinds of amendments, I think it will add to the confusion. 

I am concerned about the kind of power the Minister is taking onto himself. I suppose, Mr. Speaker, 

really that we will have an opportunity to discuss the individual sections when the Bill comes up in 

Committee, but I would suggest that the Government in future years consolidate the amendments that 

are concluded in this Act in the appropriate Acts for better reference, where people will be able to follow 

much better than in the form that it is presented here. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre):  Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister I think that I would say that not 

all of us understand the Bill, but all of us to be extent that we understand it, approve of the contents of 

the Bill. Certainly we want to see Saskatchewan participate in the Canadian Medical Care Plan. And we 

want to see Saskatchewan get all of the money that it can whether or not the services rendered are under 

any particular Act. So we have to deal with all six or seven Acts. I would like to ask the Minister when 

he closes the debate to make a comment if he can on this question of uniform terms and conditions. I 

think that we are aware of the requirements laid down by the Federal Government in order to get Federal 

sharing. For that to be the case, the Provincial Authority must be providing medical care to the 

beneficiaries on “uniform terms and conditions.” As I indicated at an earlier time, I am concerned that 

the developments which are happening under The Medical Care Insurance Act will make it impossible 

for us to get the benefits of the Act before us, because we may be violating the Federal requirement of 

uniform terms and conditions. I would appreciate the Minister when closing the debate offering any 

up-to-date comment which he may have on that particular situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant:  Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). It 

seems to me if we had brought these 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2279 

in six different stages with six different Bills, I think that the confusion would have been increased as a 

result of doing so. Such procedure would necessitate referring each clause to the Federal Medical Care 

Act. It seems to me that this is about as simple a way as you can bring a complicated matter to the 

attention of the House and deal with it. I can’t agree with him that it would reduce the confusion or the 

complexity of the matter by bringing in six different amendments. 

 

Naturally these changes will be incorporated in the Acts as he suggested. He questioned the powers of 

the Minister; if he has any suggestions or anyone in the Opposition has any suggestions as to how this 

difficulty or requirement of the Federal Government can be overcome in any other manner, I would like 

to hear them. We explored this in depth with the Federal authorities and within our own Department, 

and it was felt that this was the only way that it could be done because naturally, the Federal 

Government, while it recognizes these separate authorities, doesn’t want to have to be dealing with three 

or four different ones. The authorities readily agreed that the Minister could be the spokesman. 

 

In answer to the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney), we are satisfied that we are meeting the 

Federal requirements of uniform terms and conditions as a result of negotiations and conversations with 

them. We anticipate no difficulty in this regard. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 73 — An Act to amend The 

Trade Union Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as I propose second reading of this Bill, we should of course always keep in mind 

the rights of the individual, providing these rights do not interfere with the health, the life, safety, 

welfare and the well-being of others. 

 

The amendments proposed do not in any way interfere with the internal affairs of any specific unions. 

There are some politically orientated agents and others involved who would say that my handling of this 

legislation is contrary to their opinions. If that is so, so be it! Legislation is only necessitated because 

some strong groups or associations over-exercise privileges that are granted to them. On several 

occasions I have had employers, employees or individual members of unions ask me what could be done 

about what appears to be an unfair condition. What has been so, what may be an unfair situation will be 

taken care of here in these amendments. I would like to say also that it would be ridiculous to consult 

with all the unions as there are over 2,000 of them. We have consulted with the Saskatchewan 

Federation of labour and on many points we have agreed — to disagree. We have consulted with many 

trade 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2280 

unionists. Also, there has been no attempt on the part of the Government to rush these amendments 

through as opportunities will be available to all Members of this House to voice any objections if any. If 

we are concerned, truly concerned, with the personal freedom of the individual I can see no objections 

from anyone. Also, when I prepare legislation and I bring it to this House, I have no intentions actually 

to discuss it will every Tom, Dick and Harry aspiring politician, possibly to feather their nests as the 

case may be. I have discussed this legislation with responsible people, some who are for it and some 

who are against. There are many international reps, business agents and unionists themselves that I 

called upon to discuss all matters regarding the labour movement. If I have some problems where I feel 

that I would like to have outside advice, there are many of these people that I call. With most of them 

that I have discussed this matter with they gave me their frank and honest observations on any of this 

suggested legislation, whether it was favourable or unfavourable. I know then that they don’t run to the 

press and create a distorted picture before the facts are in front of the Legislature. Regarding any such 

proposed legislation or changes that might take place, some Members across will dare to say that I have 

not listened to protests. This I have done. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation has been discussed 

very thoroughly and on some areas we have agreed or disagreed. I suppose that legislation is bound to 

be in conflict with the thoughts of some union leaders. After all there are some who would like to 

consider The Trade Union Act as a sacred cow that should never be touched. In an ever-changing 

society, we must see the changes and prepare to meet these changes. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that every Act of the Legislature should be reviewed from time to time to ensure 

that individuals in our society have their rights firmly guaranteed by a law. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

propose the following amendments to The Trade Union Act. 

 

Section 2 of the Bill is intended to correct an error in reference to a section made when Bill No. 79 was 

passed. I might say that there will be a House amendment in this section and that further comment 

should best be left to the Committee. There is also provision that is intended to clear up a possible 

ambiguity in Section 7 of the Act. I think that this can be best handled in Committee. 

 

Regarding number three, when a collective bargaining agreement is initially entered into, the various 

clauses of the contract are not agreed upon separately. This being the case, of course, it is equally 

obvious that when notice is given to open a clause of an agreement for renegotiation, the other clauses of 

the agreement should be by implication open to bargaining. There is a section in the amendment that 

provides that where the proper notice to revise an agreement is given and the subsequent bargaining 

breaks down, the agreement terminates when the employees take strike action. In other words they have 

withdrawn their services and the agreement is 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2281 

non-existent because therefore they can always go back in. 

 

The reason that this termination takes effect after strike action is to maintain the conditions of 

employment while the employees are still on their jobs. 

 

Now the next one is this section which is identical to the British Columbia legislation and the Ontario 

legislation. There is also provision in the amendments to give the Board power to investigate 

amalgamations. Everyone knows that the Labour Relations Board is a quasi-judicial Board. It is the one 

that establishes the bargaining unit after proper presentation has been made. As I have said, there are 

provisions in the amendment to give broad powers to investigate amalgamations, mergers and transfers 

of jurisdiction between unions. There will be a House amendment to this which will establish a time 

limit where a person could challenge this situation, where an application has been made after a merger 

has taken place. The reason for this section is to protect the individual employees from action by the 

union that could be detrimental or may be detrimental to them. I am not concerned, Mr. Speaker, what 

happens at the national or in the international level of unions. But I am very much concerned what 

happens in this province insofar as the people in this province are concerned. Many mergers have taken 

place and local people have not, or may not have had in effect the opportunity to determine for 

themselves. For example, where the union has a very large membership — in Ontario for example — at 

the upper level the members of that union have in fact been canvassed for amalgamations. They agree 

though that the eastern wing may have agreed by numbers and the Saskatchewan members have not had 

the opportunity to say anything. This makes it quite clear for them. 

 

The people in the shop chose their bargaining agent by majority decision. The nature of the bargaining 

agent can only be changed if the majority approves. Again, it gives the Labour Relations Board the right 

to look into it. If there is a complaint and if the majority approve, then it would have the right for the 

merger. This is as it should be. The Board is given wider powers under this section so that it can cope 

with any situation that may arise. I have sufficient confidence in judicial bodies, in this quasi-judicial 

body to give it this additional responsibility. I think it is as it should be, not arbitrarily decided by any 

levels of union, any levels of management, but left in the hands of this judicial body. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South):  Mr. Speaker, the first thing that I want to say with respect to 

this Bill is that it comes to us unrecommended by any body of labour and management in this province. 

Therefore, I say that it has been drafted without that kind of consideration that was given to amendments 

two years ago by the Labour Management Legislative Review Committee, which was headed by Dr. 

E.C. Leslie, Q.C., at that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister, in proposing these amendments, 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2282 

seems to argue that they are relatively and mostly unimportant and innocuous. However, from comments 

that I have heard during the past several weeks in trade union circles, some elected union officials 

appear to think that they are anything but that. There is a feeling abroad that these amendments may 

very well serve to undermine the safety of trade unionism and its ability to bargain collectively in 

Saskatchewan. Trade unions, of course, as the Minister must know, are combinations of the individuals 

for whom he professed great concern in his initial remarks. 

 

The amendments that were acted upon by this House in 1966 were, as everyone knows in this province, 

distinctly unpalatable to the 53,000 members of the trade union movement of this province. As 

anticipated they have caused difficulties to employees who have wanted to form unions. Additionally, 

they have weakened the protection formerly afforded employees when they hoped to form a trade union. 

They have also made obstacles in the path of collective bargaining; and generally they have not helped 

to improve the standard and quality of management-labour relations in Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in this House from time to time there is talk to the effect that what we need is a 

labour court like in Sweden. The Hon. Premier and others in the Government have made reference to 

this fact, as though a labour court was some sort of arbitration board for organized employees, to do all 

that such a tribunal thinks they should do. But this is in effect compulsory arbitration by a labour court. I 

would like to recommend to the attention of the Minister and to his colleagues, a little document that 

came to my hand not so long ago, prepared by the Swedish Institute at Stockholm. It is prepared by the 

Swedish Information Service. It is called “Fact Sheet on Sweden.” It is about collective bargaining in 

Sweden. I make reference to it at this time with respect to this Bill because it contradicts the concept that 

seems to have been held about labour relations in Sweden by Members of the Government. I am going 

to refer, Mr. Speaker, with your permission to only a few extracts. The first paragraph is probably the 

important one that I should mention to start with. And it says: 

 

By virtue of the wide scope for self-government in Swedish labour relations, collective bargaining is 

singularly free from collective arbitration. Legislation enters on only four points. It protects the rights 

of the association in negotiation on each side against certain measures on the other that violate these 

rights. It makes existing collective contracts enforceable and compels adjudication of disputes over 

their interpretation or application. It makes the intervention of a government mediator obligatory if the 

parties cannot reach agreement in negotiations for a new contract. And it requires one week’s notice of 

strikes or walkouts if mediation fails. This means that compulsion is limited to the interpretation and 

enforcement of existing contract terms. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2283 

If I may digress here, Mr. Speaker, that last line simply means that arbitration is only employed with 

respect to the term of a contract on the items of a contract that may have been misconstrued by either 

party and require adjudication by arbitration. 

 

They are in this document a whole number of references, but what it says without my quoting directly, is 

that in Sweden what has happened is that the powers of corporate combinations have been balanced by 

the powers of employee combinations. For the employee combinations have been given in the state a 

high degree of consultative capacity. The excesses of the corporate areas have been limited by the state 

and by the balance of powers that have been achieved by these parties. All of this has resulted in the 

relatively low level of labour strife — to use a popular phrase — in Sweden so that in the years from 

1930 up to 1963 which is the period quoted in this bulletin, the last four years show an infinitesimal rate 

of strike-time lost. There is no restriction on the strike. The point is that the philosophy of the legislation 

and the practice there as opposed to the practice of the Government of this province, is to balance the 

powers of the two combinations and to limit the excesses, above all of the corporate institutions so that 

trade unionism is in fact free, and so that collective bargaining is independent and the ratio of strength of 

the parties is approximately equal at all times. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that this was not achieved in the legislation brought in to amend The Trade Union 

Act two years ago by this Government. The situation is to some degree worsened by the amendments 

that we have before us in this Bill. Mr. Speaker, whatever one might have had to say about the report of 

the Leslie Committee from which the changes of two years ago were derived, it can be said with 

authority that the Leslie Committee did subscribe without reservation to the idea that labour relations 

legislation should not be sprinkled with harassing, troublesome and technical features that would not 

only make it more difficult for labour but more difficult for both bargaining parties. The Leslie 

Committee in its report mentioned the following quotation with approval, in this regard. I would like to 

read this paragraph, Mr. Speaker, into the record. 

 

The Trade Union Act is an expression in statutory form of the liberal view that given the necessary 

protection of rights by the law, men should be free to work out their own affairs with government 

interfering as little as possible. In this respect, the Saskatchewan Act stands in marked contrast to other 

Canadian labour relations legislation where the process of collective bargaining is hedged with a 

multitude of restrictions, and where government presumes the right to interfere in the process and 

subject the parties to advice and suggestions whether or not such interference, advice or suggestions 

are desired by either party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my opinion of the amendments before us, at least 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2284 

with respect to the main ones, is that they will accomplish in labour relations in Saskatchewan exactly 

what the Leslie Committee voiced its fears about. I feel strongly that the amendments that we have 

before us should never have come to the House until the Minister had given a similar body, if not the 

same Leslie Committee body, the opportunity of studying the kind of principles that are dealt with in 

this Bill. I am sure that the Minister will say that some of the changes that are covered are simply 

so-called housekeeping amendments. I believe, though, that, while some of the changes may well be in 

this category, others might open the door to practices and possibilities that would be wholly unfair to 

organized labour and most important to the working people of this province. 

 

At the moment the Act lists the professional associations in Saskatchewan that under the Act can have 

their members exempted without all of the formalities — and I say that they are rigid formalities — 

which unions have to follow if they are to receive collective bargaining status in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is by no means clear that a second housekeeping change about which I spoke may not in 

fact permit the Labour Relations Board to broaden this list of professional associations beyond the list 

that was approved by the Legislature in 1966. This, then, would open the door to a situation where 

organizations not formerly classed as professional associations, could weaken collective bargaining units 

by extracting their membership or parts of their membership from the unit. 

 

I think the Minister should today assure the House that this is not intended if indeed it is not intended. I 

must confess that since I prepared this talk I have heard that the Minister can assure the House that this 

is not intended. But I think that the point does need clarification because it is certainly causing a good 

deal of anxiety in the form in which it was originally viewed. 

 

It would, of course, be possible for the Legislature at this session to make the situation amply clear. A 

simple amendment to the clause stating that the list of professional organizations was the list defined in 

the Act and that the Board could not make additions, would make the amendment, I think, much more 

acceptable. It may be that the Minister can give that assurance in the House. If he can, I think that would 

be very helpful. 

 

Now Item 4, Mr. Speaker, of the draft Bill amending Section 30 deals with the whole question of the 

terms and the operations of collective bargaining agreements. I have heard the reasons given by the 

Minister for this amendment and I would not dispute perhaps the need to make some changes in the 

direction he points to, if the amendments did not accomplish something that would do far greater 

damage in other directions. 

 

There is every possibility now in the particular changes that, when a legal strike takes place, the 

employer will be able 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2285 

to unilaterally withdraw benefits and make other adverse changes in working conditions without any 

recourse to collective bargaining. Now, it seems to me that such an action would be in defiance of the 

well-know principles of the Saskatchewan Trade union Act. But I believe that there is every possibility 

that such an action could nonetheless be taken. I again, believe that the Minister should assure the House 

that, if any such advantage is taken in this way because of the sec that he is now proposing, he will 

undertake that remedial action will be taken to correct it. 

 

At the moment those that have to do with management-labour relations in Saskatchewan, have enough 

to concern themselves about in maintaining good relationships without having the possibility of further 

disastrous and disruptive features thrown into the arena. Now, this would certainly be the case if an 

employer could provoke a strike in order to thereafter withdraw the favourable benefits and the working 

conditions that were stipulated in a trade union agreement in an effort to dispose of the union 

organization with which he had to bargain. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the Government’s intended cure is worse than the disease. This would 

seem to be one of the results of failing to encourage sufficient advance consultation between the parties 

that are affected in Saskatchewan by this Bill just as the Government has not given sufficient attention to 

policy that would ensure more stability in labour relations in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole framework of Saskatchewan labour relations legislation in Saskatchewan since 

1944 has been constructed so as to reduce the possibility of industrial conflict. One of the ways that this 

has been accomplished was by keeping trade union agreements in force, even where there were 

cessations of work, even where there was a strike. This meant that there was always something upon 

which to build and it made settlement procedures for industrial relations officers of the Government a 

great deal easier. Now, with this amendment I suggest the way is open for bitter internecine clashes 

between management and labour that could stretch over a long period of time. These of course could not 

only be disruptive of the economy but perhaps even more important impose a considerable hardship for 

many working people that are affected. 

 

The working conditions of an employee and his rates of pay are to some extent even in the absence of 

labour legislation, governed by common law. The supposition is that these conditions cannot be 

withdrawn in a completely arbitrary fashion. Now the amendment we have before us, Mr. Speaker, 

would create the justification for employers to bypass traditional practices in common law and by 

wholesale withdrawal of benefits, create the battleground for lengthy, protracted and damaging disputes. 

 

I believe that the Minister should inform the House that he will either withdraw this amendment and 

bring in a changed version or delete this section entirely from the Bill. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2286 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the most serious change in the Bill is the one dealing with the rights of successor 

unions where mergers have taken place. Section 35 that governed these practices to this time, will be 

wiped out by this Bill, and a new section substituted. Previously, Mr. Speaker, I think it can be said that 

the old practices governed by this part of the Act worked quite satisfactorily. I feel, however, that this 

present section is one that will not only create trouble and difficulty but which is largely unnecessary. 

The need for a section of this kind arose at the time of the merger of the two Labour Congresses in 1956. 

There was an automatic change in affiliation for all or most of the trade unions involved in Canada and 

some procedure was needed at that time to be stated, whereby the orders of certification of Labour 

Relations Boards provided a quick and simple means of changing the certification to correspond with 

the new affiliation. Now, since the Labour merger there have been a good many union organizations that 

have decided to join together in a larger union body. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is in keeping with the times and such mergers in fact have had the effect of 

eliminating jurisdictional disputes between the union bodies concerned. I believe that it is not only in the 

interests of working people, but generally in the public interest that such mergers be encouraged. I don’t 

know whether the Minister may have taken note of these facts, but where one looks at Great Britain and 

United States and Canada, a basic comparison between the three countries, you will see that we have a 

large number of relatively small union bodies, often in different jurisdictions that could very well afford 

to come together in everyone’s interest, even in the interest of employers who frequently have to bargain 

with a larger number of union organizations than should be the case. Certainly in Britain where the best 

example is shown, the numbers of unions have been so reduced that the comparison between Britain and 

Canada is quite remarkable and this process is still going on. No one can say that this has encouraged 

labour difficulties in England. The reverse is true. I believe the Minister is aware of the fact that the 

management-labour atmosphere in Great Britain is on the whole excellent. There are very few disputes 

really in their whole picture. 

 

But in any case, the amalgamations as we are concerned about them in this province and in Canada are 

almost wholly (I’m suggesting to the Minister) internal matters for the trade unions and the members 

concerned. The desirable and wise procedure for a Labour Relations Board is to act upon applications of 

trade unions where mergers have been concluded and to generally accept the evidence of mergers as the 

basis for changing the name and/or the affiliation of the relevant union in the order of certification 

issued previously by the Board. 

 

The new section that we’ve got before us does not stipulate that it applies only to merger or 

amalgamation situations that will take place following the passage of this amendment to The 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2287 

Trade Union Act. It therefore opens up the possibility of changes that have taken place many years ago 

becoming a matter of contention. The bargaining rights of many thousands of employees can thereby be 

endangered and damaged. The Minister here may say, Mr. Speaker, that some changes have been made 

to guarantee that this will not take place. I would welcome his reassurance in that regard. The fact is as I 

saw it initially that that danger was present. 

 

The change that would result from the passage of this part of the Bill would mean in any case that the 

actions of trade unions in effecting amalgamations could be obstructed by the Board. Even although a 

trade union had represented employees for many years and had the bargaining rights in a given plant, the 

Board could make every inquiry that it wanted to, require the holding of representation notes, if it 

wished, and generally introduce an area of interference and inquisitorial practice that had never been 

envisaged by the previous part of the Act that dealt with this whole question. The situation, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s contemplated by this section of the Bill is in any case most one-sided. The Labour Relations 

Board will have all powers to exercise any opportunity it wishes to exercise to acquire evidence, 

disregard evidence, and make decisions that might be quite contrary to the decisions that have already 

been arrived at by the members of trade unions. 

 

If this section had any validity, it would also require that, in the case of any consolidation, 

amalgamation, or change in corporate enterprises where trade unions had bargaining rights, some similar 

procedure would have to be gone through. The Act does not now require that employer bodies should 

have to satisfy the Board about any internal changes that they may decide upon and I’m not really here 

suggesting that they should. I am, however, saying, Mr. Speaker, that if an Act provides that a Board 

may undertake to interfere and to pry into the affairs of trade unions that should properly be decided by 

trade union members themselves, then there must logically be some corresponding action taken with 

respect to the corporate bodies. 

 

I’m sure the Minister would disagree and argue. I think superficially that there are laws governing 

company mergers. But I submit that this argument if advanced is not directly analogous to what we have 

before us. First, company mergers provided the technical considerations are observed are largely 

formalities based often on shareholders’ meetings attended by only a fraction of the shareholders 

dominated by proxies held by a tight company hierarchy. The Government accepts the evidence of 

decision provided by the companies, does not operate in general to undertake votes or to overtly 

interfere in a manner that is now possible by the amendment before us to The Trade Union Act. Nor, Mr. 

Speaker, can any law governing corporation mergers result in the total dissolution and failure of the 

corporate institution by reason of the action of government and all this I’m suggesting is analogous to 

the 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2288 

section in the Bill that we are now discussing. 

 

This change in the Act, Mr. Speaker, has imposed another arduous bit of red tape for trade union 

organizations that in the aggregate will cost them a great deal of money. The Labour Relations Board is 

now constituted and the Minister has pointed this out to us this afternoon, almost like a court and very, 

very few union organizations appear before it on technical matters without having to secure the advice 

of and presence of legal counsel. I don’t need to tell you that an application before the Labour Relations 

Board lasting a couple of days can cost trade unions hundreds, sometimes thousands of dollars in legal 

fees. In this province a great many of our trade unions, Mr. Speaker, are small groups of much less than 

fifty people. There is not reason whatsoever for imposing upon small union organizations the kind of 

large-scale costs that they will have to pay with the onerous and technical requirements that appear to 

have been thrust upon them by this amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that there is no pressing reason for this Bill being before us at this time. The 

matters that this Bill seeks to deal with are matters that can be dealt with at the next session of the 

Legislature following a sufficient and proper investigation, without doing any damage to anybody. The 

Minister says that he is all for personal freedom of the individual and this is his objective. He says that 

The Trade Union Act is not a sacred cow. Well I would like to say this that where cows are sacred, Mr. 

Speaker, it is illegal to shoot them and abuse them. I think many of the amendments that we have had 

from this Government on The Trade Union Act do abuse and are lethal in their character. He says that he 

is much concerned with what goes on in the Province of Saskatchewan and he drew an analogy about 

merger where an eastern vote would dominate the small western vote. I would like to suggest that in 

large measure a situation of that kind is mostly with regard to organizations that are now under the 

jurisdiction of the Canada Labour Relations Act and that in any case the majority in mergers of this kind 

must govern. If there is a national body that has members in Saskatchewan and this effect would be 

present, as long as votes are democratically conducted, and this is all present and accounted for — 

stipulated by the constitution of the trade unions concerned — I see no reason why he should be so 

concerned about possible abuses. If there are abuses, the Labour Relations Board can certainly deal with 

them fully by the legislation as it is now constituted. The Minister says that he is concerned about the 

personal freedom of the individual. I want to tell him this, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments that he 

piloted through two years ago to The Trade Union Act have done more to damage the personal freedom 

of the individual with respect to rights of organization than any other legislation effecting working 

people in the last 50 years. Because what has happened is that it is more difficult for people to exercise 

the rights that are conferred upon them by this Act. Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about large groups of 

employees in this province that would like to have the advantage of union organizations but are frankly 

too frightened to secure them. I’m 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2289 

talking about people in the service industries, like the hotel industry and I could go on. The Minister 

knows about them. These are the people who are on miserably low wages. They would like to organize; 

they are frankly fearful about so doing and everything that the Minister does that makes it more 

technical, more difficult for people to join in organizations, that gives the employer by one of the 

amendments two years ago the right to “talk union”, the democratic right to talk to employees. What an 

ironical phrase in this context! This makes it harder for the employee to make his choice without this 

overt interference and discrimination by the employer concerned. These are facts, these are not 

imaginary. Talk to any employee, any unorganised employee in the kind of area that I have referred to, 

on a confidential basis, and he will assure you that this is true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government has announced that it is contemplating some changes in trade union 

procedure respecting the certification of craft unions. This was announced in the press; the Minister had 

not told the House about it, but I take it that this is an accurate report. This, I suppose, would mean that 

the Act will be open next year whatever happens. Therefore, there is really no reason why these 

amendments could not be considered with the others in some sort of a joint consultative body, so that the 

next session could consider any needed changes. 

 

If the Government, Mr. Speaker, would agree to this reasonable course, then I would further suggest that 

the Government give consideration to the main items in this Bill with the trade union organizations of 

the province. I’m not disputing what he has told us, that there has been some consultation. It has been, 

however, quite hurried, also, because of the fact that the session is on, because there are many matters 

that should be considered. I know that there have already been discussions, but these have not satisfied 

the organizations that are concerned by any means. I believe that should this course not be deemed 

feasible then the Leslie Committee might be reconstituted to deal with the several questions that are 

involved. I say, again, however, that whatever the case there is no pressing need to proceed at this time 

with these amendments. 

 

I cannot personally see how the amendments that we have before us could have been drafted, if good 

labour relations were the objective. There is every indication to me that the drafters of these clauses do 

not understand the realities of management — labour relations here or anywhere else for that matter. 

The Bill might have initiated action to change some of the damaging amendments made in 1966. It 

hasn’t however, done so. It has simply added to the difficulties that had been brought about at that time, 

and this Bill if approved will further reflect in a more uneasy labour-management situation in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the central part of The Trade Union Act is to give employees the free and independent 

rights of bargaining through association of their own choosing. This main consideration was in many 

ways successfully realized during the period 1944-1964. The changes that have been instituted in the 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2290 

legislation by the present Liberal Government of the Province have had a contrary influence on the 

rights of labour to organize in the province. I’ve already pointed out to the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) that the rate of increase in union membership in Saskatchewan was far lower than the 

Canada-wide increase. Between January 1966 and January, 1967, the last period for which full figures 

are available, union membership in Canada rose 185,000 or 10.6 per cent. But in Saskatchewan in the 

same period, union membership increased by 2.9 per cent. The Canada rate is three and one-half times 

the rate growth of Saskatchewan in the same period. I want to contrast the situation under a CCF 

Government when to 1964 the union membership in Saskatchewan had risen by 102 per cent; that is it 

had more than doubled. In that period, that was the fastest relative increase in any province in Canada. 

The Trade Union Act, I want to remind the Minister, is not a document that concentrates so much on 

legalities as it concentrates on enabling as many employees as possible to enjoy the rights of collective 

bargaining. It seems to that this is disputed in the Government thesis so that it set up a kind of a 

technical, onerous framework that employees must conform to, a framework of course that is to the 

advantage of employers and other groups that seek to counteract the process of employee organization. 

 

It is evident to me, Mr. Speaker, that the legislation we have before us is going to still further restrict the 

opportunities of ordinary employees to join into organizations that will improve their economic lot and 

as well, and probably in the last analysis the most important, their human dignity and self-respect in the 

world of work. The present Government has set out to make organization and bargaining not less but 

more difficult for the people who are chiefly concerned, namely the employed class, the working people. 

They are continuing to hedge the Act in with technicalities, obstacles, and legal requirements that as I 

have said will please only the people who sell their services in the disputes that will be created by this 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have strong doubts about several of the amendments in this Bill that are before us 

and I would hope that the Minister and his colleagues would give due consideration to the withdrawal of 

this Bill until suitable consultations have devised a document that could be more satisfactory having 

regard to all the circumstances. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East):  Mr. Speaker, I too must rise to speak in opposition to Bill 

73. On October 7, Mr. Speaker, of last year, there was a full-page advertisement that appeared in the 

Regina Leader-Post. The head of that advertisement was “Declaration of Saskatchewan Liberal labour 

policy.” The centre of that newspaper ad read like this, part of it was quoted by the Hon. Member for 

Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies), - let me quote a brief part of it: 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2291 

It is an expression in statutory form of the Liberal view that, given the necessary protection of rights 

by the law, men should be free to work out their own affairs. 

 

The reference already referred to by the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), Mr. Speaker, this 

quotation was taken say out of context from the submission the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

made to the Labour-Management Legislative Review Committee of the Province of Saskatchewan 

which was established by this Government in 1965. Then a part of it was included in the Leslie 

Committee Report. Mr. Speaker, the full text or statement of the Federation appears on page 6 of the 

Federation submission, I have it here before me. 

 

More important than the quotation being taken out of context, Mr. Speaker, is the mischievous distortion 

of the spelling of the word “liberal.” In the SFL Brief it is spelt with a small “1”, it is also spelt with a 

small “1” in the Leslie Committee Report. In the newspaper ad it is spelt with a big “L”, Mr. Speaker. In 

checking the newspaper ad, I also notice, Sir, that there does not appear to be an authorization as to who 

inserted this ad…I notice the Attorney General coming in. The requirement of The Election Act is that 

anyone sponsoring newspaper advertisements during the election must authorize them and have the 

sponsor’s name appear in the ad. Mr. Speaker, I know that this newspaper ad was not sponsored by the 

NDP candidates. I doubt very much whether the Conservative or Social Credit party sponsored that 

advertisement, particularly when you take a look at the pictures of the six Liberal candidates appear in 

this newspaper ad. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) might want to take a look at it and investigate 

whether the law was broken. I believe it was, and he might want to consider taking some legal action 

against the party that inserted that newspaper ad. 

 

Mr. Heald:  Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, since my name has been mentioned, if the Hon. 

Member will make a formal complaint to me I will be glad to look into it in the usual manner. I might 

say that I noticed that some of the supporters of some of the people trying to get elected for your party 

also were guilty of a violation of that Act. I think it happened inadvertently from time to time and I think 

that if we wanted to prosecute people for a violation of that section of The Election Act we would 

probably prosecute a great many candidates and probably all the political parties that took part in the last 

election. But if you want to make an issue of it and want to make a complaint, well you write me a letter 

and we’ll look into it. 

 

Mr. Smishek:  Mr. Speaker, I thought I would bring this to the attention of the at. It may be the 

Liberals are now disclaiming that this is their policy and perhaps they are. Here is a more serious 

offence, Mr. Speaker, more than the part that I quoted. The fact is that the language was used by the 

Federation to describe The Trade Union Act as it was written and 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2292 

applied prior to 1966 amendments, prior to Bill 79 being introduced. Therefore, I cannot help but 

describe the authors and the sponsors of this advertisement with using crafty, deceptive distortion, 

because since the passage of Bill 79 in 1966, no longer does The Trade Union Act stand in marked 

contrast to other Canadian labour relations legislation. 

 

Since the enactment of Bill 79 and Bill 2, the process of collective bargaining has become hedged with a 

multitude of restrictions, where this Liberal Government has taken unto itself directly through its 

stacked Labour Relations Board the right to interfere in the process of collective bargaining and has 

subjected the employees and unions to advice and suggestions where no such interference, advice or 

suggestion is desired by either the employees or the employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 73 extends restrictions. Well, Sir, last year during one of the speeches I made in this 

Assembly, I said “labour-management relations, collective bargaining, is a human relations process. It 

cannot be legislated and forced upon by law anymore than you can legislate love, marriage or honour.” 

It requires mutual respect and understanding. It is well recognized that a good law must command wide 

respect and support, particularly by those to whom it applies. This Bill 73 like Bill 79 in 1966 and Bill 2 

adopted at the 1966 Special Session does not have the respect and support of labour and many 

employers and it will not work. 

 

If the Hon. Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) really subscribes to the beliefs he 

espoused during the Throne Speech on the matter of labour-management relations, he will use his 

influence on the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) and the Government to withdraw this Bill. He is 

reported in the press saying: 

 

Labour leaders as well as management should sincerely concern themselves and jointly request the 

elimination of all restrictive labour legislation. 

 

I say to him that neither labour nor management asked for this piece of restrictive labour legislation. 

There is no evidence whatsoever that either employers or employees have made representation to the 

Government to bring in the amendments that are contained in this Bill. 

 

The proposed amendment to Section 30 will only bring about more difficulty in resolving a dispute once 

a strike occurs. Surely, Mr. Speaker, the employer and the union know what sections of the collective 

bargaining agreement they want to negotiation revisions to and upon serving notice will advise each 

other of the specific terms on which they want to negotiate changes. Surely it’s not up to the Legislature 

to dictate to the parties that once a strike takes place that every clause, every term, every sentence, every 

word and every comma of a collective bargaining agreement must be thrown out the window once a 

strike takes place. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2293 

This is irresponsible legislation. It invites the procrastination of disputes. This sort of law can only give 

aid to those who view good labour-management relations with contempt. This kind of law does nothing 

else but inflame an already aggravated situation when a strike occurs. It will promote the importation of 

strike-breakers, because the employer will be permitted to change the working rules and standards and 

bonus strike breakers. 

 

Referring again to the newspaper advertisement of October 7, it asked this question, “Is the Liberal party 

a friend of the union member?” The answer, “Positively Yes.” Another part of the ad said, “Union 

members shall have a fair formula enabling them to choose alternative bargaining units.” If this is the 

declared Liberal policies, how can they possibly justify the new Section 35? This new section denies, 

Mr. Speaker, the right of union members an alternative union through a merger, amalgamation, or 

transfer. 

 

The section completely contradicts the present Section 3 of the Act which confers a right on employees 

to form and join unions by a majority decision, unions “of their own choosing.” The proposed provision 

denies the employees a right to a merger, amalgamation, or transfer of the union, even though the 

decision may be made by a majority or unanimous approval of its members, because, Sir, upon 

application of “any person or trade union concerned,” the Board has the power to deny the wishes of the 

majority or unanimous wishes of employees. 

 

Note the words “any person,” Mr. Speaker. It may be a person totally unaffected. It does not have to be 

an employer who bargains with the employees. It does not have to be a member or employee in the 

bargaining unit. It says “any person” may make an application to the Labour Relations Board and drag 

the employer and the union before the Board. The provision does not require that the parties shall be 

notified of such an application. Mr. Speaker, a union merger or amalgamation or transfer sometimes 

becomes necessary because of the action of the employer. Let me give you a concrete example, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to Minister to take note, of a concrete example affecting my own union. I will not 

give the name of the employer and the numbers of the locals but this is an exact case: 

 

Plan A employed close to 100 employees. These employees belong to Local No. 1. Plant B employed 

about 40 employees and they belonged to Local No. 2. Plant C employed about 15 employees and the 

employees also belonged to Local No. 2. Company A and Company B merged. The union worked out an 

agreement between Company A and Company B, that is, employee contract rights and retention of jobs. 

However, there were more employees than jobs as a result of the companies merging. It was agreed that 

all employees who acquired seniority would be retained and employees with less than 3 months’ 

seniority would be laid off. Some ten employees were affected by the lay off, but it was agreed that they 

still had the right of recall for a period of time in case there were some job openings later. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2294 

Naturally those laid-off were unhappy, no employee wants to lose a job. However all parties agreed we 

had resolved the issue reasonably satisfactorily in respect to the two companies that merged. But the 

union had a problem in respect of the employees in Plant C still remaining in Local No. 2; a Local with 

15 members is too small for administrative and financial purposes. The members in this shop agreed to 

merge with the larger amalgamated group. The matter was discussed with the employer of Plant C. His 

answer was that this was an internal union matter and he couldn’t care less. Local 2 disappeared. Under 

the new law, Mr. Speaker, “any person”, any one of the employees who were laid-off or anyone else, 

could have taken the union and presumably the employers before the Labour Relations Board, forced the 

expenditure of money on the employers and the union, and the public, as time would have to be taken up 

by the Labour Relations Board, and no doubt the Board might order a vote and thus an expenditure of 

public money unnecessarily. 

 

I know of no law that forces such restrictions and/or right of interference by “any person” if companies 

merge, amalgamate, or transfer shares. Why should such discriminatory contentions and unfair 

restrictions apply in respect of trade unions. I know of no such statutory restrictions that apply in the 

case of lawyers, doctors, dentists, druggists or any other profession when they want to amalgamate or 

merge their offices of practice. Why the unions? 

 

Mr. Speaker, students of the North American labour movement generally agree that some of the 

difficulties confronting labour and unions and employers in this age of technology and rationalization, 

are that there are too many unions and it would be desirable that mergers be expedited. This would help 

prevent jurisdictional disputes. Improve union education, organization, research, streamline 

administration and bring about more mature collective bargaining. Yes, Mr. Speaker, improve labour 

management relations. But it appears that this Government is hell-bent on prohibiting and restricting that 

process. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, several years ago I had the privilege of attending a number of national 

conferences sponsored by what was then called the National Productivity Council. I attended a 

conference in Montreal, another in Vancouver and one in Saskatoon. At these conferences the national 

leaders of the labour movement and presidents of large national companies were in attendance. I 

remember while sitting in informal sessions and buzz groups that a number of employers raised the 

problem that they had in bargaining negotiations because there were too many unions in Canada. I 

remember one employer saying they have plants in every province including Saskatchewan. He said his 

company had to deal with 22 different unions. There was one problem in dealing with the matter of 

wages, job classification, but the major problem they had was and had difficulty in resolving the 

introduction of welfare and pension plans. They pleased and suggested that unions might do well to 

bring about mergers, thus help labour-management relations and thus help collective 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2295 

bargaining. This was the view expressed by some of the largest industrialists that we have in Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, there must be a motive behind these amendments, and I am afraid that it is not a good 

motive. 

 

The Saskatchewan Trade Union Act as amended by Bill 79 is now hedged with a multitude of 

restrictions, where the Government through its policy and its biased Labour Relations Board has made a 

mockery of industrial relations. Let me quote or continue with a quote from the paragraph of the SFL 

brief that the Liberals stole for inclusion in their newspaper ad of October 7. It went on stating this: 

 

It is, we respectfully observe, something of an anomaly, that it appears to be precisely in those 

provinces where the existing Governments proclaim themselves to be the staunchest proponents of 

free enterprise and individual liberties untrammelled by the interference of the state, that we find the 

highest degree of interference with the process of collective bargaining. 

 

I have already in an earlier debate documented in some detail the biased, inconsistent, and unfair 

practices of the present Labour Relations Board and the irresponsible decisions that emanate from that 

body caused by two reasons, Sir, one, the composition or structure of the Board and two, the unfair 

provisions of the Act. 

 

I ask again why the amendments? Who asked for them? I know of no employer or union groups that 

have petitioned this Government for the amendments that are contained in Bill 73. What is their 

purpose? In as far as Section 35 is concerned dealing with union mergers, it appears the Government 

wants the power of veto. But why? Is the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) fearful that the building 

trades or printing trades may merge into single unions and he wants the right to say yes or no to such a 

possible development? 

 

Does the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey), the Minister in charge of the Public Service 

Commission want to veto a possible merger between the Canadian Union of Public Employees and the 

Saskatchewan Government Employees Association, and is it that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

wants the power to veto a possible merger between IBEW and OCAW and/or other unions? Should not 

these unions have the right to merge without Government interference? I say they do. Mr. Speaker, I 

know of no government in Canada that has taken unto itself the right of this kind of interference. It 

appears that except for this Liberal anti-labour Government none are asking for that kind of authority. It 

appears that fairly soon they will be bringing in legislation telling the worker when or when he may not 

be able to go to a washroom. Yet these are the people who during the election period in the newspaper 

ads said that they were the “friends of labour.” Well, Sir, I’ll tell the workers how friendly they are. 

Their example of friendship was certainly 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2296 

demonstrated here a few days ago when I tried to introduce an Hours of Work Act. These Liberal friends 

of labour even denied me the right to introduce this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really urge the Minister (Mr. Coderre) to withdraw this legislation. I don’t think it is 

legislation that is desirable. I don’t think that this legislation will do anything for the promotion of good 

labour-management relations. I have already said that we have too many restrictions. I hope the Hon. 

Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) agrees with that and I hope, as I have said earlier, that 

he will use his influence with the Minister of Labour, with the Government, to have this Bill withdrawn. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General):  Mr. Speaker, I hadn’t intended to say anything in second 

reading debate on this Bill, but I found it very difficult to sit in my place and listen to the rather 

extravagant distortions and the almost hysterical outbursts of the Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. 

Davies) and the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). So I find it necessary to make a few 

comments with respect to the statements that they have made. I am going to confine my comments to 

new Section 35 because as the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) said in opening debate on this Bill, the 

other clauses in the Bill are basically housekeeping clauses and they are not too significant. 

 

Section 35 does involve a new principle and so I am going to make some comments with regard to that. 

Now the Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) said that this new Section 35 comes 

un-recommended by anybody in the province. I wrote it down and that’s what I though you said. You 

said you had a feeling that it might undermine the safety of trade unionism in the province. You were 

more restrained than the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). Then we received an interesting 

if not too relevant historical dissertation on the situation in Sweden, which I won’t refer to. He said the 

amendment would worsen labour relations, was wholly unfair to organized labour. You predicted bitter 

struggles ahead. You said it would promote wholesale withdrawal from membership. You predicted that 

the section would create trouble and difficulty. Now you were fairly restrained compared to the Member 

from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). He said the Bill wouldn’t work. He said it would invite the 

importation of strike breakers. Nobody consulted any person concerned or any trade union concerned. 

Then I think he said near the end that he knew of no other Government who had introduced this kind of 

legislation. Is that correct? I don’t want to be unfair to the Hon. Member but that was what I wrote 

down. He said he knew of no other Government “except this anti-labour Liberal Government of 

Saskatchewan” and there he was at his demagogic best when he said that, “No Government other than 

the anti-labour Government of Saskatchewan would have done this kind of thing.” 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2297 

Well now I would like to state for the record in this House and to tell the Hon. Members who have 

spoken, and I am sure they know this, that this Section 35 that all the fuss is about is taken letter perfect 

from the Ontario statute and it has been in effect in Ontario since 1956. It has also been in the British 

Columbia statute since 1951. I don’t know that these dire predictions that both of these Members have 

made have come to pass either in Ontario or in British Columbia. As a matter of fact I was at a meeting 

last Friday when Mr. Gilbey of the Federation of Labour were discussing this section with myself and 

my colleague, the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) and the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer. I 

asked this question point blank both of Mr. Elkin and Mr. Gilbey, whether this section that they are 

making so much noise about in this proposed Bill has within their knowledge caused any difficulty in 

either Ontario or British Columbia. After repeating the question four or five times and seeking an 

answer, I finally got the answer from both of them that it hadn’t caused any difficulty. It hadn’t caused 

the dire things that you are now predicting will happen in the Province of Saskatchewan. So, let’s not 

have anymore talk, Mr. Speaker, of bitter struggles ahead and inviting the importation of strike-breakers 

and that this is a terrible thing that this violently anti-labour Liberal Government has done to the trade 

union movement in the Province of Saskatchewan. This is just nonsense. It hasn’t worked out that way 

in British Columbia. It hasn’t worked out that way in Ontario and it won’t work out that way in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what is the purpose of the amendment, Mr. Speaker? The purpose of the amendment is to provide 

for some democracy within the trade union movement. It will protect the rank and file members of the 

trade union from dealing at the top, from transfers at the top. I noticed both of the Members talked about 

mergers but they didn’t talk about transfers. There are three words in the second line of Section 35, “A 

merger or amalgamation or a transfer.” Now you talked about a merger and I am going to talk about a 

merger in a few minutes but I would like to talk about a transfer. The way it has been, an international 

union with affiliates in the pas could transfer a certification under The Trade Union Act from one union 

to the other, from one international union to the other without the consent of the rank and file 

membership of that union. Let me give you an example of what could happen under the laws that exist. 

We all know that a year or two ago in the SPC we had some problems and there was a strike and so on. 

Originally the SPC had one international union representing all of the employees. It was called the 

OCAW, the Oil and Atomic Workers. At one time the OCAW represented both the gas workers in the 

SPC and the electrical workers and then there was a vote ordered — what — a year ago? Something like 

that. Anyway after that vote the majority of the membership on the electrical side of SPC voted to have 

as their bargaining unit the IBEW, which is the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. The 

result has been since that time that we have two unions certified in the SPC, the OCAW in respect to the 

gas workers and the IBEW in respect 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2298 

to the electrical workers. Now the way the law has been, and I don’t say it would happen, but the way 

the law is at the present time in the Province of Saskatchewan, the IBEW and the OCAW, international 

unions, who are both members of the Canadian Labour Congress, could make a deal at the top and the 

IBEW would be able to transfer its certification for the electrical workers in the SPC to the OCAW 

without consultation at all with the majority of the membership who about a year ago voted against the 

OCAW in favour of the IBEW. So the purpose of this section, Mr. Speaker, is to prevent dealing at the 

top in frustration of the rights of the majority of the rank and file members of the union. That’s the 

purpose of the amendment, that’s what it does, and that is what it did in these other provinces. Now are 

you against that” Neither one of the Hon. Members who spoke talked about a transfer. Surely to 

goodness all this section does is to provide that any person concerned, and the Member from Regina 

North East (Mr. Smishek) didn’t read it the way I read it. He said “any person”, somebody not involved 

at all could come and apply to the Labour Relations Board. That is not the way I read it; with every 

deference, it says “any person or trade union concerned.” It means any person concerned or any trade 

union concerned. It simply provides that the rank and file membership of the union could go to the 

Labour Relations Board as a result of one of these mergers or amalgamation or transfers, and object if 

they want to. I don’t think that one Member would be sufficient. I’m sure that you have to assume that 

the Labour Relations Board is going to act judicially in this matter. But the mechanics are there to 

provide that the rank and file membership, if they object and only if they object, don’t have to sit still for 

some wheeling and dealing at the top. That’s what this section is there for. 

 

Now, one of the Hon. Members mentioned corporations and he said he tried to draw an analogy in the 

case of corporations. Well I have The Companies Act here, Mr. Speaker, and I would refer Hon. 

Members to Sections 187, 188 and 189, 190 of The Companies Act which provide for arrangements, 

schemes, and amalgamations having to do with mergers or amalgamations of companies. In every case, 

Mr. Speaker, the statute provides that a majority of shareholders in a company or two companies can 

provide the amalgamations and mergers but in every case the amalgamation or merger has to be 

approved by a court order, a court order in every case and surely there is a good reason for that Mr. 

Speaker. The reason is that again it wouldn’t be fair for the board of directors in control of a company to 

approve a merger which is good for them but which might not be very good for the rank and file 

members and shareholders in that company. So there is the provision there for a court order. All we are 

doing in this amendment, Mr. Speaker, is to provide the same kind of protection for the rank and file 

membership of a trade union, simply to provide them the right to go to the Labour Relations Board and 

put the whole thing in front of the Labour Relations Board and ask the Labour Relations Board to 

consider whether or not this merger, amalgamation or transfer should be sanctioned. I can’t for the life 

of me understand why the trade union leadership in this province is concerned or 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2299 

worried about this section. It has worked in other provinces, it’s not there for the purposes that they are 

suggesting. It’s worked in Ontario, it’s worked in British Columbia, and I’m satisfied it will work in this 

province. It is simply a protection to the rank and file member of a trade union in the event that he may 

object to a merger, then he has the right to go to the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have some other observations I may want to make in this matter and I would beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Davies:  I was about to put the two questions that the Attorney General agreed to reply to. My 

first question is, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister: do you know of any case where employees have not 

been consulted in Saskatchewan prior to any transfers or any merger in Saskatchewan? And if I may put 

a supplementary question at the same time; do you know of any cases where the Labour Relations Board 

would not have been able to do the same things under the present legislation as under the one you 

proposed? 

 

Mr. Heald:  Yes, answering your last question first, we think, my law officers think and I agree with 

them that there is a very real question as to the jurisdiction of the Labour Relations Board to interfere in 

a situation of this kind under the existing section. This section, the new section, will spell it out loud and 

clear. So far as individual instances, the Minister of Labour may know of individual instances, I don’t, 

but I suggest and I did suggest and I do suggest in all seriousness that the kind of situation I described in 

the IBEW and the OCAW could occur without clarification by this section. I think we should clarify this 

section and spell out the rights of the individual member of a trade union before something like this 

happens. 

 

Mr. Davies:  Mr. Minister, do you know of any case where this has taken place yourself? I want to 

get that clear. 

 

Mr. Heald:  I’m advised by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) that he knows of cases, I don’t. 

 

Mr. Smishek:  Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I can direct a question to the Attorney General that he might 

want to consider this when he speaks again if he hasn’t got the answer. What happens in the event of a 

merger that does take place of say two national unions? In Saskatchewan under Section 35, the matter is 

contested in some way but in fact the union that they belonged to before disappeared because there was 

a merger and they formed a new organization through a merger of two organizations. Where do all those 

employees stand? 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2300 

Mr. Heald:  Well, it would be up to the Labour Relations Board but as far as I’m concerned, I know 

you don’t have the same confidence in the Labour Relations Board as I do, and I’m going to talk about 

that when I resume debate in this matter. But I’m sure that the Labour Relations Board would act 

reasonably and if the circumstances are such that you described, I wouldn’t think there would be any 

difficulty in having the merger approved. But I still say that the burden of my remarks is still that the 

individual trade union member should have an opportunity to bring this matter before the Labour 

Relations Board if he so desires. I don’t understand what you’re worried about quite frankly. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The 

Vehicles Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to have the opportunity this afternoon to say quite a few words 

about the amendments to The Vehicles Act which we are proposing at this session of the Legislature. I 

think these amendments are probably some of the most important and significant amendments and this 

Bill is one of the most important Bills which will come before this session of the Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recent years there has been a growing awareness and concern respecting the matter of 

highway safety in this province as well as in all other provinces in Canada and in the United States and 

other parts of the world. Private associations and governments at all levels have been active in this 

regard, but statistics show that the accident toll is rising with the resulting loss of lives, limbs and 

property. Police agencies everywhere are required to devote more personnel and energy to the 

enforcement of traffic laws and to the investigation of accidents. Government agencies are experiencing 

the shock of the increase in the incidence of motor vehicle accidents and the resultant pain and sorrow. 

Several years ago a Legislative Committee was established in this Province to study this problem from a 

Provincial point of view and to recommend changes in the law. Last year, there were fairly extensive 

amendments to The Vehicles Act to make the operation of motor vehicles upon Saskatchewan highways 

safer. One example of an amendment along these lines that we did pass last year was the legislation 

dealing with the type of equipment required by operators of motor bikes. Our experience so far with 

these amendments has been quite satisfactory in the comments that I’ve received, and the letters that 

I’ve received have been quite complimentary so far as those amendments were concerned. 

 

Now of course the Government and I’m sure all Hon. Members, remain very, very concerned about the 

increasing accident rate and we have to take concrete steps to see what can be done to control this rate 

and to get it under control. The amendments 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2301 

which are being proposed in this Bill will, the Government believes, result in another gigantic step being 

taken forward to make our highways safer places. Now this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is a lengthy Bill and I 

don’t propose today to dwell on those portions that provide for administrative and procedural changes 

but rather I shall confine my remarks to those portions of the Bill that I think will help to reduce 

accidents upon our highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is common knowledge that the consumption of alcohol is a contributing factor to the 

high motor vehicle accident rate which exists in this province and in other areas of our country. 

Convictions in the courts for drunken and impaired driving offences have increased and penalties for 

these offences have become heavier, but I am sorry to say that the increase in prosecution and the 

heavier penalties have had little or no effect it seems towards reducing the practice of drinking and 

driving. Last year a progressive program was implemented in the Province of British Columbia in an 

attempt to reduce the incidence of motor vehicle accidents in that province that were caused by or were 

contributed to by the consumption of alcohol. The Motor Vehicle Act of British Columbia was amended 

to provide for the statutory suspension of the driving privileges of persons whose level of alcohol in the 

blood contains not less than eight parts of alcohol to 10,000 parts of blood. The B.C. Motor Vehicle Act 

empowered a police officer who suspected a driver of having consumer alcohol in a quantity sufficient 

to give this reading of .08 to surrender his driver’s licence. The B.C. statute provides that the licence 

would be suspended upon such a request for a period of 24 hours, unless a physical test indicated that 

the alcohol blood relationship was less than the statutory figure or the person produced a doctor’s 

certificate to the same effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the B.C. legislation permits the removal from the highways in that province of drivers who 

are potential causes of accidents. The legislation is preventive not punitive and the results of the 

program, I suggest, are most significant. I would like to quote some figures to show how successful the 

program has been during its first few months of operation. In the city of Vancouver alone, 1,110 persons 

were the object of police actions for operating motor vehicles while under the influence of alcohol 

during the period August 1, 1967 to October 31, 1967. That figure was made up of 305 charged with 

impaired or drunken driving and 705 persons who were taken off the roads under this new section of 

The Vehicles Act. Now that’s over 1,000 people, Mr. Speaker, in 1967 in this short period of a few 

months. By contrast during the same period in the same period in the previous year, 1966, only 456 

persons were dealt with by the policy in regard to the matter of drinking and driving. We can readily 

appreciate that a significant reduction in the accident rate would be the result of this program in which 

about 2 ½ times as many people were taken off the roads. Let me emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the B.C. 

legislation does not create offences with respect to the operation of motor vehicles by persons with the 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2302 

statutory alcohol content in the blood but provides for the statutory suspension of the driving privileges 

for a period of 24 hours of drivers who do operate motor vehicles while they have this .08 reading in the 

blood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government believes that the increase in the incidence of drinking drivers and the 

success of the B.C. program warrants the trail of a similar program in this province. The new section in 

our Act similar to the B.C. section provides for the suspension of the driver for 24 hours by a peace 

officer who has reason to suspect that the driver may have consumed alcohol in such amount that his 

blood alcohol level amounts to .08 per cent. This section provides that a driver in Section 104 (a) in the 

new Bill has the right to request a test of his breath if he feels that his blood alcohol is below .08 per 

cent. The test is to be of a kind authorized by the Attorney General. I could tell Hon. Members in the 

Legislature that the test which it is intended to approve for this section for the present is a balloon test 

called the “Mobat”, which has been used in B.C. under this legislation. Now this section is based on the 

B.C. legislation. It was first tried out, I’d like to tell you a little bit about the way in which they phased it 

in, in British Columbia. They first started the operation of the legislation in Greater Victoria on April 5, 

1967 and with good success. They report that the experience in Victoria was that of those who were 

stopped and required to surrender their licences, less than 5 per cent of the people stopped by the police 

requested that they be tested by the balloon. In all such cases the test was positive which of course 

confirmed the actions taken by the police officers. Now in July and August, the operation of the statute 

was extended to Vancouver Island and Vancouver. I have talked to a number of the B.C. officials and 

they tell us that the legislation has been very successful and well received by the public. I noticed a little 

bit in the paper the other day from Vancouver somewhat to the contrary. I don’t think the experience 

perhaps in Vancouver is quite as satisfactory as it is in other parts of the province, but certainly in 

Victoria and the interior of British Columbia, they are very happy with the results of this section that 

they put in a year ago. The B.C. people feel that it has resulted in a large number of drivers who are 

potential traffic hazards being removed from the highways without any significant change in the number 

charged with impaired driving. The purpose of course of this section is to remove these drivers from the 

highways and until they are sober and without any charge being laid. Now the present provision in our 

Section 94 (1)(d) providing for the Highway Traffic Board suspending the licence of a driver refusing to 

take a breath test when requested by a police officer to do so is being retained by this Bill. This is the old 

section which went to the Supreme Court of Canada and was found to be constitutional. This provision 

has been very useful to obtain breath tests which are used in corroboration of physical signs of 

impairment. Now while the Federal Government has placed the Bill to amend the Criminal Code before 

Parliament which provides for compulsory blood tests, I don’t suppose anybody knows when it will be 

passed or what its final form will 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2303 

be. We therefore consider it advisable to retain existing Section 94 (1)(d) until we have an opportunity 

of assessing the effectiveness of the Criminal code provision when it is passed by the Federal 

Parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the new Section 104A provides for the Attorney General 

authorizing a device for the test which a driver may request under that section, it is necessary to make a 

similar provision in Section 94 under which I as Attorney General can designate the breathalyser which 

has been used for over 10 years in this province. The breathalyser cannot be used on the highway and 

requires trained operators whereas the Mobat which is used in B.C. and which we intend to use for this 

new section can be used anywhere and any police officer can be easily trained in its use. This 

amendment to Section 94 is in Section 19 of the new Bill. 

 

During the holiday season, Mr. Speaker, from December 15, 1967 to January 4, 1968, the RCMP in 

British Columbia in the areas outside Victoria and Vancouver checked 89,862 vehicles for all purposes 

and suspended 461 licences. Of these 461 licences suspended over Christmas and New Years, only 11 of 

them requested the Mobat test and all proved positive. During the same period, 163 other drivers were 

charged with impaired driving. I should point out that once a driver’s licence is suspended under this 

legislation he is never charged with impaired driving. I’m advised that up to the end of February there 

have been 4,902 suspensions in B.C. under this statute that has been going for less than a year. Of this 

number, only 184 requested the Mobat test with all but a few showing a positive result. Mr. Speaker, I 

submit that this proposal is progressive. It’s progressive because it is aimed at taking potential killers 

and maimers from behind the steering wheels of motor vehicles on our highways. This proposal was one 

of two that the Government has been considering, the other being an amendment to The Vehicles Act to 

make it an offence for a person to operate a motor vehicle with an alcohol blood level content of .08. As 

I’ve stated many times in this House and also outside this House the Federal Parliament is now in the 

process of occupying this field. While their present legislation is .10, I am still hopeful that it will be 

possible to convince the new Prime Minister who is still Minister of Justice — at least he was when I 

cam into the House — to go from .10 to .08, because I’ve had a number of discussions with him about 

this and I know that he personally favour .08. So I’m still very hopeful that when the legislation does get 

into the final stages in the House of Commons that the reduction will be from 1.0 to .08. For this reason, 

Mr. Speaker, because the Federal Government is in the process of occupying the field and because of the 

initial success of the B.C. legislation, the present proposal appears before this House with the 

expectation that if it is enacted by Hon. Members, a significant decrease in motor vehicle accidents will 

result. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill to amend The Vehicles Act also provides for the termination in May of 1969 of 

the use of the 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2304 

coloured licence system in the province of the Highway Traffic Board. At present, demerit points are 

entered in the driving record of persons convicted of certain offences, both Provincial and Federal. 

When the number of points entered in the record of the person reaches a certain total, that person is 

required to apply for and secure a coloured licence. Upon the number of points reaching a higher total, 

that person is required to apply for and secure a different coloured licence, and if his bad driving 

continues, his driving privileges are suspended under the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this program has been very costly to administer and in addition the administration of it has 

been difficult and burdensome. We have made an overall assessment of the program and we have 

reached the conclusion that the program has not produced the results that were intended or that were 

hoped for. In place of the coloured licence program, will be established a program providing for the 

statutory suspension of the driving privileges of persons who are convicted of certain offences under the 

Criminal Code by means of a motor vehicle. These offences include criminal negligence, motor 

manslaughter, impaired driving, drunken driving and dangerous driving. The new program will allow for 

a restricted licence to be issued to persons who have had their driving privileges suspended if a licence is 

necessary for that person to earn his livelihood. In addition, flexibility is written in with the proposed 

amendments in the form of a delegation to the Highway Traffic Board of a discretionary power to 

remove or vary the suspension in deserving cases. The discretionary power as contained in the proposal 

will, I am sure, provide flexibility in the program to relieve the harshness of licence suspension in proper 

cases only, of course. Let me make clear, Mr. Speaker, that the present system of issuing coloured 

licences will continue until May 1, 1969 at which time the new program will be put into force. Until the 

new program is brought into force, changes have been proposed to The Vehicles Act which will provide 

for statutory suspension of persons whose point records exceed a certain total, only upon that person 

being notified of the number of points entered into his records. Previously I might say the licence of a 

person whose point entry reached a certain total was automatically suspended by operation of the Act. 

This will now not be the case and the suspension will take effect only upon the person being notified of 

the number of points that are entered in this record. But of course as I say that is a transitory provision 

until 1969. 

 

Now I would like to go into some detail with respect to the various penalties which are being imposed 

because it is very important. Of course it’s a discussion of the new Section 87 of the Bill. For a number 

of years I stated that we felt that the overall total effectiveness of the coloured licence and demerit point 

system was open to question and the Special Committee, the Legislative Committee on Highway Traffic 

and Safety drew our attention to a number of the deficient aspects and objectionable features existing 

with the point system. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2305 

Here I would just like to review some of the objectionable features of the point system. First of all, it 

was pointed out to us that prosecutions do not follow all accidents, consequently the point system really 

doesn’t reflect a complete record. Secondly, there was considerable disparity in points assessed for 

highly similar or identical offences. Thirdly, it was felt that the courts were unable to assess the 

complete driving records to properly deal with the offender. When somebody comes up before court 

they don’t have the driving record there. Fourthly, the Highway Traffic Board could do little to 

adequately adjust points on the basis of the driving record once the court award was made. Fifthly, it 

was felt that the point system contributed very little toward improving the driving attitude of the 

offending motorist. And sixth, it was felt that for only the most flagrant of offenders was action taken to 

suspend or restrict the driving privileges. A very impersonal and machine-like approach was taken by 

this system toward the offending driver. I think adequate evidence of this was found, Mr. Speaker, in the 

recording and processing routine for each conviction which amounted to slightly more than a problem in 

arithmetic to enter the points and compute the total. Thereupon depending on the point level the process 

resulted in an impersonal stereo-typed letter giving information on points and the point reduction 

process as well as establishing the colour of the licence and the date on which it can be purchased. 

During the accumulation of points, nothing was done to alert the driver that he was developing a driving 

problem, and the system functioned essentially as a punitive measure and contributed little, we feel, to 

traffic safety. Mr. Speaker, a pilot program of driver interviews being conducted by the Highway Traffic 

Board received wholehearted endorsation by the Legislative Committee and this together with several 

other recommendations becomes the foundation for the new Section 87. The new Section 87 in effect 

will provide for; 1. the abolition of coloured licences; 2. the abolition of the demerit point system; 3. the 

provision for automatic revocation of licences for the more serious offences under the Criminal code of 

Canada; and 4. the continuation and I emphasize this, the continuation and expansion of the 

driver-interview program which is directed toward producing ultimate results of driver improvement and 

overall traffic safety. We feel very strongly and we intend to continue and expand substantially the 

driver-interview program. 

 

Now the proposed legislation will accomplish these ends we think by several means. First of all, the 

repeal of the present Section 87 will abolish both coloured licences and points; secondly, it will provide 

mandatory periods of suspension for conviction and second or subsequent convictions of a charge for 

death or injury through criminal negligence with a motor vehicle; reckless or dangerous driving; failing 

to report or remain at an accident; hit and run, drunken and impaired driving; and also for driving while 

prohibited or disqualified. This new legislation will establish a driver-interview program and interview 

of drivers under terms and conditions laid down by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. I should say, 

Mr. Speaker, that in Committee study of this Bill, I propose to make available to all Hon. Members the 

proposed criteria for the driver- 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2306 

interview program. This new section will also empower the Highway Traffic Board to suspend or 

restrict licences after driver interview, and the new section also — and this is important and it is new — 

provides for appeal against the ruling of the Highway Traffic Board to the courts and this is a new 

proceeding. It is felt that because the livelihood of people is involved here there should be provisions for 

appeal to the courts, so there is provision in the new section by filing notice in the District Court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments separate the several Criminal Code driving offences into three 

groups based on the gravity of the offence and the desirability of relating certain convictions with others 

to establish second or subsequent offences. When the mandatory suspension comes into force a 

conviction under Section 222 of the Criminal Code which is drunken driving will mean loss of licence 

for three months to start with. However, if death, injury or property damage occur in connection with the 

above or in connection with the conviction under Section 192, which is death by criminal negligence, or 

under Section 193 which is injury by criminal negligence, or under Section 207 which is manslaughter 

by a motor vehicle, the period for loss of licence is doubled from three months to six months, 

mandatory. So it’s three months in respect of those sections that I’ve listed. Then if there is injury, death 

or property damage it’s automatically increased to six months, from three months to six months; that’s 

the automatic suspension. Then, Mr. Speaker, suspension becomes more severe with multiple offences. 

The legislation relates convictions under any of the sections mentioned above in such a manner that any 

one becomes second or subsequent to any other prior conviction. Now let me give you an example. First 

offence, reckless driving; this would be six months. Let’s take the case of the fellow whose next offence 

is drunken driving. This becomes a second and subsequent offence if it occurs within a five-year period 

and demands the suspension of one year. Again provision is made for death, injury or property damage. 

If any of these were associated with both convictions in my example, the suspension would increase to 

one year and two years respectively. Now we can discuss this in detail in Committee, but you will see 

that we’re giving effect, we’re cracking down on the serious offences with mandatory suspensions; 

we’re making the suspension greater if there is injury involved; and of course we’re making the 

suspension greater if there is a subsequent offence. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a somewhat lighter penalty is attached to the next grouping of convictions wherein 

suspensions have been cut by one-half. Convictions under Section 221, subsection (4) of the Criminal 

code, which is dangerous driving, or under Section 223, which is impaired driving, for the first offence 

carries a suspension of three months. Here again for involvement through death, personal injury, 

property damage the suspension doubles to six months. Again these are added penalties for subsequent 

and second offences under any one or either of the two sections and the result is doubling suspension 

periods to six months and with accident involvement, one year. In a manner 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2307 

similar to that described in the last two paragraphs, the legislation proposes to relate the various 

convictions one with the other into one large pool, so that all may become subsequent offences 

regardless of the order in which they occur. For any second or subsequent conviction within the 

five-year period the more severe penalty, namely the longer period of suspension attached to the 

particular later offence shall apply. For example, first offence impaired driving with no involvement, 

three months; second or subsequent offence, hit and run, with personal injury, two years. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the third group of criminal offences we find only one, Section 221(2), failing to 

stop or report (this is commonly know as it and run). Conviction where property damage only occurs, 

three months suspension; with personal injury or death, this rises to a six-month suspension. Again any 

subsequent offence within the five-year period doubles the suspension in either category. Unlike the first 

two groups that I have been dealing with, this particular offence is independent, and not related to any of 

the previous identified Criminal Code charges and does not become part of the large pool used for 

determining second or subsequent offences. Because any order of the courts under Section 225, 

subsection (1) of the Criminal Code supersedes any suspension that will be imposed under these 

amendments, a prohibiting order issued for a longer period than the mandatory one being imposed under 

The Vehicles Act will take precedence. The licence of any person subject to the prohibition order will 

remain suspended for such longer period. As the use of a motor vehicle is deeply involved in our daily 

movements and as in many cases the necessity to drive is a requirement for employment, the ability to 

earn a living, steps have been taken to allow recovery to a limited degree only of the licence to drive 

when faced by suspension. Any judge, magistrate or justice of the peace may at the time of conviction 

recommend to the Highway Traffic Board the issue of a restricted licence; that is, the court looks into 

the circumstances and if it considers it advisable it can recommend to the Highway Traffic Board the 

issuance of a restricted licence. Also any person may make application to the Board for a review of his 

suspension and request a licence to drive. The Board may after considering the circumstances lift the 

mandatory suspension or without removing the suspension issue a restricted licence on such terms and 

conditions it deems fit. To replace the many one, two, three and four point convictions under The 

Vehicles Act, which when accumulated to seven or more points brought about a mandatory suspension, 

a driver interview and driver improvement program will be expanded in the next few months and will be 

in full operation by the time points are abolished. The various convictions will be weighed and used in 

combination as criteria for selecting drivers for interview. The acceptable values of the various 

convictions under The Vehicles Act and the Criminal Code will be established by order of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council (and I will be providing that for you in Committee). Computer 

programming will then print out weekly lists of persons with sufficient accumulated convictions within a 

one-year period who warrant attention of the Driver Review Board. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2308 

I’ll give you an example of an accepted criterion (I don’t say this will be accepted criterion but I could 

give you an example of an accepted criterion for driver interview); one conviction for impaired driving 

plus one for running a red light, plus one maybe for inadequate brakes, this would initiate an interview. 

This is the kind of think and this is all done by the computer. Another interview procedure could start 

because of one conviction for each of the following: no operator’s licence, failing to dim, speeding and 

driving without due care and attention, these four in any order within one year. Now you may think 

that’s too many, but these are the things that I would like to discuss with you in Committee because we 

have a suggested criterion that we will be submitting to you for your consideration. 

 

It should be remembered that there are 92 separate offences under The Vehicles Act and 10 under the 

Criminal Code from which combinations of offences can accumulate. Repeated involvement in 

accidents, complaints by enforcement officers, recommendations of judges or magistrates will also result 

in an individual interview appointment. The selected licensee will be called to appear and will be given 

every opportunity to attend and discuss his driving problems and will be offered advice and guidance for 

improvement. An assessment will be made of the facts and relevant information and a decision made on 

the type of disciplinary action to be taken. For many, it will mean a warning or period of probation, for 

which the driver must improve his attitudes and skills and be without accident or conviction. Failure to 

maintain a clear record during this period will mean suspension or restricted privileges. Also failure to 

appear without valid reason would incur suspension. On the other hand, the Highway Traffic Board 

may, if the facts so indicate, immediately suspend, cancel or revoke or restrict the licence of any person 

interviewed for any period being proper. The most severe suspension under such action would be 

permanent disqualification from holding a licence. 

 

Because of the wide powers given to the Board by these amendments it becomes necessary to provide 

protection for the individual against any arbitrary decision affecting his licence. The right of appeal, as I 

said earlier, is therefore provided for through application to the District Court within 30 days of 

suspension. The judge will on application fix the date of the hearing, advice of which must be given to 

the Highway Traffic Board. Under such procedure the person affected by the Board’s suspension or 

restriction may be successful in having the Board order cancelled or modified as stipulated by the judge. 

On the other hand, the Board order may be confirmed if the appeal is dismissed. Both the appellant and 

the Board of course are bound by the judge’s decision. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that these safeguards should 

adequately ensure protection for licensed drivers, but at the same time take the people off the roads of 

Saskatchewan who have to come off the roads. The legislation as well as the criteria for interview has 

been prepared on the basis of knowledge gained during the Board’s activities and 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2309 

and from references to practices in other jurisdictions. Experience in the months ahead will no doubt 

present some problem and it will require amendments to develop more effective procedures. It is, 

however, my considered opinion that these changes will improve the present proposals and increase the 

effectiveness of this major attempt to introduce and extend a dynamic program of driver improvement 

and traffic safety. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the remainder of the Bill contains in the main administrative and procedural changes. The 

significant proposal in the Bill is the provision that would delegate to the Highway Traffic Board the 

power to prescribe standards and specifications for tires to be used on motor vehicles. I should tell Hon. 

Members that I expect very shortly that some of my colleagues, my opposite numbers in the other 

provinces, will be announcing the imposition of new tire standards and I think I can indicate to Hon. 

Members that as soon as this enabling legislation is passed, that we will be doing likewise. I think this is 

very important to have proper standards and specifications for tires and also to have some degree of 

uniformity with the other provinces. And that is the object of the exercise here. 

 

The procedure of hearings conducted under the Act will also be updated to provide for more streamlined 

procedure. In recent years questions have arisen in the courts in respect of the applicability of The 

Vehicles Act to areas that are not conventional streets or roads, which are used by the motoring public to 

a considerable extent. An example of this is a parking area in a shopping centre. The Bill proposes to 

make clear that these areas are not public highways, within the meaning of The Vehicles Act. It is 

proposed, however, in the amendment to provide that certain misconduct in the operation of a motor 

vehicle, such as speeding and careless driving on parking lots, will constitute an offence under The 

Vehicles Act. We feel that effective control is required in these areas for the purposes of safety. I am 

sure you have all seen some fairly reckless driving and speeding in some of these shopping centres. 

Under the Act as it is at the present time you can’t do very much about it. So we’re going to try and 

cover that loop-hole. 

 

Over the years a question has arisen as to the lawfulness or legality of people towing trailers in our 

province without having them registered under the Act. There is a proposal in the Bill to provide that 

people who are towing trailers in the province need not register those trailers, if the trailers have been 

leased from people in other jurisdictions and the persons in those jurisdictions have complied with the 

laws of those jurisdictions with respect to the trailer. This would be a trailer coming in, one of these 

Union-Haul deals we’ll say from Ontario or Manitoba. As long as it is properly licensed there, there is 

no problem when it comes into Saskatchewan. But the law has not been very clear in this regard. 

 

Last year The Vehicles Act was changed and amended to place in the hands of city councils the matter 

of determining the 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2310 

maximum number of vehicles that could be used as taxis in the respective cities. This Bill proposes to 

extend this local government determination to towns and villages as well, in the light of the trend for 

taxis businesses becoming established in more of our towns and larger villages. We’re doing for town 

and villages what we did last year for cities, taking it out of the hands of the Provincial Government 

giving the power into the hands of the local council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the increased use of snowmobiles on our highways and streets tends to create a safety 

problem, both from the standpoint of the driver and the motoring public This Bill now before you 

contains a prohibition against the operation of snowmobiles upon public highways, except on the 

un-travelled portions, unless those portions are unsuitable or unavailable. This way, Mr. Speaker, 

snowmobiles will not be operated near the areas of our highways where vehicles travelling at high speed 

are operating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also embodies a requirement respecting flashing signal lights on school business. 

Any vehicle registered for the first time as a school bus will require flashing red lights as standard 

equipment. This requirement is a safety feature and is a move to establish uniformity in this regard. 

Coupled with the requirement for flashing red signals is the duty on the part of a school bus operator to 

activate these lights when loading and unloading children, and on the part of the motorist to bring his 

vehicle to a stop when approaching from the front or rear of a school bus that has stopped upon a public 

highway. 

 

The last significant proposal that I intend to comment upon is the requirement of persons involved in 

accidents that cause damage apparently of $100 or less to seek the owner of the property damaged in the 

mishap for the purpose of supplying that owner with particulars. At present as you know, I am sure, 

accidents involving property of more than $100 must be reported to the police, but no duty rests with the 

driver in respect of accidents causing damage of less than $100. The Criminal Code does have a hit and 

run section, but in many cases prosecution under the Criminal Code may be too severe, so we have 

covered this in the Provincial statute and we think this is desirable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to place these proposals before the House. As I say, they are quite 

complicated and I am sure that many of the features, particularly the conversion from the coloured 

licences and probably the new point .08 legislation are sections of the Bill which can be more adequately 

discussed in committee. But I am confident that this Bill is a good Bill. I am confident that this Bill will 

attack in a substantial and effective way the problem which we have and which all of us in this province 

want to overcome, namely, slaughter on our highways. I am sure that all Hon. Members will agree that 

this is an honest effort and a workman-like effort I hope to get at the problem of traffic safety in our 

province. I can tell Hon. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2311 

Members that we in the Highway Traffic Board and myself in the Attorney General’s Department will 

do everything in our power if this legislation is passed to see to it that it does the job that it is intended to 

do, namely stop slaughter on our highways. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West):  Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House support this Bill. A 

number of the Highway Traffic and Safety Committee’s recommendations are being carried out by the 

sections of the Bill, and for this action I give the Attorney General full credit. I compliment him for 

putting into effect the recommendations of the Joint Committee of the Legislature. Some of the remarks 

that I will be making in this debate will be of a critical nature, but should be interpreted as an effort to 

encourage action in some areas where I think there should be a speed-up in activity. This comes about as 

a result of interviewing surviving victims of automobile accidents and the relatives of those who have 

lost their lives in automobile fatalities. They have convinced me that I should draw attention to some 

matters that I am sure will get attention that much sooner if we constantly keep them before the 

Minister. 

 

I wonder if I might make at the outset a comment on the Act itself. In its present form, Mr. Speaker, 

without the amendments that are contained in this Bill, The Vehicles Act is made up of more patches 

than whole cloth. To the average layman, with its deletions, amendments and additions it represents a 

legal entanglement almost beyond comprehension. When the Highway Traffic and Safety Committee 

studied the Act some years ago, at that time the Act was patched up and stuck together and rewritten to a 

point that it was difficult to follow. This is the second time it has been amended extensively since the 

Committee wrote its report. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that peace officers and lawyers and magistrate 

judges and justices of the peace and anyone working with this Act must be just about ready to pull their 

hair out by the handfuls. What we need, I think, is a new streamlined, clear-cut, easily read Act that the 

average citizen can read and understand and I hope that we will soon have one. I recommend this 

activity to the Minister. 

 

Rather than take the time of the House to list the recommendations of the final report of the Special 

Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety, I would hope that the Hon. Minister would include in the 

final draft of the new Act — and he says he is going to bring it to the House next year — the 

recommendations — some of them I think are important — that have been omitted thus far from the 

present legislation. For instance, the implementation of a program of driver examination whereby every 

licensed driver will be required to pass the driver examination every five years; but that with respect to 

certain drivers they be required to pass a physical examination every two years. I would hope that the 

new Act would include a vehicle safety program in accordance with the recommendations in the report, 

whereby 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2312 

vehicles would be made subject to periodic tests. Probably more important than any other, a 

recommendation might be initiated by legislation calling for a standing committee that would constantly 

study traffic problems. With introduction of a tax on the compulsory insurance that we all pay this 

particular year, the funds, it seems to me, are now available at the expense of the automobile drivers for 

complete driver training. I would hope that this recommendation in the report would also be included in 

the new Act, or some other Act; that at least recognition of this program should be initiated in The 

Vehicles Act. Mr. Speaker, there are other possibly lesser recommendations of the Committee which I 

think need attention and perhaps should be written into the legislation. I hope the Hon. Minister’s reason 

for not taking action in regard to them is because he is planning to include them when he rewrites The 

Vehicles Act next year. 

 

There is one aspect of this Bill which I think is fraught with shortcomings, which I predict will be, in the 

long run, ineffective because it is toothless in its application, and that is the section regarding the use of 

a breathalyser. Mr. Speaker, this section provides for the use of the breathalyser in a limited fashion. 

Failure to comply with the request for a breathalyser test provides for a 24-hour suspension of the 

driver’s licence. When it was first introduced by the Government of the day in 1957, against the most 

concentrated opposition that any new idea had experienced, like the Legislature of this day, the 

Government was faced with highway traffic deaths. According to the Minister who introduced the 

amendment to The Vehicles Act in 1957, those drinking and driving were not being found guilty before 

the courts because of lack of evidence. In the debate which followed, speaker after speaker in the 

opposition rose to fight, in their words, for human rights against high-handed and arbitrary compulsion. 

The statements made at that time if I were to read them would certainly provide comic relief, in view of 

the adoption of the breathalyser in many states and in many provinces as a legal measurement of 

impairment. Let me give you one example, the Hon. Lade Member for Humboldt concluded her 

comments as follows: 

 

I certainly feel it is most despicable for me to have to sign an undertaking to have to submit to any 

chemical test or blood test in order to give me the right to drive on the highways for which I pay taxes 

to build. 

 

This use of this scientific instrument, Mr. Speaker, if it had been endorsed by the Opposition, the press 

and the courts at that time would, I am sure, have saved many lives in this province. However, the 

opponents of the breathalyzer argued with energy for the right of the drunken driver armed with an 

automobile to drive without being apprehended, because his right to refuse to take the test had been 

recognized. They argued for his right to endanger the lives of others. With this type of opposition, use of 

the breathalyzer was restricted and the accident toll climbed. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2313 

The first sign of a change in the Members opposite came when they were elected to the Government and 

charged with the responsibility of preventing accidents. In March, 1965, the Hon. Attorney General to 

his credit, speaking in a debate said, and I quote him: 

 

It is reasonable to set a limit for drivers in this respect as it is to limit the speed at which cars may be 

driven. 

 

He endorsed as a limit, 0.06 per cent alcohol content in the blood. Legislation contained in this Bill, I am 

sure, recognizes the scientific value of the breathalyzer and the right of the majority to safety. Last year 

the accident toll in this province on the highway was 287 deaths. The 0.08 per cent recommendation for 

the blood alcohol content limit in the legislation is nothing more than adequate. But unless we introduce 

laws in conjunction with this measure, that are strong and carry an automatic penalty that is clear-cut 

and severe, certain drivers will continue to drink and drive in motor vehicles. 

 

To say that we can turn to the Federal code for breathalyzer reading or a yardstick is ridiculous if their 

recommendation is going to be 0.10 per cent. I suggest that anyone who would recommend this 

percentage is out of touch with and not aware of the relationship between the use of alcohol and the 

operation of a motor vehicle. Breathalyzer amendments contained in this legislation should have been 

introduced, I submit, as soon as the Committee signed its recommendations. Even now I question, as I 

said, its effectiveness and its value and its application. It calls for taking away a licence overnight for a 

short period of time if the driver refuses to take a test. If it is legal within the constitution for one-day 

suspension, then the principle should be applied to lengthen the term of suspension. If a driver refuses to 

take a test, then it may be a clear-cut indication that he is driving impaired, and there is a possibility that 

he could take his own life or the lives of others on the highway a week following the one-day 

suspension. To suspend a licence overnight for such a violation of the rights of everyone is ineffective, 

half-hearted and in the words of a layman, pussy-footing. This section in the Bill will not stop impaired 

drivers from operating vehicles. 

 

An overnight suspension for refusing to take a test is not an adequate penalty. You would almost expect, 

when you read of this type of penalty for refusing to take a breathalyzer test, that they should also supply 

the suspended person with a hotel room, breakfast the next morning, and a card showing the location 

and time of opening of every bar in the locality. Some are in an accident the first time they over-indulge. 

Severe legislation with an automatic penalty will convince all drivers that they should not drive and 

drink to excess. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if drivers refuse to take the breathalyzer test, if we have the right to suspend their licence 

overnight, then we should suspend if for a certain specified period. I 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2314 

would suggest on the first offence for a period of at least three months, so that the driver will realize that 

he has endangered his life and the lives of others. If he has a second offence, if he refuses a second time, 

after one suspension, there should be an automatic suspension for refusal to take the test and suspension 

for a period, I suggest, of 12 months. Unless we as Legislators establish in the minds of the public that 

those who drink to excess are not responsible and should not be driving, and do not have the right to kill 

their passengers, themselves or anyone else on the highway, then I say we are shirking our 

responsibility. 

 

I had a discussion with one of my legal friends as to the effectiveness of the British Columbia 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, I am indebted to the Leader-Post for providing information regarding the 

British Columbia legislation, in a summary after one year because if confirms the comments of my legal 

friend. In this story, they talk about the city of Victoria and I quote, April 16, 1968: 

 

Victoria police, the first to experiment with the unique law, said 238 drivers were ruled off the road as 

borderline impaired drivers between April 5, 1967 and April 5, 1968. The drivers thus avoided 

prosecution, but the city also charged 182 motorists with impaired driving and six with drunken 

driving during the same period, compared with 166 impaired and six drunken driving charges in the 

previous year. 

 

The heading of the story is “Drunks still drive.” 

 

The first full year of British Columbia’s roadside licence suspension law in Greater Victoria indicates 

that more drivers are drinking than ever before. In a small area close by, neighbouring Colwood, 

RCMP suspended the driving licences of 57 drinking motorists during the first year, but the number of 

impaired driving charges rose by two to 72. 

 

In Saanich police used the suspension law sparingly, preferring to send home borderline, impaired 

driving suspects. They lifted bout 15 licences during the year to which the number of impaired charges 

went up 4 to 84. 

 

This is a comparison in different areas, Colwood, Saanich and Victoria. 

 

The officers said the suspension technique probably discourages some social drinkers from drinking 

and driving, but they said that the law encourages many others who knowing that if they are caught 

might not be prosecuted. The law empowers police to suspend driving privileges of borderline 

impaired drivers for 24 hours and no charges are laid under this procedure. Drivers can challenge an 

officer’s ruling by taking a breathalyzer test and if successful have their licences returned 

immediately. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2315 

Victoria police said only nine of 238 drivers suspended in the city last year challenged suspension 

orders and none of them were successful. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, this report thoroughly indicates that this type of legislation has not stopped people 

who drink from driving. They go right on the road the next day. They are off the road for 24 hours. You 

would have to have a fantastic police force to catch up with them. You are just lucky to catch the same 

one twice. You would have to have one policeman sitting outside of the front door of every last person 

to make sure that there were no repeats. The legislation among those who drive and drink is a laughing 

stock. I have heard it described in British Columbia as a taxi service, where the police officer brings you 

home and hands the keys to your wife. As a matter of fact I had a visit from a person who described it 

exactly as I am describing it to you. 

 

Do we have enough police officers to do this and baby-sit every person who drinks to excess and drives? 

I think to introduce this legislation will prove to be ineffective and a half-measure and will prove only 

one thing, that we should have written legislation which would take the impaired driver off the road for 

a longer period of time automatically. This would make the highways safer and this would reduce traffic 

deaths. We should not wait for Federal legislation nor copy British Columbia legislation. Now that the 

breathalyzer has been accepted as a scientific measure, we must write legislation and make it a condition 

of driving, that the operator will give up his driver’s licence for a period specified, three months, at least, 

if he refuses to take a breathalyzer test; or it he takes a test and the blood alcohol reading is 0.08 per cent 

or higher. Think of some of the people that have been lost to this province, the university graduates, 

professional people, community leaders. Think of the husbands and wives. Think of the people who 

have died without reason because of our failure to protect them, because some drivers with too much to 

drink violated their basic right — the right to live. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General):  I wonder if the Hon. Member would permit a question? Any 

my question is: he made a comment about impaired drivers having an automatic suspension. I hope you 

realize that in the amendments that I have just described, impaired driving carries with it an automatic 

suspension for three months in the first instance and if there is property damage or human damage, it is 

six months. You realize that, do you? 

 

Mr. Whelan:  Mr. Speaker, I am aware of that. What I am thinking of is the use of the breathalyzer 

where the person refused to take the test and will automatically have a suspension. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino):  Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this Bill, I will 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2316 

say that it is a step forward. Last night I heard over the news that the Manitoba Legislature is dealing 

with something similar. I would be rather curious to know what step they are taking. I think that the 

Member for Regina North West made a very good point. A person that is impaired can refuse to take the 

breathalyzer test and he is suspended for one day and it gets him off the hook. I think that people get 

wise to this and I think that everyone would naturally refuse. Now to say that there was only one 

repeater, the chances of being caught the second time perhaps would be very small. So there is another 

area there. 

 

One more think that I would like to point out is that I hope that we can see the reinstatement of the 

Highway Safety Committee that made studies on highway safety. The reason for this is that we must 

keep pace with developments as they present themselves. With the Highway Safety Committee, I think 

that we can have an approach, a non-political approach, to this problem. I think the Member for Regina 

North West clearly pointed it out how on a previous occasion the former Member for Humboldt (Mrs. 

Batten) opposed the breathalyzer very vigorously. As a matter of fact, I listened to it over the air. That 

was before I was in the Legislature. I couldn’t understand why this Member was taking such a strong 

opposition to this question of the breathalyser. 

 

There are many other things that need studying. There are standards of tires that we talked about and it is 

a very good thing. But at the present time you meet a car on the highway with four worn-out tires, 

almost down to the core. What do the police do about that? I think there are studies to be made here. 

What approach do we use? There again if the Government proceeds in this area without having the 

backing of both sides of the House, this could enter into the realm of politics again, as much as did the 

former Member for Humboldt some years ago. 

 

I think another thing is the checking of cars by a police officer. The warnings, is what I am referring to. 

They should also be registered for future reference by the Highway Traffic Board, because the warnings 

why a fellow could be warned several times and never be fined. He could be a bad driver. I don’t know 

whether you keep track of him in this sense. A fellow could probably have a full string of warnings and 

has never been taken off the road and still be a very dangerous driver. If there was a way of keeping 

track of these, I think it would have some merit depending upon what kind of warnings they are. There 

is faulty brakes. If you happen to be caught on a municipal road with faulty brakes you might not be 

fined, but if you are on a blacktop highway they will drag you in. But I think that it is just as wrong 

driving a car with faulty brakes on a municipal road as it is on the highway. Some police might use this 

to make their decision whether they lay charges or not. There again, unless you have backing of both 

sides of the House on a question like this, it enters into the political arena. 

 

I think that we are making good steps ahead now and in 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2317 

order not to — say in plain language — louse this thing up, I would suggest that the Government really 

consider the reinstatement of the Highway Safety Committee. It will certainly help us to keep pace with 

the problems as they present themselves and not have the decisions made here enter into the realm of 

politics. Because the moment this happens I want to say that we will have a slow down, we will have 

another upsurge of killing on the highways. 

 

Now with regards to school buses. The Attorney General mentioned signal lights. At the present time I 

don’t know if it is legal for the school buses all to be painted with the chrome coloured paint. Is this law 

now? 

 

Mr. Heald:  They are new buses. 

 

Mr. Thibault:  Yes, but I believe that there are a lot of buses driving today that are not properly 

painted. I think that we have to have a good look at this question of paint, whether we should not 

discourage the use of this colour by any other motor vehicle so that the general public will be aware that 

when they see this type of colour, that know that it is a school bus and nothing else. I think that our fire 

department should come in under the same thing also, so that nobody imitates the colour of the fire 

machines. I know that it will be a sort of inconvenience to some people, but I think that for the sake of 

safety it has a lot of merit to discourage the use of these colours by others motorists. 

 

I think that there will be more discussion during the Committee and so at this time I want to say that I 

will support the Bill. It is a good step forward, but not as far ahead as I would like to see it, but we will 

go along with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair):  Mr. Speaker, I just have a few words to say about this 

Bill. I think that this is a step in the right direction, but unfortunately the actions of this Government fall 

far short of the ringing declarations of concern that we have heard about highway traffic safety. 

 

I think that it is worthwhile examining the timetable of action regarding highway traffic safety in this 

province to illustrate this point about their actions falling short of their declarations with regard to 

highway safety. 

 

The Resolution which the Members from our side of the House put forward in 1965, and which the 

Members on that side of the House — to their credit — amended to include the investigation of drinking 

with regard to driving, was passed in the amended form and subsequently the Highway Traffic Report 

came down in 1966. Nothing was done on this particular matter in 1967. 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2318 

Mr. Heald:  The only one in the North American continent,…and don’t say that we didn’t do 

anything. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  Oh, no. I am referring specifically to the fact three… 

 

Mr. Heald:  That’s one of the recommendations. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  With regard to drinking and driving? That’s the point that I am getting at. There 

were three Members on that Committee from this side of the Chamber that disagreed and had 

reservations with regard to the breathalyzer legislation and they stated them in the report. It is here for 

anyone to see who cares to read the report. In 1968 we submitted a Resolution which was ruled out of 

order because a Bill superseded it in the order of this House. Now there is a serious problem in highway 

traffic safety and we only have to look at the figures on deaths, injury and property damage to realize 

this. In 1965 there were 233 deaths, 4,238 injuries and property damage of $9.2 million. In 1966 there 

were 279 deaths, 4,338 injuries and $11.7 million of damage. In 1967 there were 287 deaths, 4,465 

injuries and $12.2 million of damage done in the Province of Saskatchewan. It is unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker, that I cannot altogether accept the presentation or shall I say, the partial presentation, put 

forward by the Attorney General with regard to the British Columbia figures on the success of their 

24-hour suspension legislation. 

 

I understand that in Britain if a person refuses to take the breathalyzer test they are yanked off the road. I 

cannot understand why the Government, when it has at this point in time more public support for good 

strong legislation in this field than at any time in the past. 

 

Mr. Heald:  It is the strongest in Canada barring none, and you know it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  And still not strong enough to do the job. I submit that the partial figures 

submitted by the Attorney General will show when the full figures are disclosed that he cannot build a 

case for the 24-hour suspension on the basis of British Columbia figures. 

 

Mr. Heald:  Don’t condemn it before you try it! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  I say that the public is with the Government if they want to move ahead. I have 

received a considerable number of letters on this, right next to deterrent fees, I might inform 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2319 

the Attorney General. It’s not the 287 that were killed in highway traffic accidents, but there may be 

some of their relatives who may have written a letter, and I don’t think they have made a mistake in this. 

 

Mr. Heald:  There is nothing that you won’t play politics with. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  Now, I don’t want the Attorney General to take issue with me for attacking the 

fact that this Government hasn’t gone far enough in this legislation. All I want him to do is to bring in 

the appropriate changes so that they can go farther. 

 

Mr. Heald:  You are just playing politics with life. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  Oh, no. I’m not playing politics with life, Mr. Attorney General. I have asked for 

information on this and we will just see how Swinging Pierre is going to do on this particular matter. 

Mr. Speaker, Swinger Pierre is . . . 

 

Mr. Heald:  You be as constructive as the other two that spoke and you will be all right. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  I submitted a question, Mr. Speaker, in this Legislature on February 16. 

 

Mr. Heald:  I’ll answer it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  You’ll answer it, yes after the debate is over probably, just like the deterrent fee 

question that I asked in this Legislature. It hasn’t been answered yet. And this question said: From the 

date of presentation of the final report of the special Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety to the 

present time, how many times has the Government of Saskatchewan made representations to the 

Government of Canada about changes in the Criminal Code regarding, (a) .08 blood alcohol content and, 

(b) .10 blood alcohol being the basis for conviction on a charge of impaired and/or drunk driving. In 

what form was each representation made? 

 

It is unfortunate that this information is not before us to see . . . 

 

Mr. Heald:  . . . if you were in the House you would have heard it as I answered it. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank:  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that the Rules of the House demand of the Minister 

that when I submit a formal question in 



 

April 22, 1968 

 

 

2320 

writing that he answer me formally in writing. I don’t think that we can ignore this. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Attorney General’s remarks fall short of that action which is demanded by 

the public of Saskatchewan. My colleague from the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. 

Romanow) wishes to say something on this debate and unfortunately he is detained, as I understand it, 

by sickness in Saskatoon today, and I would beg leave to adjourn the debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READING 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister 

of Municipal Affairs) that Bill No. 74 — An Act respecting the Sharing of Rural Municipal Tax 

Levies on Potash Development with Municipalities Located within an Area of Influence of the 

Potash Development be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current):  Mr. Speaker, I would simply like to say in regard to this that I have 

had some discussions with the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) and he has given us some 

details in regard to the regulations that may be expected under this Bill and I have nothing further to say 

at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Estey:  Mr. Speaker, I think that we have had sufficient discussion on this Bill in second reading. 

I just want to point out again that it is our hope that this  Bill will bring benefits to a large number of 

municipalities and certain urban centres. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:02 o’clock p.m. 


