



















































Hansard: February 22, 1968


125 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session – Sixteenth Legislature 

6th Day 

 

Thursday, February 22, 1968. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to introduce to this House this 

afternoon a group of grade eight students from the St. Mary’s school in Estevan. There are 20 students in 

all and they are brought here this afternoon by their teachers, Hugh Bitts and Rich Mickler and also Bill 

Owens, one of their drivers. This is quite a famous little school because Mr. Bitts has an orchestra 

known as the Blue Bands Orchestra. I understand that next summer he is going to take this orchestra 

down to California to play several engagements down in the United States. I welcome them here this 

afternoon on your behalf, Sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. LaRochelle (Shaunavon): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce through you to this 

Legislature a fine group of grade 11 and 12 students that are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. They are 

from the Consul school district. They are accompanied by their teacher, Miss Maxlin and also by Mr. 

Strain and their bus driver, Mr. Les Harder. Mr. Speaker, these students have driven over 300 miles to 

attend the sitting of this Legislature today. I think this is a group that comes from the furthest part of the 

southwest part of the province. I would like to wish them a very instructive visit while they are in the 

Legislature and I would wish them a very safe journey back home. They are a fine group of students and 

I certainly want to see them get back home safely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased on your behalf and on 

behalf of this Legislature to welcome a very fine group of young men and women in the east gallery 

from Miller high school in the city of Regina. This school is located about three and a half blocks from 

where I live and I am very pleased to be able to greet them this afternoon. As you know this is a new 

school and already it has made its mark not only in our city for higher education but throughout this 

country. The building has received national and outstanding recognition and the facilities are the most 

up-to-date in Canada. They are accompanied by Mr. Zrymiak and Sister Catherine. I want to say that 

Sister Catherine also gained much fame in this community when she walked for 30 miles in the March 

for Millions. I will always remember it because I was one of her financial sponsors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — I want to welcome them on behalf of everyone here. I hope they will gain much from the 

deliberations during this afternoon. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

126 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the Members of this 

House, I would like to introduce the students in the first three rows of the west gallery. They are students 

of the W.C. Howe school and from the stronghold of free enterprise, Regina South, under the direction 

of Mr. Ochwita, the principal of the school. They are grade eight students. Last year there were some 18 

of them here, this year we are close to 50. I surmise that word-of-mouth advertising has paid off well 

and I know we all join in welcoming them to this session this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce 

to the Members of this Legislature the students from a class in Buena Vista school in Saskatoon. They 

are accompanied this afternoon by their teacher, Mrs. Hoge, and are occupying the back three rows in 

the west gallery. Buena Vista school, I need hardly add, is located in Nutana Centre constituency, the 

constituency about which I know a great deal. We congratulate Mrs. Hoge on giving her students the 

opportunity to view this House in session and trust that the students will enjoy their stay with us and 

return safely to their homes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

BOY SCOUT WEEK 
 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if I might 

call to the attention of the House that this is Boy Scout Week. As Members may know, the Boy Scout 

Organization is a world-wide organization. We in Saskatchewan last autumn had the opportunity of 

welcoming Sir Charles McLean, the Chief Scout of the Commonwealth, and I know that we who are 

associated with the movement looked forward to that opportunity, even though the day he came here 

happened to be October 11th which was a rather busy day for me as a result of some other activities. I 

think Members may know that the Chief Scout of Canada is His Excellency the Governor General, and 

you may have seen him on television last Sunday evening. The Chief Scout of Saskatchewan is our own 

Lieutenant Governor. I have been very happy to be associated with this movement over a period of 

many years, and I would hope that the House would be willing to join with me in expressing best wishes 

to the movement in Saskatchewan and in Canada. It is one of the more prominent organizations in the 

independent sector of our provincial life. Before I take my seat may I express a cordial invitation to 

attend the Scout-Guide Tea on Saturday afternoon. Last year I had the pleasure of sharing the receiving 

line with Mrs. Thatcher, the wife of our Premier. I am sure that all Members who could take advantage 

of that opportunity would find it a pleasant occasion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

127 

QUESTIONS 
 

THE SASKATCHEWAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — I would like to direct a question to the Premier. It 

arises from the answer to a question he gave yesterday. His answer intimated that The Saskatchewan 

Economic Review printed in 1967 was released in April of 1967. My perplexity and question arise out 

of the fact that I had written to him on April 25th asking for a copy and as yet I haven’t received a copy 

of the Review or an answer to my letter. My staff have on several occasions asked the proper officials 

and we haven’t got it. May I ask, since it was issued; is it the intention of the Government to table this in 

the Legislature? 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — If the Hon. Leader of the Opposition would have this individual 

direct another letter – I am sorry I am not aware of it – we would certainly see that he gets a copy. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — That isn’t the question I asked. This individual was myself who wrote to himself, and I 

got no reply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — My question was; is it the intention of the Government to table this report in the 

Legislature and distribute it to the Members? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I’ll look into it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, that prompts another question. May I ask the Premier when he intends to 

look into it. It has been nine months since it was issued. Surely it won’t take too long. When will we 

know? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We have been kind of busy this last nine months as the Hon. Member knows. 

However, we will certainly see that he gets a copy very shortly. 

 

MOORE COMMITTEE 
 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, last year when we asked for a report on the Moore 

Committee, we were informed that there was a shortage and we could expect further reports at a later 

date. I wonder if the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) could now supply us with a copy of the 

Moore Committee Report? 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — I’ll look into that, Mr. Speaker, as the Member may 

know there has been a considerable run on those reports for other reasons since that time, but we’ll see 

what we can do. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — The Members of the Legislature would like to have one. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

128 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Premier, the other Members of the House would certainly 

like a copy of the Economic Review as well. It has been customary to mail one when they are printed 

and issued, and we would certainly like to see that practice continued in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. McPherson (Regina South 

West) and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition). 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned the debate yesterday, I had a 

few words to say concerning some of the immediate problems of the constituency that I represent in this 

House. I had also remarked about the confused and muddled attitude of Liberals, both in Saskatchewan 

and Ottawa, concerning the introduction of a National Medical Care Plan. I had also suggested to the 

Government opposite that, upon receipt of that $14 million from Ottawa, it should take another look at 

its 1964 election promise to include drugs under medical care. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I had suggested an immediate start by covering terminal cancer patients and other 

exceptional categories. Finally, I had drawn attention to the need for stringent observation and control 

by an agency of government to ensure that excessive drug costs would not jeopardize the plan. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words concerning the performance of this Government since it 

assumed the reins of office in 1964. This Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, is punctuated with dire warnings 

of our immediate future, of tight money and of high interest rates, and it hints again of the intention of 

the Government to impose a variety of new taxes and imposts upon the people of our province. When 

we hear the Premier proclaim, as we did on television recently and repeated again yesterday, that he has 

a tiger by the tail, we cannot help but wonder, Mr. Speaker, what it is that has suddenly gone wrong in 

this so-called new Saskatchewan. Where are all of the new industries, Mr. Speaker, that were to take the 

tax-load from the shoulders of the Saskatchewan people? The Hansard of this House has the Premier on 

record during the 1965 session as uttering this profound declaration and I quote him: 

 

We know that every new manufacturing plant, every mine, every retail business that comes into 

this province adds to the Provincial tax-base. As the base is widened, we can provide better 

social services, improved education standards, better highways and so on. I say again, we intend 

to use private enterprise methods. We must nourish our investment worthiness; we must improve 

our methods of attracting new capital. 

 

One might wonder, Mr. Speaker, how a Government which claims to be a true champion of free 

enterprise could have encountered 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

129 

any difficulty whatsoever in attracting new industry. The facts would seem to indicate that difficulty has 

been experienced in holding on to what we have. Since 1964, Mr. Speaker, Hardply Corporation, Prince 

Albert, closed its doors, laying off 96 employees in April of 1966; Burns meat packing plant, Regina, 

closed in June of 1967 with a loss of 80 employees; Intercontinental meat packing plant, Regina, closed 

in September, 1965, with a loss of another 50 jobs; NorCanAir, Prince Albert, closed their maintenance 

operation with 50 jobs lost in June of 1966; British American Oil Company transferred 22 employees to 

Calgary in July of 1967; Mobil Oil, Regina, transferred another 30 employees to Edmonton in May of 

1966; Robin Hood Flour Mills in Moose Jaw and the oat mill closed a short while ago, with a loss of 

over 169 jobs; Western Decalta Petroleum, Regina, closed its Regina office October 12, 1967; Prairie 

Bag Company, Moose Jaw, closed its operation in September of 1967, with a loss of another 20 odd 

jobs; the Cement Company, Regina, shut down for four weeks on October 23, 1967; the Steel Mill, 

Regina, was working only a three-day week last fall. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, so much for lost jobs and lost industries. There are a few more that could be added to 

this impressive list. What about the new industries, Mr. Speaker, that have been announced by this 

Government but failed to materialize? The Heavy Water Plant, we all remember, made good copy in the 

Leader-Post, but produced nothing more. A $20 million ammonia plant for Estevan, announced in May 

of 1965, joined the Heavy Water Plant. A $5 million chemical plant in conjunction with the Prince 

Albert pulp mill became another mirage, Mr. Speaker. This was announced in September, 1966. The 

Volkswagon Centre for Regina, announced in August 1966, also failed to materialize. A $25 million 

iron pellet plant for Regina also never appeared on the scene. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) 

mentioned the other day, Primrose Forest Products, Meadow Lake, announced an operation in April of 

1965. The Government proceeded to build what was supposed to have been a $400,000 road. It spent 

approximately $2 million on this road which ended in the wilderness; and this company never began 

production, Mr. Speaker. An asbestos pipe manufacturing plant was announced for Regina valued at 

some $2.5 million in June of 1965, and this never appeared. The development of the Choiceland iron ore 

deposits announced also in April of 1965, and since that very little has been heard. A number of potash 

developments have been announced and re-announced, Mr. Speaker, without tangible results to date. 

The TISCO steel wire plant for Moose Jaw also vanished shortly after the October 11th general election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you today that the Throne Speech which is presently under discussion 

stands as mute testimony to the failure of this Government to attract new industry or to hold on to what 

we have, to provide that wider tax-base which the Premier spoke about only a few months ago. 

 

In the letter which accompanied the 1967 Homeowner Grant, the Premier had this to say and I think it’s 

worthy of quoting to you: 

 

As was pointed out last year, this assistance was made possible by the new industrial 

development and diversification which has continued to gain momentum in our province. This 

growth is permitting us to widen our tax base. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

130 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the widening of this tax-base I think will be best understood after the full impact of 

the 1968 Budget is felt by Saskatchewan people. The sad and the unfortunate aspect of it all, however, is 

that more and more tax revenues will be provided by those who can least afford to pay, if the 

Government proceeds with plans that have already been made public through the news media. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we have had better than average crops over the past four years, and 

in 1966 we harvested the largest crop in our history. If this Government, Mr. Speaker, now has a tiger by 

the tail, then it will have to look elsewhere for the trouble. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the cost of providing 

Government services is increasing progressively. Under the former CCF Government, budgetary 

requirements rose from $30 million in 1944 to in excess of $197 million in 1964. Expanded health 

services, education, highway construction, power development, grid roads, sewer and water systems, 

and many other services claimed an increasing share of increased revenues. A CCF Government, Mr. 

Speaker, introduced the first Hospitalization Plan in North America and financed it alone for over ten 

years until the Federal Government introduced a similar plan. A CCF Government introduced and 

financed the first comprehensive pre-paid Medical Care Plan in North America, and at the same time, 

Mr. Speaker, the CCF Government paid off $143 million of dead weight debt, inherited from the 

previous free enterprise Liberal Government, and in 1964, Mr. Speaker, had a net asset position of $33 

million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Since the Thatcher Government took over in 1964, Mr. Speaker, medical care 

premiums have been increased by $20 per year. Tobacco and liquor taxes have been increased. Gasoline 

tax has been increased. A new tax has been imposed on cleansers and detergents. Automobile insurance 

rates have been increased sharply, and fire insurance rates have increased from 40 to 50 per cent across 

the entire province. Municipal taxes have increased at an unprecedented rate since the Liberals took over 

in 1964, in spite of the Liberal promise that methods would be found for reducing municipal taxes. 

Licence fees have been increased. University tuition fees have been increased, Mr. Speaker, with the 

latest increase being announced only a few weeks ago. Grazing lease fees were increased sharply by this 

Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker, and a new hospital revenue tax has been imposed on the people of 

Saskatchewan. In addition to this, Mr. Speaker, increased revenues to this Province under the terms of 

the Dominion-Provincial Tax Sharing Agreement from 1964 to 1967 amounted to a figure in excess of 

$29 million. 

 

With all these new sources of revenue, however, Mr. Speaker, this Government could not resist the 

temptation to snatch from our senior citizens that additional $30 a month which Ottawa provided. This 

Government seized that $360 a year from all those who are on supplementary allowances. More recently 

the $1.50 cost of living bonus has also been taken from them. What Ottawa gave, the Thatcher Liberals 

took away, Mr. Speaker. To put the frosting on the cake, Mr. Speaker, this Government has also 

accumulated an additional $109 million in additional gross debt since 1964. I expect the figure is 

considerably higher at this stage. This is a practice, Mr. Speaker, which it deplored when it was in 

opposition, and it 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

131 

was perennially unable to distinguish between dead-weight debt and self-liquidating debt. So, Mr. 

Speaker, this Government after establishing a record such as this, after less than four years in office, 

now finds that it has a tiger by the tail, I suggest to you that a tax on sickness will not solve the problem. 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is its own free enterprise tiger, and that the Government should lose no 

time in getting around to the other end of this ravenous beast and pay some attention to what it is it has 

been feeding him over the last three and a half or four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Some of the items on the menu, Mr. Speaker, include timber rights which have been 

secured on terms which the Government chose not to divulge. This monster has already swallowed a 

Government air-line, and as insurance against indigestion, the Government has committed itself to pay 

out $275,000 a year for ten years to the new owners of NorCanAir. This Government, Mr. Speaker, has 

sold sodium sulphate reserves at Alsask belonging to the people of Saskatchewan estimated at 2.2 

million tons for the paltry sum of $22,000 or one cent a ton. Other reserves at Snake Hole Lake were 

disposed of for $60,000. 

 

In answer to a question asked in this Legislature some time ago, we were provided with an impressive 

list of road building machinery which has been disposed of by this Government. This was property 

owned by the people of this province, which provided a valuable yardstick to measure efficiency and to 

judge the value of services provided by private contractors. The Premier, in his 1966 Budget Address, I 

believe, sounded some words of warning. He said: 

 

This year we will spend approximately $40,600,000 on highways. We have run into some 

difficulty expanding our program this past year. Many contractors simply lacked sufficient 

equipment. 

 

What he may have implied, Mr. Speaker, but failed to make clear, is the fact that there has been a drastic 

increase in the cost of highway construction over the past three or four years. At this present pace of 

highway construction, Mr. Speaker, there has been no need for contractors to sharpen their pencils and 

become involved in genuine competitive bidding. According to the Liberals’ own figures, unit bid prices 

for grading increased from under 17 cents a cubic yard in 1963 to 26.7 cents in 1966, or an increase of 

just about 60 per cent. Other figures are just as revealing. From 1963 to 1966, oil surfacing aggregate 

less haul in place increased by 76 per cent. Bituminous surface less haul in place from 1963 to 1966 

increased by 41 per cent; sub-base course less haul in place from 1963 to 1966, up 123 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, base course less haul in place from 1963 to 1966, an increase of 79 per cent; gravel surfacing 

aggregate less haul in place from 1963 to 1966, Mr. Speaker, an increase of 116 per cent. 

 

I just want to point out today, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan’s highway development under the former 

CCF Government was one of the success stories of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

132 

Mr. Snyder: — Saskatchewan people were taken out of the mud and the entire highway system was 

re-built with the prudent use of highway dollars. Recognizing that Saskatchewan has within its borders 

one third of all the highway mileage in the whole of Canada, I suggest to you that a remarkable job was 

done during those years. 

 

It is apparent, Mr. Speaker, that this Government has learned nothing from the costly experience over 

the past three years. This Government intends to ignore the supply and demand factor according to a 

news release in the Leader-Post of January 18th of this year. At that time, Highways Minister Boldt told 

the Prairie Road Builders’ Association that his highway budget this year will be equally as large as last 

year’s $58 million expenditure, thus setting out quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, the order of priorities 

established by those who sit opposite. 

 

Another choice morsel which has been fed to the private enterprise tiger, Mr. Speaker, is a bite out of the 

insurance business in Saskatchewan. This was accomplished by raising automobile insurance rates, and 

even more blatant, Mr. Speaker, the increase of fire insurance rates from 40 to 50 per cent across the 

entire province. This is an increase, Mr. Speaker, which has yet to be explained properly by the Minister, 

who a short time previously announced that the SGIO had just enjoyed the best year in its entire history. 

A recent news release by the Premier indicates that he is prepared at this time to place another piece of 

Saskatchewan Government insurance on the chopping block in payment for services rendered. For all 

this, Mr. Speaker, the Government seems to have but one answer, ―We believe in private enterprise.‖ 

This it holds to be inviolate and untouchable, Mr. Speaker. It is possible that vision becomes blurred 

with age, but it seems there was a time when the Premier was able to see these matters more clearly than 

he does today. On May 19, 1945, the Moose Jaw Times Herald carried a news item in the following 

terms: 

 

The CCF Government has done more for the people of this province in the ten months it has 

been in office than was previously done in 39 years of administration by Liberal and 

Conservation Governments. 

 

So said W. Ross Thatcher, Federal candidate for the CCF: 

 

It has begun a program for securing the benefits of the natural resources of the province for the 

people as a whole instead of a few. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s position on practically every matter of importance indicates that he is 

trying to balance the scales in the favor of the few. In almost every instance, it is not difficult to find the 

beneficiary in the background. 

 

It appears, Mr. Speaker, that this Government, in common with the Liberal Government in Ottawa, 

refuses or fails to recognize the consequence of conducting the affairs of a country or a province for the 

benefit of a few. It may agree that it had a tiger by the tail, but it is not sure what’s wrong, whether the 

trouble is functional or organic. Liberals talk glibly about pepping up the economy or slowing it down, 

or the merits of tax reductions, the need for tax increases, or the benefits of high interest rates. One of 

the Members to your 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

133 

right, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), recently advocated more unemployment, 

suggesting that a reservoir of unemployed would be a desirable feature. This represents, Mr. Speaker, 

the thoughtful and profound approach which some Liberals suggest to solve the nation’s ills. 

 

The Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, fails to set a meaningful order of priorities. The frequently announced 

proposal to impose deterrent charges upon hospital patients would seem to be predicated on the 

assumption that through this measure we can summon some kind of black magic to deter sickness. I’m 

sure it’s well know, Mr. Speaker, that the patient gets admitted to the hospital on the authority of a 

doctor and he is discharged by the same process. The word, ―deterrent‖ is a misnomer. This so-called 

deterrent is simply a tax on the sick, Mr. Speaker, and an erosion of the Medical and Hospital Services 

Plan. This, Mr. Speaker, can easily be regarded as another channel through which additional business 

may be fed to private insurance companies at the public’s expense. Undoubtedly, many people will feel 

obliged to carry insurance to cover the possibility of having to pay this new tax and they will certainly 

find insurance companies ready to accommodate them. At the best, Mr. Speaker, this proposal can only 

be regarded as a tawdry effort on the part of a frustrated Government to stimulate an economy suffering 

from too many fire sales and unable to match up to the boisterous and repetitious advertising of phantom 

industries that never got beyond the imagination stage. 

 

I’ll conclude my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, by expressing my disappointment that the 1968 Throne 

Speech fails to recognize some of the most pressing problems of Saskatchewan people. This 

Government, Mr. Speaker, was less than frank and honest with the Saskatchewan voters prior to the 

general election. The Throne Speech forecasts tough times and increased taxes at a period in our history 

that has been marked by buoyant revenues, better than average crops and continuing economic growth. I 

see nothing in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, which provides the kind of stimulus which is needed in 

the constituency which I represent in this House. Accordingly, I will be voting against the motion and 

supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before I begin my address this afternoon I would like to voice 

my pleasure at having been given the privilege to sit as a Member of this Assembly. I wish at this time 

to express my appreciation to the residents of Kelsey constituency who put their confidence in me as 

their elected representative. I aspire to serve them well and be worthy of that position I now hold on 

their behalf. 

 

For thirty-four years the people of Kelsey and the Province of Saskatchewan have been fortunate to have 

in their midst the dedication and competence of Mr. J.H. Brockelbank. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — And I’m certain that all Members of this Assembly will join with me in conveying to 

my predecessor good wishes for many rewarding years in the future. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

134 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to congratulate you on your appointment as Speaker of this Assembly. My 

personal appraisal of your position is that it is an onerous one at times, but I assure you that I have heard 

complimentary remarks regarding you from both parties represented in this Assembly. To receive such 

comments can only mean that your actions and decisions in the past as Speaker of this House have been 

impartial and even-handed, and I am certain they will continue to so be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of the number of years that this Legislative Assembly has met and governed this 

Province with different political parties sitting on the Government and Opposition sides of this 

Assembly, we still, Mr. Speaker, find a great many failings, weaknesses and lack of necessary 

legislation in our province. I don’t suppose we will ever reach a point where there are no issues of 

importance, for as time goes on, circumstances change. Solved problems of the past given the right 

conditions reappear as new problems. Governing bodies must act on new and better and more 

legislation, consequently government will always be faced with new and important issues. But, in 

responding to these issues, we must keep foremost in our minds that it will be for the betterment, not 

only of the people we represent in government but of all mankind, both now and in the future. 

 

There are areas where the present Government of this Province has shown and is showing lack of 

foresight and concern. In the field of agriculture, which we still must consider Saskatchewan’s primary 

industry, considering the important role it plays in the economy of Canada, it is indeed very 

disappointing that this industry receives more and more attention but less and less action from not only 

the Provincial Government, but also the Federal Government of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Now, Mr. Speaker, before I elaborate on the agricultural field of Saskatchewan, I want 

first to comment in regard to a statement made in this Assembly Tuesday last. This statement was to the 

effect that the New Democratic party on this side of the House or for that matter, the entire organization, 

Federal and Provincial, was controlled by labor. This is not the first time, Mr. Speaker, that such 

accusations have been made. We don’t get too excited about them, because we associate them on the 

same plane as we would children fighting. After one has been defeated and they are walking away from 

each other, the loser picks up a stone, tosses it in a last effort at victory. Doesn’t it seem strange, Mr. 

Speaker, if it were true that we were dominated and controlled by labor, that we should have sitting on 

this side of the Assembly twelve farmers or people associated with the professional or semi-professional 

fields? This representation, Mr. Speaker, farmer, labor and professional are working in harmony towards 

a better Saskatchewan and indeed a better Canada . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — . . . with no individual segment dominating the other. Consequently this accusation can 

only be a last ditch, on erroneous assumption on behalf of the Liberal party. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

135 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to inform this Assembly of one of several serious problems within the 

constituency of Kelsey which I represent. Since early December, 1967, residents and other motorist 

travelling highways within the constituency have been confronted with not only serious but dangerous 

driving conditions because of ice on the road surfaces. Highway No. 3 from Crooked River to Hudson 

Bay and Highway No. 23 from Chelan to Bertwell and from Chelan to Greenwater Lake have been 

extremely hazardous during most of this winter. Mr. Speaker, I want to bring it to the attention of the 

Government that residents depend on these highways to commute from home to town for supplies. 

Travellers depend on them for service in the area; school buses to transport students to and from school 

depend on them. Truckers depend on them to service supplies as well as resident truckers who make 

their livelihood from trucking over these highways by hauling material to and from two local industries 

that the area is somewhat dependent on. Municipal authorities, individuals and myself have contacted 

numerous people in the Highway Department but have received no satisfaction from them, because they 

state that the expense is too great to remove this icing problem. Mr. Speaker, I ask you: which expense is 

most important before this serious condition is attended to? The expense of local contractors going 

broke, the expense of loss of service to the community or even more serious, the expense of a loss of 

life. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the cheapest expense would be to remove this hazardous ice condition 

now, as the cost of solving by sanding, in comparison to the hardships that the people of these 

communities are suffering or may be suffering, is relatively cheap and I urgently recommend the 

Government to do so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the field of agriculture, we find that the present day position of the farmers is not 

good and the prospects of it improving within the next several years are not favorable. When we look at 

some of the facts, the problems and the cost-price squeeze in which the farmer now finds himself, we 

find that it is not only a fact but an actuality that in many areas his position is either stagnant or 

worsening rather than improving. One of the primary reasons for this is that he is without an 

international wheat agreement for which the farmer can thank the Federal Liberal Government. And 

there is no guarantee that such an agreement will be negotiated for this summer. It is also a fact that 

deliveries in Saskatchewan to January 17, 1968, are 94 million bushels less than grain deliveries to 

January 17, 1967, a drop, Mr. Speaker, of 38.8 per cent. It is further a fact that production costs of the 

farmer have soared from $17.95 per cultivated acre in 1962 to $23.48 per cultivated acre in 1966, an 

increase, Mr. Speaker, of $5.53 per cultivated acre in a period of four years. I might add, Mr. Speaker, 

that these costs are now somewhere in the neighborhood of $30 per acre. I might also add that during 

this time of increased production, the prices of the farmer’s produce have not changed significantly. And 

also the cost of land has spiralled something drastically. It is also a fact that the Canadian farm wheat 

production total is down 233 million bushels from 1966. And in the Province of Saskatchewan the 

farmers’ wheat production is down 198 million bushels. And to further worsen the farmer’s position, the 

present price for cattle and pigs has not increased but is lower than it has been for some time. This holds 

true when the present Government is encouraging diversification of some swine facilities and increasing 

the number of livestock within the province. Before this seems practical to me, a more reasonable floor 

price 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

136 

should be established whereby the farmer, going into these diversified fields, will be able to survive the 

additional debt he has incurred, if the prices of livestock drop. 

 

It is a fact that according to statistics of ARDA, 60 per cent of Canadian farmers are earning a living 

which is below poverty level. This means in dollars and cents that 60 per cent of the farmers of Canada 

have an income of less than $3,000. It is also interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Economic 

Council of Canada calculates the Canadian rural living standard to be one-third below that of his urban 

neighborhood. This fact, Mr. Speaker, holds true for farmers who have many thousands of dollars 

investing in the farming operation. And it is no fault of their own that they are in this position, but the 

fault of the present agricultural system. These are facts, Mr. Speaker, sober, honest and unvarnished 

facts, that show that the farmer is not in a desirable situation, yet the present Government has done little 

to alleviate this problem. Indeed in many areas it has worsened under its administration. 

 

One of these areas is in the purchasing of farm machinery. You will remember that under the previous 

Government, the Agricultural Machinery Administration tested and published reports on farm 

machinery so that a farmer purchasing new implements knew the capabilities of that machinery. This 

service is no longer available, and we now find that farmers are confronted with time-consuming 

breakdowns, costly repairs and maintenance bills because of inferior agricultural equipment. Due to 

numerous complaints by farmers the United Grain Growers of Canada conducted a survey in July of 

1967. This survey showed that in the Province of Saskatchewan, 88.8 per cent of the farmers requested a 

program such as the Agricultural Machinery Administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — This questionnaire showed that only 4.5 per cent of the farmers in the three prairie 

provinces were totally satisfied with new machinery bought. 24.4 per cent of the farmers felt that over 

50 per cent of their machinery purchases were not satisfactory for performance or durability. This survey 

further showed that 54 per cent of the respondents felt that the three prairie provinces should establish 

and administer a testing program. 24.5 per cent of the respondents suggested that the Federal 

Government undertake such a program. 78.5 per cent of the farmers in the three prairie provinces felt the 

need for a field-testing program, whether it be Federally or Provincially administered. This survey, Mr. 

Speaker, clearly indicates that the farmers of the prairie provinces feel that a testing program is needed 

and that it is needed especially in Saskatchewan, where 88.8 per cent of these farmers felt the need for 

this program. In fact this program should not be limited to machinery alone but should include farm 

chemicals, fertilizers and other farm necessities. I find it impossible to understand the present 

Government’s thinking when it abolished the Agricultural Machinery Administration, and I now find it 

even further impossible to understand why it refuses to reinstate it. When the need is so great, as it 

appears now the Government is more concerned in protecting the machinery companies outside of 

Saskatchewan rather than the farmer inside Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

137 

Mr. Messer: — I would further suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it is time we update and refurbish the 

Agricultural Representatives Branch so that it meets the needs of present day agriculture. Due to the fact 

that a farmer’s total year’s production in grain or specialty crops or any other farming operation for that 

matter may be destroyed or seriously damaged within a matter of days by infestation of bugs, insects or 

other disease, the local Agricultural Representatives Service should be so geared so that he may, within 

a short time after being contacted, survey and analyze this Liberal situation and make recommendations 

before a substantial loss has occurred to the farmer. As it is now, the agricultural representative is no 

more than a middle-man between the farmer and the Agricultural Extension Department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that, if his ranks cannot be increased and his services updated, it would be more 

convenient and economical to replace this middle-man service with a telephone. Due to the highly 

technical field that agriculture has become, and since it is rapidly becoming more specialized and more 

technical, I believe the local agricultural representative should personally contact every farmer in his 

district at least twice a year so that he may discuss problems and farming practices with farmers in his 

area. There should also be more local research done with each agricultural representative district. 

Included within this district office there should be a family farm improvement representative who would 

be capable of undertaking and planning and developing of rural farmsteads. 

 

I would also suggest that they carry out more research on the common problems encountered by the 

farmer. This would involve water and sewer, feeding equipment and all other labor-saving and 

production equipment on his farm. I believe it possible to extend crop insurance to cover crops that are 

not covered now, such as rape seed which has become a major crop in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

This program could also be expended in its individual coverage per farmer and be made available to all 

farmers in this province. This program could well be administered through the District Agricultural 

Representative Office and by combining these services and possibly others associated with the 

agricultural industry, we would have a nucleus of service and assistance established throughout the 

province. I realize, Mr. Speaker, that these increases and the expansions in the agricultural 

representatives services and localizing agricultural research and assistance would demand a bigger share 

of the Provincial Budget. But would we note that in the year 1967, agriculture received $11,638,000 as 

its portion of the Provincial Budget or only 3.84 per cent of an over $302 million Budget, making it the 

second lowest department in receiving a portion of that Budget. There is most definitely a great deal of 

room for a larger share of the Budget so that we may maintain and improve the agricultural industry in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — There are other fields of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, where improvements could be made, 

such as the development, leasing and selling of Crown lands, a guaranteed and updated floor price on 

livestock, more assistance to young farmers embarking on a career in farming. Indeed if we are to truly 

help the farming economy, I believe that we must launch an all-out 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

138 

effort, firstly, to increase the farmer’s net income to a point where it relieves him of the present 

cost-price squeeze; secondly to maintain an equal relationship between the farmer’s cost of production 

and the marketing price of his produce. There are several other areas besides that of agriculture that I 

would like to mention. One of these that has a tremendous effect on the future of our province is that of 

education. 

 

We find that the present Administration is concerned about education but concerned only from a 

financial point of view that lacks concern for progressive education. The taking-over of the financial 

control of our University is evidence of this. By so doing they are removing the autonomy and academic 

freedom of our universities, whereby our education may suffer from lack of university personnel and 

lack of funds available for research at this level and indeed the loss of students because of these factors. 

 

This Government has also neglected to make available the necessary loans that are direly needed by 

these students, at least to some of these students anyway. Students need these because university tuition 

fees have increased twice since 1965, the last increases averages $75 per student. Combined with these 

tuition increases, there has been a rise in the student cost of living. This, along with the increase in the 

number of students attending our Universities and requiring loans and grant for which insufficient 

allowance has been made by this Government creates financial hardships that many cannot bear and, 

because of this, are forced to discontinue their education. We also find that the local school taxes are 

soaring because of the lack of Government funds to provide the necessary facilities. If our pre-university 

school system is to be maintained and improved upon in this province, it should not and cannot be 

dependent upon the local taxpayer but must be more of the responsibility of the Federal and Provincial 

Governments. I think it unfortunate that we have a crisis concerning the teachers in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, because of the legislation which this Government has attempted to force upon their 

profession and which would have taken away the negotiating facility of teachers and divided personnel 

in that field on a divide-and-rule basis. Mr. Speaker, if we continue with such an outlook in the 

education field, the younger generation and consequently the province stand to suffer. 

 

In another important field, it was announced several weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, that the payments be 

discontinued to eight hospitals in this province as of April 1, 1968. There may be hospitals in our 

province that are in a position whereby they could be put to better use, if they were converted into 

homes for elderly people or for some other type of specialized care; but this possibility could only be 

considered after pre-arranged plans had been completed for the medical care of these people in 

communities that had experienced the closing of their hospitals. In the eight hospitals which we may 

very well witness closing this spring, there is a lack of provision made for the number of patients who 

will be relying on the already overcrowded hospitals in larger centres. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that, if we 

in this province have reached the stage where we cannot provide proper medical care or proper 

education for our people, because it is a losing proposition economically, then we surely must re-assess 

our values. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

139 

Mr. Messer: — Now, Mr. Speaker, there are numerous other issues which due to time I’m not able to 

discuss, but from what I have said, the Hon. Members should be well aware that I will not support the 

motion, but will vote for the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, firstly, I should like to join with other 

Members of this House in congratulating you on your reappointment as Speaker of this House. It speaks 

well for you, for your past performance and the fair mindedness in which you have conducted your job. 

In my humble opinion, Sir, you will rank as amongst the best speakers ever to preside in this 

Legislature. 

 

I should also like to congratulate the new Members of this House who have spoken in this debate thus 

far, and in particular I should like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply 

on their maiden speeches. Both Regina and Saskatoon can be justly proud of these new Members. 

 

Finally, I should like to thank the voters of my own constituency of Souris-Estevan for having given me 

a mandate to represent their interests in this Legislature for the third term. It is particularly sweet in view 

of the dirty campaign which was waged against me, but I suppose, Mr. Speaker, that I should have 

expected the tactics that were used when I consider who my opposition was. The Hon. Premier read an 

excerpt from the propaganda sheet known as ―The Commonwealth‖ indicating just a sample of the 

smeared tactics which were used in the last campaign. Why, Mr. Speaker, they even insinuated down in 

Estevan that we slashed tires and tore down signs, and that we even had a Hitler youth movement. Let 

me tell you that those young ladies and gentlemen who were working in my campaign were a far cry 

from any Hitler youth movement. 

 

The NDP seem to work on the theory that if you throw enough mud, some is bound to stick. The 

Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) who spoke earlier in this debate today spent ten minutes 

yodelling about the tax increase under the Liberals but let me remind the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that if the NDP had become re-elected as the Government, with all the promises of free 

services, free drugs, oiled roads to every farm, free university tuition and all that free stuff, yes, with all 

the promises that they gave the people of this province, we would be looking at some real tax increases 

in the years to come. 

 

The cost of services and goods are going up all over the land, and I suggest to the NDP that they speak 

to some of their labor bosses in an effort to keep some of these costs in line. The next few years, Mr. 

Speaker, should prove interesting ones in Estevan. 

 

Only last month final approval was given to the participating school boards to proceed with their plans 

to build a comprehensive high school. This school will be of great benefit to the city and to the 

surrounding area. Permission to proceed with the plans culminates several years of hard work by the 

Estevan Collegiate Board and the other participating school boards. With the completion of this 

comprehensive school and its added facilities for education, we hope it will be a further 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

140 

incentive for some new industry to locate in our area. And I look forward to the day, Mr. Speaker, 

however far down the road it may be, for Estevan to become a centre for a junior college. With the new 

comprehensive school it could easily become the centre and the nucleus for such a college. I therefore 

urge the Premier in his capacity as Minister of Industry and Commerce to keep Estevan in mind and 

indeed actively seek a new major industry for our city. With all the natural resources available locally, 

and by this I mean our oil, gas, sulphur, power, etc., Estevan becomes a natural for the location of new 

industry and, Mr. Premier, I don’t mean another heavy water plant either because even if we had one we 

probably would have had it out on strike by now with some of your friends on the other side of the 

House. 

 

I want to speak a bit about transportation in the south part of the province. For several years, we along 

the Soo Line pressed the former Government for public transportation between the provinces of 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba. When this Government took office in 1964, we shattered the old Socialist 

theory of operating buses only within the province. We linked up with a private company to give us 

service from Regina right through to Winnipeg, along the Soo Line. I am told that this service has 

proved to be not only popular with the people in the area, but most profitable to the Government as well 

as the private company. Now, keeping that venture in mind, I understand that another private company 

wants to try a similar venture from Estevan to Minot, North Dakota. A very inconvenient situation exists 

in Saskatchewan in the fact that we have little, if any, cross-border public transportation. Souris-Estevan 

alone has five ports of entry but no trains or buses to expedite passenger movement down into the 

United States. If a private company wants to run service into Estevan, then I urge the Minister-in-Charge 

to expedite such a venture as soon as he receives their proposal. 

 

Lastly, in the field of transportation, I am going to urge the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) to 

complete the oiling of two highways which are vital to the welfare of Souris-Estevan. No. 47 was oiled 

from Estevan to Benson in 1964, within weeks after we took office. A year later, the balance of this road 

was re-built from Benson to Stoughton. While we recognize that it takes a few years for these roads to 

settle and become compacted, we now urge the Minister to oil the last 14 miles of this road before it 

starts to deteriorate. It is imperative to the Estevan business community to oil the balance of Highway 

No. 47 in order to bring traffic south to our city from the entire area both east and west of Stoughton. 

The completion of the oiling of Highway No. 9 south of No. 18 to the Northgate border-crossing is 

another highway of prime importance, not only to Souris-Estevan, but to Cannington and the lakes as 

well. We harvest a great many American tourist dollars at the Moose Mountain resort and as you well 

know, these tourists are loath to travel on dusty, gravel roads. The portion of No. 9 from 18 to Northgate 

was built three years ago and it is now ready for oil treatment and I therefore urge the Minister’s 

immediate attention in this regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because 1967 was such a dry year, I found in my travels that a serious water shortage 

existed along the Souris River between Estevan and Carievale. So much so that we had to ask the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation to release some water from Boundary Dam to help the stock men with 

their water 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

141 

problem. The SPC was very co-operative and it did release some water to help downstream farmers. The 

topic was brought up again at the Southeast Municipal Convention and resolutions passed asking that 

the SPC do not release water in the early summer, but rather hold excess water until late fall for release, 

when it would do the livestock farmers along the Souris Valley the most good. This at best, however, is 

only a temporary solution and at worst there are times when no water is available at the Dam. I would at 

this time urge The Water Resources Commission to investigate the possibility of the construction of 

several smaller dams to hold water all along the Souris. This is a vital and serious matter to all those 

concerned in that area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will devote a portion of my remarks today to the health programs because I feel they are 

of major importance to the people of this province. I am sure that you will agree with me that my 

concern is shared by my colleagues and that this year’s Throne Speech shows that a Liberal Government 

puts health high among its priorities. I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the Opposition fully realizes what 

this means. They would chalk it all up to a carryover from their Administration and ignore the fact that 

we are providing superior services in virtually all areas and new services in other areas. This Throne 

Speech reflects a concern for people and their problems, a Speech that recognizes that new programs 

and long-term plans are basic to raising the health standards of every person in Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the programs that impresses me most is the survey which will be carried out this year to diagnose 

cases of unsuspected diabetes. This is a program which shows real progressiveness and points the way 

for other health departments in other provinces. The danger of diabetes is too often overlooked. Its 

economic and social costs too often go unrecognized. Yet the incidence of this disease is alarming and 

becomes progressively higher in the upper-age groups. Few diabetics are under 30 years of age, but in 

the 50-59 age group over 10 per cent of the population may suffer from this disease. The incidence is 

much higher among those who have a family history of the disease and slightly higher in women than in 

men. It is particularly desirable to diagnose diabetes in its early stages. Yet in its early stages, the 

symptoms are so vague that they may be attributed to another cause. Many early diabetics never go to a 

physician. 

 

Last year a project was conducted to ascertain if diabetes testing should be instituted regularly by the 

Health Department. The results dramatically pointed the way to the inclusion of testing in this year’s 

health program. Efforts of the pilot survey located approximately 370 previously unsuspected diabetics 

and both they and their family physicians were advised to confirm the diagnosis. In all approximately 

39,000 people participated in the test for sugar tolerance which pointed out the possibility of the 

existence of diabetes. The test, carried out in conjunction with tuberculosis testing was particularly 

recommended for anyone over the age of 40 with a family history of the disease. One of the interesting 

highlights of the testing was that four cases were discovered among 156 public health employees who 

were tested at the very beginning of the survey. Certainly no one is immune. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

142 

This year the program is to be continued. The survey will again be carried out with the close 

co-operation of the Saskatchewan Anti-Tuberculosis League and the physicians of Saskatchewan. The 

Tuberculosis League has not yet finalized its schedule of tuberculosis testing, but this is under current 

consideration. It is expect this year that the survey will begin in Estevan, and I hope that the citizens will 

avail themselves of the diabetes testing as well as the tuberculosis testing. As many Members must be 

aware, tuberculosis testing is done in a different part of Saskatchewan each year, and, by combining this 

new survey with the services provided by the League, it is possible over a few years to bring this test to 

the entire province. 

 

Diabetes surveys are a new concept in public health medicine, but their importance is obvious. The 

Health Department has received letters from physicians attesting to the value of this program, and I am 

proud that our province is a leader in this development. 

 

In the area of planning health services, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be significant for me to point out 

that there will not be a mass adult polio immunization program this year. This announcement is 

particularly significant in the light of the method by which the decision was made, when we consider 

that one year ago it was believed that a mass immunization program would be necessary. The 

Government, anxious to ensure the health standards of our citizens, took steps to ascertain the immunity 

level of the population. The method involved was to test a representative sample of the population and 

project the results. This was a very large task and one which many public health officials have felt could 

not work. It was considered absolutely necessary, for the results to be valid, that at least 75 per cent of 

those asked to participate would have to be willing to co-operate. Many considered it unlikely that 

co-operation on that scale would be possible. 

 

I believe it is a tribute to the responsibility of our citizens that over 76 per cent of those contacted 

provided a blood sample as requested. Of the 592 contacted, there was only one who refused to 

co-operate. A number of other people had valid reasons for not participating, such as illness, or having 

left the province. Less than 20 per cent declined to respond or could not be accounted for because of 

other reasons. 

 

The results of the survey showed that over 90 per cent of the adult population was protected against 

polio and therefore an epidemic is virtually impossible and isolated cases very unlikely. These results 

also showed that earlier polio immunization programs seem to have long-term effects. By continuing 

immunization programs among children, the disease will never again be the dread menace we once had 

in the 50’s. I would also submit, Mr. Speaker, that the survey showed the concern of this Government 

for the welfare of the population and the responsibility in using public money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — Mr. Speaker, one of the characteristics of our expanding health service is that the 

expansion is reflected in the organization. For some years, the Health Department has exhibited a 

concern for the rehabilitation and treatment of long-term illness. Various programs have been conducted 

by 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

143 

various branches. Now in recognition of the unique and special problems associated with chronic illness, 

the Department has set up a new branch, the Medical Rehabilitation and Chronic Care Branch. This 

Branch will provide overall planning and coordination between other branches of Health and Welfare 

which are concerned with rehabilitation and chronic care. It will also work with the University Hospital 

in Saskatoon, which recently became responsible for the Physical Restoration Centre there, and the 

South Saskatchewan base hospital, which is to assume the administrative responsibility for the Wascana 

Hospital in Regina. 

 

The development of this Branch is in line with the levels-of-care concept primarily developed by the 

Saskatchewan Hospital Plan. The administrators of the Plan have long recognized that there must be 

numerous levels of care, both in the hospital and in the community, and that coordination must ensure 

the proper placement of patients for maximum recovery. For this reason, the Medical Rehabilitation and 

Chronic Care Branch has been assigned responsibility for developing home-care programs. For both 

economic and therapeutic reasons, home-care programs are an extremely important addition to hospital 

and private services now in existence. 

 

A home-care program for patients at home is physician-directed with medical, social and nursing service 

provided. To be effective it must be centrally administered and thoroughly coordinated. It must include 

planning, evaluation and follow-up procedures that are ordinarily provided in a hospital. For the most 

part this type of program will make use of doctors, nutritionists, social workers, physiotherapists and 

nurses who are already in the community. It is also necessary to develop homemakers in the community 

who can provide services to patients on a fee-for-service basis. 

 

The home-care program has already been tried in various parts of Saskatchewan with varying amounts 

of Government aid. One of the most active groups so far has been the Victorian Order of Nurses which 

has developed a program in Regina. Saskatoon has two programs, one of which is for discharged 

psychiatric patients. Moose Jaw and Prince Albert have programs sponsored by their district medical 

societies. The Health Department has developed another program in Central Butte. This year the 

Medical Rehabilitation and Chronic Care Branch is promoting programs in Swift Current and Yorkton. 

Money and human resources are being made available to these centres in the hope that they will marshal 

community resources for home-care programs. Prospects are excellent that this will. I feel I can predict, 

Mr. Speaker, that home-care will become an increasingly important adjunct to hospitalization. 

 

The new Branch will also supervise medical rehabilitation for children with congenital deformities. 

They will conduct a paraplegic program which will provide such appliances as wheelchairs and 

electronic lifts. Coordination will be provided between the orthopedic shops operated by the 

Saskatchewan Council for Crippled Children and Adults, the Wascana Hospital and the Department of 

National Health and Welfare. The Branch will pay salaries and travel expenses of people who will carry 

out assessment clinics in various parts of our province. 

 

During the 1968-69 fiscal year, the Medical Rehabilitation and Chronic Care Branch plans to conduct a 

number of studies. These will include a full-scale investigation of existing 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

144 

geriatric programs. A study will be made defining areas of responsibility between the Health and 

Welfare Departments for rehabilitation and chronic care. The Branch hopes to be able to forecast the 

need for health social workers in the next few years, and will recommend a program for obtaining 

qualified people. A detailed review will be made of the needs of physically disabled children and a 

registry of handicapped persons in the province will be started. 

 

The creation of this Branch, Mr. Speaker, is a result of the Government’s conviction that the needs of 

some of our people are special and that the services that they receive must be special, too. Mr. Speaker, I 

see that my radio time is now up. I will not support the amendment. I will support the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.A. Heggie (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak for the first time in this House with a good 

deal of humility. I entered this august Chamber for the first time as a student back in 1935 to observe 

how government worked. Although it has been a long road before I could occupy a seat in this 

Legislature, my interest in good government has remained steadfastly the same. I have had the good 

fortune to serve my fellow citizens in civic government in Saskatoon and on the judicial side as a 

Magistrate. To me, and I say this with humility, service in this Chamber is service to the whole of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I now want to join with other Members of this House in offering my 

congratulations to you on your re-election to the high office of Speaker. I anticipate you will continue to 

rule in a fair and impartial manner throughout your new term of office. I also take this opportunity to 

congratulate my colleagues as mover and seconder in the debate on the Speech from the Throne. They 

are to be commended on their excellent presentations. I want to congratulate Premier Thatcher on his 

re-election in Morse with a 1,000 vote majority . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — . . . and the re-election of the Liberals as the governing party. I am convinced that the 

people of Saskatchewan will never return to the era of Socialist experiment that this province went 

through from 1944-1964. I said it during the recent election campaign, and I say it in this House, that 

one dose of Socialism will last the people of Saskatchewan for a long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to draw the attention of this House to the new voting patterns in 

Saskatchewan. For 20 years Liberal ranks drew their strength mainly from the southeast and southwest 

and a fringe of scattered seats across then north. Let us look at the voting pattern from the 1967 election. 

Liberals broke through in the cities to elect 5 Members from Regina and Saskatoon. But what is more 

remarkable is the complete breakthrough in central Saskatchewan. Look at the political map now. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

145 

1. Wilkie 2. Kerrobert-Kindersley 3. Rosetown 4. Elrose 5. Arm River 6. Hanley 7. Watrous 8. Last 

Mountain 9. Humboldt 10. Rosthern 11. Saskatoon Nutana South 12. Saskatoon Nutana Centre 13. 

Saskatoon City Park-University. All held by Members of the Government party. A clean sweep of 13 

seats gained or retained in central Saskatchewan. 

 

The solid centre is the new phrase supplied to this area. There must be a reason for this trend towards 

Liberal strength in central Saskatchewan. The answer, central Saskatchewan is growing up; it is 

becoming industrialized through oil and potash; its new-found prosperity is appreciated by the majority 

of the people of this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Blue collar workers have joined with white collar workers, white hard hats have joined 

with the felt hats of the professional people, the highly mechanized farmers have joined with the 

computer-oriented business men to make sure that the benefits of industrialization will not be lost by an 

election of a Socialist party dedicated to big government and big labor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — The oil workers, the potash workers, the farmers large and small, the city folk, are not 

going to lightly throw away their new-found gains made possible by a Government with a free enterprise 

outlook. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that my constituency of Hanley is a part of that solid Liberal 

centre. 

 

I want to take this opportunity to publicly thank the citizens of Hanley for electing me. Hanley is a 

unique seat. I like to call it a suburban seat. Four-fifths of this seat lies to the south and east of 

Saskatoon; one-fifth lies to the west of the river on the edge of Saskatoon. Hanley is a seat of grain 

farmers and stock farmers, and farming remains its principal industry. But underneath the soil of Hanley 

lies one of the thickest potash veins in the world. Millions of tons of this mineral resource are there, 

waiting to be mined and shipped to areas of the world whose soil will not produce without potassium as 

a fertilizer. 

 

Within the boundaries of Hanley constituency are three potash mines, Duval Corporation located west of 

Saskatoon; the United States Borax and Chemical mine at Allan and Potash of America mine, with two 

shafts ten miles east of Saskatoon. Mining interests from Europe are negotiating for another potash mine 

in the Dundurn area. In addition, Hanley can boast of a cement plant, a chemical plant, a steel 

fabrication plant, within its boundaries. These mines and plants have changed the whole outlook in 

central Saskatchewan. Farm boys work in the mines in the winter time. Families of workers move in 

from every province in Canada looking for housing. The town of Allan has doubled its population since 

1964. The villages of Bradwell, Elstow, Blucher and Vanscoy have grown to the point that they have 

housing problems and are clamouring for sewer and water and natural gas. After years of stagnation 

these towns and villages are modernizing, and rural citizens are beginning to enjoy a share of the good 

life of their urban cousins. Potash and potash alone has done this, Mr. Speaker. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

146 

How does this all affect taxes? The result is a much more broadly based tax structure for rural 

municipalities in this area. The rural municipality of Blucher has two mines within its boundaries, the 

rural municipality of Cory has one. These mines have brought problems with them, problems of new 

roads, better roads, paved roads, better road maintenance. Rural municipal councils have to wrestle with 

these new problems, but I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that they would never want to go back to the status of 

no mines and no problems. One particular problem facing these councils is the sharing of what is terms 

windfall taxation from potash mines. This problem will be worked out and the Government has 

indicated in the Speech from the Throne that it will assist. But is it not better to have to share excess 

taxation than to have no tax money at all? I only emphasize this, Mr. Speaker, to show the contrast 

between the new industrial solid centre of Saskatchewan and its position of immobility during the CCF 

regime. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — There are 10 municipal councils within the Hanley seat, each with problems of its own. 

I am happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that since my election to this House, I have attended the council 

meetings of seven of these rural municipalities and will attend the other three as soon as time permits. I 

feel, Mr. Speaker, that it is at this level of local government that we legislators are confronted with the 

real problems. Local councils are the grass-roots of our governing bodies. For example, three 

municipalities are meeting to explore the possibility of amalgamating, doing this on their own accord, 

setting up continuing committees to carry it through – a far cry from the county system which the 

previous Government tried to impose from the top. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — I daresay, there will be a move for more amalgamation of rural municipalities, a 

genuine attempt to bring more efficiency to local government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn to development of another kind in Hanley constituency. I refer to the opening 

of the Gardiner Dam and Diefenbaker Lake. As a result of this, the central part of the Hanley seat has 

become a network of reservoirs and canals. Broderick, Brightwater, Blackstrap, Bradwell, and all 

reservoirs on this new waterway. The Blackstrap reservoir, lying between Hanley and Dundurn is a 

veritable man-made lake, three quarters of a mile wide and 9 miles long, a boon to recreation for the 

citizens of Hanley and the citizens of Saskatoon. 

 

The Department of Natural Resources has laid out a five-year program to develop the Blackstrap into a 

playground which will only be 25 miles from Saskatoon by a four-lane divided highway. Already a 

public park and recreation area has been designated for the east bank and some 700 cottage sites will 

open up for private development on the west bank this spring. The interest in this new recreation area is 

phenomenal. I commend the Government for its vision and foresight in getting this development under 

way in 1968. In addition, the canals will bring life-giving water to thirsty towns and villages presently 

with poor water supplies. Potash mines will draw huge quantities of water used in the mining process. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

147 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne mentions the introduction of French as a language of 

instruction in schools in certain areas where there is a sufficient concentration of French-speaking 

citizens to warrant it. In the light of national events I think this is a good move. In a country where 

one-third of the population speak French I am fully convinced that children in Saskatchewan will derive 

full benefit from speaking two languages from childhood. These French schools will be as great a 

benefit to the English-speaking families as to French-speaking. Would not our university students be in 

greater demand if they were fluent in two of the world’s major languages. I am proud to say that in the 

Hanley seat, the areas around Vonda, Prud’homme and St. Denis are French-speaking communities, and 

a local group of French-speaking citizens is now working with the Department of Education with a view 

of setting up a French language school of instruction, one of three pilot projects in the province. I urge 

the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) to move this project forward with all possible speed. I 

await the outcome with a great deal of interest and excitement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words to my friends across the aisle, those who sit to the left of the 

Speaker. I am not going to chastise them because they are Socialists. As a matter of fact, I know many 

of them, and some are personal friends of mine. I daresay, most of the Opposition Members are sincere 

and dedicated men. I only disagree with their economic views as they apply them to our social structure. 

I just cannot agree with them that the Government can do everything for everybody. I cannot agree that 

government enterprise is better than private enterprise when applied to our total life. I agree, and I think 

most liberally minded people agree, that there are sectors of our economy in which the government must 

take a hand, and use its vast taxing power to supply certain services that people demand in a modern 

industrial state. 

 

A national airline, a national railway, or a pipeline are cases in point. We must have these services to 

survive and compete in world markets and the burden of paying for them must fall equally on every 

taxpayer. The Liberal objective is to allow as much free competition as possible to regulate the law of 

supply and demand. If it fails to properly distribute income, then the government has a duty to step in 

and take a hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) said, in his speech to this House 

yesterday, that he hoped Liberals had a higher motive in life than that of selfishness. I presume he was 

alluding to the profit motive. Is the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw saying that Socialists have a corner 

on virtue? This is the usual type of fuzzy, wool-headed thinking that doctrinaire Socialists indulge in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Liberals are just as dedicated to virtue as Socialists are. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — More, more! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — The difference is that we Liberals are wise enough to harness the latent motive power of 

the profit incentive to 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

148 

propel us forward. This power is there and we may as well use it. I liken it to a jet engine using the hot 

gases from the exploding fuel a second time before they are expelled into the atmosphere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Ours is the most economical way of doing things. It comes back to the old saying, 

―There is nothing wrong with Socialism, except that it won’t work.‖ 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s Ross’s line! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Socialists in action remind me of the line from ―The Rainmaker‖, ―The Preacher was so 

busy talking about what is right that he forgot what is good.‖ 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that to speak in this House is a privilege, a privilege accorded to 

me by the electors of Hanley, a privilege those same electors can take away at the next election if they 

see fit. What the people of Saskatchewan want and the voters of Hanley, in particular, is good 

government, responsible government, government dedicated to progress, equity and sound financial 

policies. To achieve these aims within the ability of our citizens today requires measures that may be 

unpopular in the short run, but correct in the long run. 

 

The Speech from the Throne has indicated policies which will achieve this end. I therefore urge this 

House to adopt the motion before it and defeat the amendment. I will vote accordingly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — I am very pleased at the opportunity to take part in this 

debate. Before I do so I should like to add my words of congratulations to yourself, Sir, on your 

appointment, also my words of congratulations to the mover and seconder of this debate, and as well to 

the new Members who have joined us since the October election on both sides of the House. 

 

Just listening to the Hon. Member from Hanley (Mr. Heggie) who just sat down, points up again some 

of the changes that took place last October. I always had a great respect for the former Member from 

Hanley. However, I think it’s going to be a lot easier to respect the present Member now that he is sitting 

on this side of the House! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — . . . Where you’re standing! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I should like, Mr. Speaker, to report at this time on a number of developments in the 

Department of Education during the past year. Time neither today nor tomorrow will permit me to go 

into all of them, but before doing so I would like to review quickly the scope of the provincial education 

system and some of the growth trends both in diversity and in enrolment 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

149 

figures. As you know, Sir, the Provincial Department of Education is responsible to a degree for the 

elementary and secondary school systems as well as vocational training and of course at the university 

level also. 

 

Now figures for the elementary school enrolment in the Province for the past two or three years are I 

think quite interesting. September 1966, the enrolment in the elementary schools of this province was 

176,900 students. In September of 1967 that figure was 178,600 and the projected enrolment in the 

elementary schools next September of 1968 is 180,000. These figures do indicate levelling off of 

enrolment at the elementary levels of our school systems. However, while enrolments as such are 

levelling off, it does not necessarily follow that classroom requirements for our elementary grades are 

also remaining static or levelling off. 

 

I’m sure that Members on both sides of the House, the rural Members particularly, are well aware of the 

trend to urbanization which is continuing in our province as well as in other parts of Canada. While this 

trend has many implications and has been going on for some time, I only refer to it here insofar as it 

relates to the construction of school facilities. In other words, new classroom space at all levels, the 

elementary particularly, is still being required by our urban boards to meet the increasing number of 

students who show up there each fall for their instruction. 

 

Up until the past year or two, most of the school facilities that were being emptied or left behind as a 

result of this centralization or as centralization progressed, were largely the older types of building 

which in many cases were due for renovation or up-dating, if not complete renewal in any event. 

However, this situation is changing somewhat. We do have some isolated instances at least of new 

facilities being emptied that were built within the last ten years or so and emptied as a result of 

centralization, centralization, perhaps not necessarily at the suggestion of the local board, but at the 

wishes of the local people themselves. It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that the Department is very 

carefully scrutinizing the request of unit boards, particularly for buildings and additional classroom 

space, in some of our smaller urban centres particularly. 

 

It is for this reason also that we are suggesting to any of these unit boards who require additional 

elementary facilities that they very seriously consider the use of portable facilities, facilities, which, after 

they have served usefulness, could easily be moved elsewhere for school purposes or disposed of 

perhaps for other purposes. I am not suggesting that the present trends in population movement will 

necessarily continue. However, I think we would all agree we don’t wish to find ourselves ten or twelve 

years hence with a number of permanently constructed classrooms in the wrong places. 

 

We have already asked a number of school boards to consider the use of portable facilities, particularly 

as I say at the smaller centres and particularly with respect to additions or extensions of elementary 

classroom space. This does not mean, I might point out, Mr. Speaker, as some people think, that such 

facilities cannot be good sound facilities. Many changes in the development and design of these facilities 

have taken place in the last few years in particular. Portables as such are not new in the province. Many 

of our city systems have been and 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

150 

are using such classrooms at a number of their school sites and have been doing so for years. 

 

School boards themselves are very interested in making the best possible use of the tax dollar to provide 

the necessary classroom facilities for our students. I am sure that they will give full consideration to the 

possibilities of good quality portable classroom space in their building program. 

 

Of course another reason why we are closely examining all requests for the construction of new school 

facilities is the current high cost of money. The threat of inflation which we are witnessing, partly as a 

result of heavy public spending of borrowed money, is a further reason. The Premier in his remarks 

yesterday dealt with these two points so I don’t propose to dwell particularly on them today. 

 

The Government will propose certain amendments at this session, Mr. Speaker, which will spell out 

more clearly Provincial authority to make regulations pertaining to the construction and the location of 

new school facilities. I might say that these amendments will not result in any significant changes from 

present practices now adopted by the Department. 

 

The Speech from the Throne also made reference, Mr. Speaker, to legislation which will permit the use 

of French as a language of instruction in certain designated schools. This legislation will be of a 

permissive nature, in that it will allow the Lieutenant Governor in Council to name certain school 

systems, or perhaps I should say particularly certain schools within that system, where French would be 

the language of instruction. The terms and conditions or the controlling regulations have not yet been 

finalized, simply because the whole question is still very much under active study. Departmental 

officials have already met with a number of interested groups who have presented briefs on this subject. 

We are dealing primarily with a group known as the ACFC (Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne). 

I’ll have to be a candidate for one of these schools myself. However, the curriculum and the qualified 

teacher supply and other relevant factors are currently being assessed. One suggestion from Gravelbourg 

College is an example of what is being considered. A curriculum suggestion from the people at 

Gravelbourg would place heavy emphasis on French instruction at the kindergarten and grade I level, 

with a gradual reduction to perhaps half French and half English in grade 6 or in around that area and 

more English than French in the senior grades. I say again, Mr. Speaker, that our policies in this regard 

have not as yet been completely formulated. Policy regulations, it may easily be seen, that might fit the 

Gravelbourg situation could perhaps not well fit the situation in Prince Albert or Regina or elsewhere. 

 

The Government did feel that this was the only way we could make a beginning this year, a beginning, 

Mr. Speaker, which we are very happy to make, and a beginning which we were happy to expedite to 

this session at the request of our Prime Minister during the recent Constitutional Conference in Ottawa. 

 

We have said, and I repeat again, that we in no way envisage setting up an additional school system. 

Economics themselves simply do not allow it. However, at the moment the only real cost that I could 

foresee would be cost associated with texts, curriculum and other such matters. We have said also 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

151 

that we will consider schools in areas where there presently is a high concentration of French-speaking 

people. 

 

We met with a number of groups, the Member who just took his seat in Hanley (Mr. Heggie) mentioned 

a group in his area that has been down to see us and we are working with these people to develop 

regulations that will fit the situation. 

 

I should like for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to turn to comment on curriculum developments. I think 

there is probably no function of the Department of Education as such that has a greater impact on what 

our schools are and what they do and the product they turn out, than the work in curriculum 

development. The very quality of the instructional program can only be as good as the quality of the 

curriculum guidance that we give. I want to tell my Hon. friend from Kelsey (Mr. Messer), who was 

speaking earlier this afternoon, that this Government is interested in all aspects of education, financial as 

well as curriculum and other changes. 

 

I would like to refer just briefly to our approach to curriculum improvements. The implementations of 

programs in divisions 1 and 2 has proceeded to the point where we feel we can seriously begin to try and 

assess the results. I think all programs, I think everyone would agree, should be subjected to the test of 

performance and this one will certainly be no exception. Our officials in co-operation with the teaching 

profession recently instituted an evaluation procedure of the operations of divisions 1 and 2. 

 

In recent years also, Mr. Speaker, there has been a major change in the curriculum for the senior grades, 

as well as for the first six grades. Accompanying this change-over to the many new courses as well as 

new and additional subject materials there has been a change in the grading system, better known to 

most people as the Division System. Revision of the courses at the high school level itself, particularly 

in the technical and vocational end, has been pretty well completed. Last fall new courses for grades 7, 8 

and 9, now known as division 3, were made available to our teachers in the school system of the 

Province. In the meantime these newly developed courses and the programs previously in use will both 

be authorized for use. 

 

This reorganization of the curriculum with the new courses in mathematics, new science courses, 

industrial arts and many other subjects came about under the guidance of two special steering 

committees set up for that purpose. Extensive consultation with trustees, with educators and of course 

with the teaching profession itself at all times, took place during the development of those courses. We 

are tying, I say again, Mr. Speaker, to do everything possible to upgrade the instructional program in our 

school system. 

 

In spite of this there is still, I think, perhaps a good deal of confusion in the minds of many parents 

particularly with respect to what is going on in the changes in the curriculum and the changes in the 

grading system. It is a double change in that we have revisions of different courses, a new curriculum at 

the same time accompanied by a change in the grading system. Despite the tremendous efforts of the 

many people involved in the development and the implementation of these policies, this Government 

felt that further study and continuing study was still required. So that accordingly last 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

152 

December we appointed a special two-man advisory committee to gather information to look into the 

operation of division 3 and division 4. 

 

This committee has begun its work and I must say to date that they’ve proved a great help to me and to 

the Department. They are looking at several main areas with respect to the Division System, the 

additional school building requirement for the implementation of division 3 particularly, the additional 

teacher requirement and the extent of centralization which would be involved to implement the full 

degree of the program in the rural areas particularly. Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few more 

comments on this committee and on other matters tomorrow and at this time I beg leave to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION 
 

ALLOWANCES TO PAID MEMBERS 
 

Moved by Hon. Mr. Thatcher, seconded by Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): 

 

That this Assembly is of the opinion that the recommendation contained in the Culliton Report of 

1962 for a periodic review of allowances paid to Members of the Legislative Assembly, the 

Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition under authority of The 

Legislative Assembly Act, and the salaries paid to the President and Members of the Executive 

Council, should be acted upon forthwith by the establishment of a similar committee to review 

the said allowances and salaries and in addition to review the provisions of The Members of the 

Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, the recommendations of the said committee to be laid 

before this Assembly. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I shall speak only very briefly on this particular 

motion at this time. You may recall, in one of the debates during the last session, I indicated that if this 

party should be returned to power we would look at the matter of Members’ indemnities. And this 

resolution proposes to do precisely that. 

 

It proposes to set up an independent committee, which will review first of all indemnities, and secondly 

the Superannuation Bill. I would remind the House that this matter was last looked at in 1962, five years 

ago. The procedure followed at that time by the Government of the day, was the same as we are 

proposing at this time. The Chairman of an independent committee was Chief Justice Culliton. One of 

the recommendations which were made in 1962 was that there should be a periodic review of this 

particular matter. We are suggesting that such a review should be made this year. I have no hesitation 

whatever in saying as Leader of the Members on this side of the House, that we feel there should be 

some adjustment in the indemnity, and probably in the pensions. I would remind the House that in the 

last five years civil service salaries have gone up anywhere from 20 to 30 per cent. Indeed in some 

categories they’re up, I understand, as high as 35 per cent. When I was looking over the University 

budget a few weeks ago I was quite surprised to 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

153 

find dozens and dozens of professors who are receiving more money than are Cabinet Ministers. Time 

and again we have watched other provinces in the last few years raise indemnities to a point where 

Saskatchewan, I believe, is in the lower category as far as financial remuneration is concerned. Not long 

ago we watched Ottawa raise indemnities from $10,000 to $18,000 a year. I am quite aware that this 

measure may not be popular throughout the province. However I ask myself, ―Is it right?‖ I don’t think 

there is a Member in this House who can’t earn substantially more than they are earning as an MLA. 

 

Therefore we are proposing that a Special Committee be set up again with the Chairman, Chief Justice 

Culliton. Other members of the Committee who have been suggested are Mr. Bill Leonard, the secretary 

of the Civil Service Union; Dean Barber, dean of Commerce, Saskatchewan University; Dean Carlyle 

King, dean of English at Saskatchewan University. It might be that we could find a Conservative farmer. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — There’s none left! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Now my understanding, and no doubt the Leader of the Opposition will explain his 

own party’s position, is that there is support for this resolution on both sides of the House. Perhaps the 

Commission will recommend no change at all, and under those circumstances of course we will not 

move. However, the Chief Justice is prepared to call his Committee into being. They are prepared to 

study this matter in the weeks ahead, once he is notified that the Committee wishes him to proceed. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, as was indicated, I am the seconder of 

the motion and will say only a very few words about it this afternoon. 

 

As the motion indicates this is to be a matter of reviewing the situation. Certainly the idea of the periodic 

review of the remuneration which Members of the Legislature receive is as apt and appropriate as the 

periodic review of wages or salaries or other kinds of remuneration for any other group of people. I 

think it was the Member for Hanley (Mr. Heggie) who in speaking earlier this afternoon mentioned with 

considerable respect the position of Members in this House, that this was a position of very great 

importance. I hope that the people of the province accept that point of view and will continue to accept 

it, I hope that, along with that, they realize that Members can’t be expected to bonus the operation of 

public business out of their own income. When I say bonus I use that word quite seriously. I am quite 

convinced from having talked with many of the Members, with whom I have been associated over a 

period of years, that being a Member of the House does, for some of them at least, mean an economic 

sacrifice. The Premier has referred to that. Regardless of that point, Members spend increasing amounts 

of their time at public business. Certainly it is in order that this be re-examined from time to time. As the 

Premier has said, it is a difficult job for Members of the Legislature. All of us talk from time to time of 

better machinery of doing it, but none of us seem to get around to doing much about creating that better 

machinery. In the end the fact is that we have to make up our own minds on it. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

154 

As I understand the resolution, the Committee will examine, the Committee will report back and the 

specific recommendations, if any, arising out of the report, will come before us in the form of legislation 

or some other form. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 2 – An Act to establish 

the Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, before moving second reading on this Bill, I think a word of explanation is 

in order. The Bill provides for the creation of a Commission to administer the Alcoholism Program of 

this Province. Alcoholism is a condition that has become well known throughout our society, and it has 

become an increasingly serious problem not only in Canada and the United States but throughout much 

of the entire world. It is estimated that there are approximately 15,000 alcoholics in this province. 

Thousands of additional persons such as employers and members of the alcoholics’ families are also 

directly affected. 

 

The Bill contains a definition of alcoholism. I think that, for the purpose of this debate, it will suffice if 

we think of an alcoholic as a person whose drinking habits have become such that they affect his health 

or his social or economic well-being. 

 

Many studies of various kinds have been undertaken to prove that alcoholism is a serious problem and 

that the adverse effect upon health or social or economic well-being, is a grave one, not only for the 

individual person directly involved but for society as a whole. I would like here to point out only a few 

statistics that are to me particularly tragic. In 1965 the consumption of liquor was involved in 18 per 

cent of all automobile fatalities in Saskatchewan – 44 deaths. In the same year, liquor consumption was 

involved in at least 12 per cent of non-fatal automobile accidents – 873 persons. In the fiscal year 

1965-66, 652 diagnosed as suffering from acute effects of alcoholism spent a total of 5,753 days in the 

general hospitals of this province. It is also known that many persons who were treated in hospital under 

a different diagnosis were nevertheless suffering from the effect of alcohol consumption. Many other 

studies have been undertaken in connection with such matters as in employee absenteeism, social aid 

costs, imprisonment for offences relating to alcohol consumption. And in all cases it was generally 

agreed that the results of these studies indicate that alcoholism has a most serious effect upon our 

community, both in terms of human illness, misery, and unhappiness and in terms of cost. 

 

This Province began grappling with this problem in 1953 when the Bureau on Alcoholism was 

established within the then Department of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation. In 1959 this Bureau began 

operating the Alcoholism Counselling and Referral Centre in Regina. This Bureau was transferred to the 

Department of Public Health in November, 1965, because it was recognized that the treatment of 

alcoholics was basically a health problem. Since the transfer, a referral and treatment centre was opened 

in Saskatoon. While this has provided much needed service, it has also helped to highlight the need to 

take more energetic steps to fight this major health problem. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

155 

Accordingly, it was decided to undertake a study in depth of the problem of alcoholism, so that 

recommendations could be developed to allow this problem to be tackled in a more energetic and 

scientific manner. A committee, known as the Minister’s Special Commission on Alcoholism, was 

established on August 24, 1966, to conduct this study. I must give credit to my predecessor, the Hon. 

D.G. Steuart, for initiating this move and setting up the committee. The chairman of this Committee was 

the Chief Justice of Saskatchewan, the Hon. E.M. Culliton. The Committee made various 

recommendations respecting measures to be taken and recommended that the program be administered 

by a Commission. It would have a close working relationship with the Provincial Department of Public 

Health. It is a well-known fact, Mr. Speaker, that in the field of the treatment of alcoholism, the work 

done by members of the Alcoholics Anonymous has been singularly effective. In any province-wide 

program for the control of alcoholism, it is therefore necessary to proceed in close co-operation with the 

members of this organization and the organizations composed of the husbands and wives of AAs. 

 

The Committee’s recommendations, that the program be administered by a Commission has therefore 

been accepted by the Government, since it provides the basis for participation by interested persons. It 

would not be possible to the same extent if the program was government-department operated. The Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, provides for the establishment of a Commission and empowers the Commission to operate 

a program of the kind set out in the Committee’s report. The Bill provides for the Commission to consist 

of between 8 to 12 persons; four of these persons, including the chairman, are to be appointed to hold 

office at the pleasure of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. It is my thought, Mr. Speaker, that it would 

be beneficial to have certain persons appointed who, because of their position, could maintain a proper 

liaison between the Commission and the Departments of Government, including particularly the 

Department of Public Health. These persons should hold office indefinitely and not be subject to the 

provisions of the Bill affecting terms of office and reappointments, as would apply to the other 

members. They would, therefore, in a sense, be ex-officio appointments. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to publicly thank all the members of the 

Study Committee, headed by Chief Justice Culliton, for having served on the Committee. Each member 

spent a great deal of time, not only in serving as a member of the Committee itself, but in serving on 

several sub-committees. I have been impressed with the high quality and soundness of the Committee’s 

report and I know that their recommendations will be a most useful guide to the Government and the 

Commission in the future. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — I think that Members on this side of the House would be 

inclined to agree with the statement in the Throne Speech to the effect that alcoholism must be regarded 

as one of the critical social problems that we face, not only in Saskatchewan, but in other provinces. I 

have had the opportunity to look over the Bill only in a very limited fashion, and I know that other 

Members wished to have a little more time to devote to it. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave at this 

time to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

Thursday, February 22, 1968 
 

 

156 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 3 – An Act to amend 

The South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill is quite a short one and quite a simple one and it is being proposed 

purely for administrative reasons. It is proposed that the number of members on the Board of Governors 

of the South Saskatchewan Centre be increased from seven to nine. It is being recommended so as to 

give more flexibility to the appointment and composition of the board committees. As a consequence of 

this amendment it is also proposed that a quorum of the Board be changed from four to five. The work 

of the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre will grow by leaps and bounds in the next few months in 

spite of what the Members opposite say and think. In addition to the workload of proceeding with the 

Base Hospital, they will be, after April 1st, involved in the operation of the Wascana Hospital, and this 

is a justification, I feel, for the introduction of this Bill. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — I would like to ask the Minister a question before he resumes 

his seat. I wonder if the Minister would, with the permission of the Speaker, comment on whether or not 

he proposes to introduce House amendments or another Bill on the same project, which would deal with 

the question of superannuation of employees who may be transferred from Wascana Hospital to the 

South Saskatchewan Centre. 

 

Mr. Grant: — That will be handled in another Bill. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — People in Regina are very interested in the activities of the 

present board. There are some comments that I would like to make and therefore, I beg leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:43 o’clock p.m. 


