



















































Hansard: March 28, 1968


 
 

 
1462 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

31st Day 

 

Thursday, March 28, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 10 o‟clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

STATEMENT IN PRESS ON ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I want to 

draw attention to a statement in the press to which my attention has been drawn. It is the statement of the 

Premier when he was commenting on the Bill which the Government had planned to introduce with 

respect to advertising of certain alcoholic beverages. In this statement the Premier is quoted as saying 

that some Members of his side wouldn‟t support it and that was his privilege and right. He went on 

however to say that only three or four Members of the Opposition would support it. I want to draw to the 

Premier‟s attention that that statement was made without any knowledge of the facts. He had no way 

whatsoever of knowing what the position of Members of the Opposition was and it is more than a little 

presumptuous, I think, for him to say to the press what the Opposition‟s stand on a particular Bill might 

be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): I didn‟t wish to be presumptuous but I had talked to some Hon. 

Members in the Opposition and that is what they indicated. In this case perhaps I knew about as much 

about it as did the Hon. Leader. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: Mr. Speaker, this of course is the usual kind of statement which comes from the Premier. He 

knew nothing except a little bit of rumor he picked up in the halls. It was presumptuous of him to make a 

statement on behalf of this group and it is resented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOVER OF RESOLUTION NO. 2 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): Mr. Speaker, I would draw to you attention that Resolution No. 2 was 

moved by Mr. Meakes and not Mr. Messer because, if this Motion is continued with today, Mr. Meakes 

may wish to close the debate. It was Mr. Meakes‟ Motion, not Mr. Messer‟s, as shown on page 5, item 

9, Resolution No. 2 of the Order Paper. 

 



 
March 28, 1968 

1463 

 

Mr. Speaker: According to my records the original Motion was moved by the Member from 

Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). This must be a misprint on the Order Paper. The original Motion according 

to my records was moved by the Member from Touchwood. I‟ll see that it is amended. This would make 

a difference of course to whoever closes the debate. I can assure you that, if this agrees with everybody 

else‟s records, this is what I have here, the Member for Touchwood. I think the other Votes and 

Proceedings will bear this out. I thank the Member for drawing it to my attention. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 8  

CLOSURE OF COMMUNITY HOSPITALS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J. Kowalchuk 

(Melville): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the Government that no community hospitals be closed, 

 

(a) until it has been conclusively established that alternate services will be available on a year-round 

basis; 

 

(b) without prior consultation with hospital boards and communities affected; 

 

(c) without a minimum of 12 months notice; 

 

(d) until alternate use has been found for hospitals which are structurally sound and in a good state of 

repair; 

 

(e) until a thorough study has been conducted into the needs of affected communities, including the 

concentration of senior citizens in the area, travel conditions and distance from alternate hospital 

services, and other pertinent factors. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Melville (Mr. 

Kowalchuk) when speaking to this Motion, I think, must have had his remarks written sometime earlier 

because the points he touched on were not only inaccurate but were certainly not up-to-date. I thought 

surely that he would up-date them or have the author up-date them. He plowed so much old ground, I‟m 

sure that he hadn‟t read my news release of late February when I indicated many of the answers to the 

questions in the Motion and in particular that the date of April 1, 1968 would not be insisted on in 

connection with the closure of some of these hospitals. I also indicated at that time, Mr. Speaker, that no 

hospital would be closed without full consultation and I repeat that again. I stated that alternative 

services would be assured. In spite of 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1464 

this he harped back to the fact that I had stated when meeting the delegation from Neudorf that the 

building was a converted army hut. This was a typographical error in one of the memos supplied to me. I 

corrected it on the occasion of the visit of the delegation and it seemed to me a pretty weak argument to 

use in pointing out that I hadn‟t adequately dealt with this problem. I strongly question the answers that 

he attributed to me, to the inquiries by the members of the delegation. I have minutes kept of that 

meeting and the minutes do not disclose these questions or the answers and I deny in no uncertain terms 

that I said that I put dollars before people. I defy anyone to produce evidence that I made that statement. 

 

I can advise that I am meeting with some considerable success and I publicly thank the people of the 

various hospital boards on the responsible attitude they are taking to a major problem that we have in 

this province. Mr. Speaker, I certainly cannot support the Motion in its present form. I think we must 

work toward a better distribution of our hospital beds and use of our hospital beds, otherwise we are 

guilty of burying our heads in the sand and ignoring a problem that is on our laps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald): 

 

That the words after the word “Assembly” in the first line be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

“commends the Government for, 

 

(a) not closing small community hospitals until alternate service is available on a year-round basis; 

 

(b) rebuilding several of those community hospitals; 

 

(c) consulting with hospital boards and considering community interests in any proposal for closing 

community hospitals; 

 

(d) making provision for a large additional hospital in Regina to serve southern Saskatchewan; 

 

(e) providing for an extension of the University Hospital in Saskatoon, and 

 

(f) instituting the new and centralized teaching program for nurses‟ training. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): I beg leave to move adjournment of the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 1  

HOUSING PROGRAM 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution  



 
March 28, 1968 

1465 

 

by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): 

 

That this Assembly urges the Provincial Government to enlist the support of the Government of 

Canada in developing a housing program particularly for low and medium income families which 

would include: 

 

(1) the establishment of a provincial housing authority; 

 

(2) the provision of funds at a low interest rate for home building; 

 

(3) the establishment of research facilities to develop new and less costly techniques for the 

construction of homes; and 

 

(4) the development of a program which will guarantee the construction of a minimum yearly quota of 

housing for each province in Canada. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words 

concerning Resolution No. 1 and particularly sub-paragraph (1) of this Resolution which deals with the 

establishment of a provincial housing authority. The concept of a provincial housing authority arose in 

the Province of Ontario and has been used in that province for some years. It arose for the reason that 

land costs in that province rose to an extent where in many cases, especially in urban centres, a person 

would build a $17,000 home on an $8,000, $9,000 or $10,000 lot. The housing authority in Ontario 

devised a method by which they could lease a lot to an individual and that individual would then go 

under the NHA and obtain a loan through CMHC. Now my point, Mr. Speaker, is simply this: that in the 

Province of Saskatchewan we have not yet reached a situation comparable to the Province of Ontario. 

We are developing lots in large towns in Saskatchewan, selling at approximately $1,750, and when you 

get to the larger urban centres the price would be somewhere around $2,300. Insofar as the other powers 

of the Ontario housing authority are concerned, they simply deal with providing low-rental housing, 

assembling land and leasing lots. As I have said and the Government‟s submission is simply this: that 

we can do as much without establishing a housing authority under the present CMHC co-operation with 

the Province as we could at this time by establishing such an authority. I feel that to establish a housing 

authority in Saskatchewan today would not provide us with any more housing. Indeed it might just be 

another example of Parkinson‟s law. Insofar as the Province of Alberta is concerned, they established a 

housing authority and limited its purpose to land assembly, low-rental housing, and building houses for 

employees. And we are doing at least as much if not more than the Province of Alberta. The Province of 

Alberta as I said has a housing authority. Insofar as the Province of Manitoba is concerned, while they 

have something comparable to a housing authority, I think it is generally acknowledged that we in 

Saskatchewan are doing considerably more in the field of 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1466 

housing and assembling land than is the Province of Manitoba. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) the following amendment to Resolution No. 

1: 

 

That the words “the establishment of a provincial housing authority” be deleted and that items (2), (3), 

and (4) be renumbered as (1), (2), and (3). 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): Mr. Speaker, I have only a very few brief words to say with 

respect to the amendment that has now been proposed by the Minister for Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey). 

I begin by saying that I regret very much that he has introduced an amendment which will to my mind 

delete from the Resolution one of its most important component parts. I point out to the Minister and to 

the Government that in deleting this part of the Resolution they are passing pre-judgment on one of the 

recommendations of the Batten Royal Commission with respect to this very point. I think it an 

extremely cavalier treatment of a Commission which has labored long and very hard to produce the 

Report that was tabled in this House on March 1. This is yet another indication of the manner in which 

the Government intends to proceed with important matters affecting consumers, including of course, in 

this case, the matter of a housing authority. It‟s pointless in my view for the Minister to say, well, they 

have a housing authority in Ontario, and they created that housing authority because they had some 

difficulties in getting cheap land or relatively cheap land for the erection of houses. That‟s what they did 

in Ontario and therefore there is no need for an authority in the Province of Saskatchewan. I want to say 

that the whole concept of a housing authority is by no means embodied in the simple question of 

attending to serviced land and that housing authorities all over the world have attempted to bring 

together all of the myriad complexities and requirements that attend upon housing needs and bring them 

under one system, one authority that will facilitate the production of all the things that are necessary to 

quicken the movement for new housing, to provide for such things as land assembly, to attend to the 

most important question of research and all of the other segments that are part of the housing 

philosophy. 

 

I point out that the Batten Commission has emphasized the great need for detailed and concentrated 

research in the field of housing construction and in housing itself for that matter. This is certainly one of 

the questions that a housing authority in Saskatchewan should proceed with at the earliest possible 

moment. I spoke of the innumerable matters that have to be bound together in the production of new 

homes as the prime justification for a provincial housing authority. To my mind this is why this part of 

the Resolution proposed is so important. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have been presented with the 

weakest possible argument from the Minister as a defence for the deletion of part (1) of the Resolution 

that has been proposed. 

 

I report what I started with initially, that the Batten 



 
March 28, 1968 

1467 

 

Commission after almost a year of intensive work has made a recommendation to this Government and 

really to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. One of these proposals is for a housing authority; 

and there are many recommendations that are part of this main recommendation with respect to a 

housing authority. But the Government by bringing in this amendment has simply brushed aside and 

brushed off the proposal that has been made by the Commission and is not prepared to apparently 

consider this most vital part of the Commission‟s Report. If for no other reason, Mr. Speaker, it seems to 

me that the amendment that we have before us here this morning stands completely condemned and I 

shall not support it. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): Mr. Speaker, I rise to oppose the amendment which has been 

proposed by the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey). I do that for these reasons, Sir. The 

Economic Council of Canada estimates that one million Canadian families live in substandard housing 

in this nation. Saskatchewan represents about 4.8 per cent of Canada‟s total population. Recognizing the 

Saskatchewan housing problems of our Indian population, the pathetic housing conditions in many of 

our villages and towns, largely unmodern, the number of inadequate and unmodern homes in the 

countryside that still lack modern conveniences, it is reasonable to assume, Mr. Speaker, that at least 

48,000 Saskatchewan families live in substandard housing and perhaps more. Mr. Speaker, in 1966 this 

Legislature passed or adopted The Housing and Urban Renewal Act. In that Act is a provision 

authorizing the Provincial Government to establish a housing authority. Really the amendment proposed 

by the Minister is a negation of its own legislation it introduced in 1966. I regret very much that the 

Minister saw fit to bring that amendment to this Resolution. The Hon. Premier told us earlier that in the 

fiscal year this Government will be constructing 178 low-rental housing units in the province. We then 

heard later the Minister of Municipal Affairs tell us that the Province has entered into agreements with 

CMHC for construction of 34 low-rental housing units in Prince Albert and 78 in the city of Saskatoon. 

That is 66 units less or 59 per cent less low-rental housing units. The Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs 

also told us that the present Budget calls for an expenditure in the current fiscal year of $1,450,000 on 

low-rental housing. Now, Mr. Speaker, I have checked the Estimates that have been presented to us 

during this session. I refer to the Department of Municipal Affairs‟ estimates on page 33. Here is what 

the Estimates say: administration of housing and urban renewal  

$40,000; expenses of maintaining housing construction for re-sale or rental by the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, $14,000; grants to municipalities under The Housing and Urban Renewal Act  

$93,610; subsidies pursuant to Section 5 of The Housing and Urban Renewal Act in respect of low 

rental housing projects  

$43,720. I looked at the Department of Natural Resources under Northern Affairs Branch and under the 

Indian and Metis Branch to see whether an allotment was made for housing there, Mr. Speaker, but not a 

cent has been appropriated at this time in these 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1468 

branches. It appears that the Government has no intention under the Department of Natural Resources‟ 

estimates to spend anything on housing. This Government proposes, Mr. Speaker, to spend only $43,720 

for low-rental housing, not $1,450,000 as the Minister advised this House earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I was to give the Junior Member from Saskatoon some advice I would suggest the he 

should not copy the bad habits of gross exaggeration of some of his colleagues, if he wants to gain the 

respect of this Legislature and the people of Saskatchewan. There is no better rule to follow than to be 

honest. He shouldn‟t be announcing projects of $1½ million, when in fact the expenditures of this 

Government for low-cost rental housing will only be $43,000 in the coming year as provided for in the 

Estimates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada including the Province of Saskatchewan has a critical housing situation. 

Governments at every level, Federal, Provincial and municipal, in smug voices pronounce that the 

problem is either not serious as we have just heard the Minister say and claim for that the reason he 

moved the amendment or they say that someone else is to blame. They pass legislation: we hold 

meetings and conferences; but nothing is happening. Day by day, Mr. Speaker, the housing situation in 

this country is getting worse. In the last 10 years the purchase price of an average home has gone up by 

40 per cent and payments have doubled. The cost of the average residential housing lot has at least 

doubled in price in the cities over the last 10-year period, and in some cities it has increased by as much 

as 500 per cent. For the Minister to say that in our cities we can easily buy lots for $2,300. I challenge 

his figures, I know that in this city there are lots in some areas that are costing as much as $6,000 and 

more. 

 

Let us, Mr. Speaker, examine a few facts about why Canada faces a housing crisis. More than half of our 

dwellings predate 1945. Some 20 per cent of Canada‟s homes lack adequate toilet and bath facilities. 

Saskatchewan‟s percentage is I submit a good deal greater. Since 1957 interest rates under NHA have 

gone up from 5½ per cent to 8 5/8 per cent, an increase of almost 57 per cent within a 10-year period. 

Total monthly payments for principle, interest and taxes on the average home in a 10-year period went 

up from $90 a month to $180 a month, an increase of 100 per cent. In order to carry an NHA mortgage 

payment under The National Housing Act you need an income of $8,000 a year. We find that 80 per 

cent of Canadians who are married earn much less than this. The latest available average family income 

shows that average Canadian‟s earnings were only $5,939. The Economic Council of Canada report tell 

us that to keep up with the pace of housing demands, we should have been building as of last year 

190,000 homes until the year 1970 then have increased the figure to 200,000. However, last year Canada 

only built 150,000 homes. We fell further behind. 

 

The Canadian Welfare Council tells us that 50 per cent of Canadians need some public assistance to 

obtain decent shelter. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1469 

 

Yet in Canada in total there are only 50,000 publicly owned low-rental units, less than one per cent of 

the Canadian dwellings. The Minister of Municipal Affairs tells us that at present there are 600 odd low-

rental units in the province. Mr. Speaker, 575 of these were built, planned, or on the verge of completion 

under the CCF Administration. These facts are substantiated by the Departmental Annual Reports 

submitted by this Government. I ask the Minister to be also honest with these figures. I am not going to 

say that more should not have been done by the former Government in the area of low-cost housing and 

in subsidized housing. 

 

There is, however, one important thing to remember: it was not until 1964 that the Federal Government 

passed legislation making it possible for provincial and municipal governments to approach the housing 

problem with new vigor, since more money was made available and larger responsibility was assumed 

by the Federal Government as of June, 1964. I ask the Minister in charge of housing to stop telling us 

tall stories that are out of school. The truth is that since 1964 this Government has done virtually nothing 

in the field of housing. It passed an Act which provided for the establishment of a Housing Authority. 

Up until now we have not seen the establishment of a Housing Authority and from what the Minister is 

proposing in his present amendment it is obvious that this Government, despite the legislation it passed 

in 1966, intends to do nothing in acting on the legislation it passed for the establishment of a Housing 

Authority. 

 

The brutal truth is that neither the Liberal Government in Ottawa nor the Liberal Government in 

Saskatchewan has any meaningful policy, any meaningful approach or has any intention to deal with the 

housing problems that the people of this province and throughout the nation are facing. Canada prized 

itself on being the second or third richest nation in the world, but it stands twelfth among the western 

nations in the ratio of housing starts to population growth. We are far behind Britain and Sweden  

these Socialist countries  

we are behind West Germany, we are not even up to Italy and France. This country and this Province 

has all the resources needed to provide our people with the best housing that may exist anywhere in the 

world. We have the labor force; thousands of construction workers are presently unemployed, yes, right 

here in the Province of Saskatchewan. We have the land, millions of acres of land, we have the lumber, 

cement, bricks, steel, glass, each and every product needed to build houses. Not a single item needs to be 

imported for housing construction because we produce or manufacture right here in the Dominion of 

Canada every item that is needed. House building is a great job creator as I believe everybody knows. It 

has been estimated by the Federal Government that every home built provides two and one-half full-

time jobs for one year. Now the politician‟s answer or the Liberal Politician‟s answer to this is: while it 

is true that we have the resources and that jobs are created through housing construction, the big 

problem is money. Who is going to pay for this? Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the Ottawa bureaucrats put it 

this way: “The 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1470 

trouble with you people who are so quick to criticize is that you don‟t understand the beautiful 

complexities of the situation.” Now, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I don‟t understand the beautiful complexities, 

but I do understand the ugliness of slums. I understand that it is not healthy to live in a shack, it is 

immoral for a nation with all its resources to have one million of its families living in substandard 

housing. Mr. Speaker, it has been proven ten times over that slums breed crime, juvenile delinquency, 

premature school dropouts and other social problems. I understand that as a nation socially economically 

and morally, we cannot afford to sit on our hands any longer and hope that the problem will disappear, 

because it will not disappear. 

 

What about this question of money, Mr. Speaker? Well, you know when the Premier of Saskatchewan 

decided that we must have a pulp mill in Saskatchewan he did not hesitate to give $3 million of 

Government funds to his American corporation private enterprise friends to start the pulp mill. Nor did 

he hesitate in persuading the Liberals in Ottawa to donate another $5 million of Government funds. He 

did not even bat an eye in guaranteeing a $50 million loan to his New York Wall Street pals. Then he 

gave them millions of acres of forest and agreed that the Government will subsidize the wood cutting 

operation. This he tells us is good for the people of Saskatchewan. When he made the pulp mill 

announcement in this Legislature he said, “We are very proud of the fact that 1,500 men will be 

employed in the construction phase of the plant. Once it is operating there will be 500 men in the plant 

and about 3,000 out in the woods.” In the July and August issue of the Government‟s publication, 

“Saskatchewan Today”, the report states that the pulp plant when completed will employ 350 men in the 

mill and another 650 in the woodlands operation. Informed sources tell us that perhaps half the number 

of the revised figures would be more accurate. Mr. Speaker, if it is good business for the Federal 

Government and for the Provincial Government collectively to give $8 million for the construction of a 

pulp mill I say, Mr. Speaker, that we should be looking for that kind of money for housing construction. 

If it is good for the people of Saskatchewan to back up a $50 million loan for the pulp mill, I say, Mr. 

Speaker, it would be a good thing for the Provincial Government to guarantee loans equal to that amount 

for housing construction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: Mr. Speaker, I have said that in Saskatchewan we need approximately 48,000 homes to 

overcome the substandard housing conditions in the province. If $58 million, an amount equal to the 

grants by the Federal and Provincial Governments and loans as in respect to the pulp mill, were granted 

for housing, it would provide $12,000 for each unit. It would create, Mr. Speaker, 12,000 full-time jobs 

over a 10-year period, and that‟s a lot of work. If Parsons and Whitmore are a good and desirable 

financial risk, I believe the people of Saskatchewan are equally as good a risk. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1471 

 

It‟s all a matter of value and where we want to place our priority. There is never a shortage of money for 

highways, for new plants and for things, or funds for research in those fields, but there is never money 

for housing and for people. Perhaps this is what the man meant when he said, “You don‟t understand the 

beautiful complexities of the situation.” Walter Steuart of the Star Weekly answered it this way, “I 

don‟t, but I do understand that the one of richest countries in the world is unable to shelter its citizens in 

a decent fashion, that despite our wealth, our resources, our advanced technology, we have failed in the 

basic function of civilization. I understand that and I am angry about it.” 

 

I also understand that this Saskatchewan Liberal Government has refused to take advantage of reducing 

rental rates announced by the Government of Canada as of February, 1967. On the average it represents 

$16 per month reduction to each renter. I understand, Mr. Speaker, that other Provinces have taken 

advantage of the reduction and have passed this on to the people. I know that the people of Greer Court 

and Regent Park in Regina understand that this Government has no intention of reducing their rent even 

though the Federal Government is prepared to pick up 75 per cent of any subsidy. Mr. Speaker, I want 

this House to understand that on September 13, 1967, I wrote to the Minister of Municipal Affairs, then 

Mr. McIsaac, asking the Government to reduce rental rates. Here is part of his answer. He said, “The 

question of the adoption of the new rental rates is being considered at this time.” Mr. Speaker, I would 

like you to take note of Sessional Paper No. 41, given to me by the present Minister responsible for 

housing and take note of this: seven months later than I wrote to the former Minister, or 13 months later 

after the Federal Government announced and introduced a reduction in low-cost rental rates. The answer 

given in this House, “The Government of Saskatchewan has this matter under consideration.” They were 

considering the matter on September 13: it is still considering the matter on February 29. 

 

I ask this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, to reject the amendment that has been proposed by the Minister. I 

urge the Minister to also reconsider his position, I urge him to establish a Housing Authority provided in 

The Housing and Urban Renewal Act enacted in 1966. The housing situation in Saskatchewan is urgent. 

We should be taking action. We should be adopting the Resolution originally proposed by the Hon. 

Member North West (Mr. Whelan). I urge this Government to get going on the important question of 

housing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words in this 

debate at this time, I hadn‟t intended to get involved particularly. However, after listening to my Hon. 

Friend from Regina North East in his remarks, I should like to point out some of the things that this 

Government has been doing in the field 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1472 

of housing. I should refer him back to the remarks made in the Budget debate by the Hon. Provincial 

Treasurer, (Mr. Steuart). I think possibly I should read some of them to him and some of the figures in 

the Estimates, because either he misunderstood or didn‟t read all of the Estimates to gather the full 

information as to the money that is being devoted to housing this year. Advances for subsidized rental 

housing projects 1968-69 are to be $1.4 million and the advances for land assembly projects $625,000. 

The Government program for assistance to housing for Indian people and people of Indian ancestry is to 

be continued again in this coming year. We certainly on this side of the House recognize the need for 

more housing in this province, in this whole country, for cheaper housing, if possible, Mr. Speaker. We 

recognize that interest rates are too high for many people. This we are in complete agreement with. I 

suggest that my friends in the Opposition are misinterpreting the object of the amendment here. All we 

are saying in the amendment is that we do not believe that the creation of another Crown Corporation is 

necessarily the answer to the housing problem in this province or in any other province. I would like to 

just refer to the Resolution that we are debating, “That the Assembly urge the Provincial Government to 

enlist the support of the Government of Canada in developing a housing program particularly for low 

and medium income families.” This we are in support of, which would not include the establishment of 

a Provincial Housing Authority. I include the establishment of a Provincial Housing Authority. I say 

again, Mr. Speaker, we have in years past established a Provincial Housing Branch, which in my opinion 

can do more effectively all of the work than is possible by the establishment of another great Crown 

Corporation for the sake of building houses. All we are asking here is that the first part of the present 

Motion be deleted. Now secondly, the provision of funds at a low-interest rate for home building is 

something that I am sure most Members on this side are very sympathetic to. As I say we recognize that 

the interest rates for many people having to borrow for building houses today are certainly too high. I 

think we recognize also the great difficulties of the Federal Government and of this Government in 

trying to do something effective about this particular problem at this time. Now the establishment of 

research facilities to develop new and less costly techniques for the construction of homes is something 

that we have been urging. We have urged the CMHC, we have urged the construction people  

something again that we are in complete support of. Thirdly, the development of a program which will 

guarantee the construction of a minimum yearly quota of housing for each province in Canada. This 

again is something I am sure would have the support of almost all the Members on this side of the 

House. Here again I would remind Hon. Friends opposite and the Members of the House that this year 

starts in housing construction in this Province were above those of last year. The increase was greater 

than in most other provinces. As I say we do not see that the establishment of another Crown 

corporation, a Provincial Housing Authority as such, is necessarily the answer to the housing problems 

faced by this province. The mover of the Motion, the Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) 

when he moved this Motion earlier in this House, referred to a survey 



 
March 28, 1968 

1473 

 

that this Government initiated earlier last year. And he rather made light of the survey. I want to refer 

back. I can‟t recollect at the moment all of the results of that survey particularly, but we had been 

hearing a lot about housing at that time. It was very pertinent of course, it was the political thing to be 

doing  

newspapers, everybody was talking about housing and the tremendous need for housing, so we initiated 

a survey with the towns, the villages, the cities of the province to find out first of all if there was a 

housing shortage or a severe need for any particular type of housing in each of these various 

communities. I think Members will be interested to know that we got replies to almost all of the 

questionnaires that we sent out. Generally speaking, many of the municipal councils affected felt that 

they had no particular problem insofar as housing was concerned, especially in the towns of the 

province. Now the cities had different problems and of course here you are looking at a picture that is 

more comparable to the national picture in housing. But I want to say that I will take the word of the 

municipal officials of this province a good deal more quickly than I will the word of Members opposite, 

when they start talking about the tremendous needs of housing in many of the places in this province. 

Housing starts are up in many of the towns that we surveyed. Many of the towns that sent replies to that 

survey said that they would like to see Department officials out to discuss low-rental housing, to discuss 

the construction of housing for sale and various other programs. All of these requests were followed up. 

The Department officials did go out and contact them and in many cases today there are programs either 

underway for land assembly or other such programs as a result of that particular survey. I want to 

suggest again, Mr. Speaker, that since we‟ve taken office, the municipalities of this province have 

become much more aware and much more conversant with and much more active in housing programs, 

and in Federal regulations respecting housing programs than they were ever afforded the opportunity 

when Members opposite were in the Government. 

 

Friends opposite made reference to the Batten Commission Report. I would just like to refer to a page or 

two of this Report now. This Report has been under preparation for a long period of time, and I think 

most of that time I was the Minister of Municipal Affairs and in charge of the Housing Branch. Despite 

the reference to the Report to the advisability of establishing a Housing Authority in the Province, to my 

knowledge and to the knowledge of my officials or my former officials, I should say nobody from the 

Batten Commission ever approached the Department of Municipal Affairs and the Housing Branch to 

see what this Government was doing in the field of housing. So in this respect (incidentally, as well as in 

a number of other respects) I very much question the validity of this particular statement. The Report 

itself states that “The Commission could not, within the limits set by time, money and other obligations 

carry out an adequately detailed study of local conditions.” This referring to housing . . . “As with so 

many studies of housing before this one, the results of the Commission‟s inquiries were not highly 

productive of specific insights into how to improve the operations of the housing market.” My friends 

opposite, despite 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1474 

all of their comments and their remarks on this debate, haven‟t really put forward any concrete answers 

to the housing problem in this country today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment to this Resolution. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): Mr. Speaker, I oppose the amendment 

simply because it indicates that this Government is not very much concerned with housing. I grant that 

you have the Department of Natural Resources and other departments that have been doing a little bit of 

work in that direction and some research. They have given some assistance in grants, but if you look at 

the picture of housing across the Province of Saskatchewan, I think it could be said that it is tragic. 

When there‟s reference being made to the Batten Commission, then surely the Batten Commission who 

made the studies was able to assemble this information and put it on the records. Now I do not need to 

repeat what I‟ve said over the years. There has been an ARDA report for my part of the province which 

indicated that some 80 per cent of the homes in the rural areas weren‟t fit for people. The Minister gets 

up to tell this House that the programs of this Government have been satisfactory. I‟d like to point out as 

I pointed out previously that in the city of Prince Albert, part of which I represent, particularly the north 

part and certainly some of the east part of the city are a disgrace to Canada. It can only be said without 

any insult to the people there, because they can‟t help themselves, that it is a city of shacks. That‟s what 

it is, and you can find these kind of communities across Saskatchewan. On one hand we have a 

Government that‟s been talking about the tremendous growth of industry and all the money everyone is 

making, and yet we find such tragic housing in the Province of Saskatchewan. Granted the Government 

has done a few things, but the Motion was moved in order that we get some organization that‟s going to 

start doing something about housing. When we asked how many houses have been built for the needy 

people in the far north, the answer has been one or two. We find for example in Lac LaRonge in the 

constituency of my Hon. Friend from Athabasca, certain teachers needed accommodation and the 

Government had to go ahead and subsidize housing, paying about $150 for a suite and only receiving 

$60 from the teacher. Wouldn‟t it be better if we had a setup whereby a study could be made and 

something could be done to provide houses for these teachers? Wherever you look you find that there is 

a tremendous need for housing whether under this Government or former Governments. To this extent 

we have failed in the Province of Saskatchewan. I can only refer you, with all sincerity to what the 

Batten Commission said, the Commission appointed by this Government. If you look at the bottom of 

page 230 in the middle of the last paragraph, you‟ll see it says this: 

 

Solution to the problems presented by housing requires the continued study and action of some body 

capable of taking a large, but specifically regional view and of stimulating the necessary actions and 

reactions, often 



 
March 28, 1968 

1475 

 

in advance of the emergence of the problem as an overt concern. 

 

In June, 1967, the Government of Manitoba created the Manitoba Housing and Renewal Corporation 

with wide statutory powers. A similar authority, called the Alberta Housing and Urban Renewal 

Corporation, was established in Alberta in the spring of 1967. To date both of these have concerned 

themselves mainly with the financial arrangements for projects initiated by others. This is much too 

narrow a view to take of the responsibility of a provincial agency in the field of housing. It goes on, and 

I‟m not going to read more; Hon. Members have the Report. I refer them to the Report and to read those 

two pages and you‟ll come to the conclusion, as I have come that the program of housing is not 

satisfactory in this province and that the Government isn‟t doing what it should be doing. Therefore I 

would hope that you would vote against this amendment and pass the Motion in the original form, so 

that maybe we can get a body, whether it‟s a Crown corporation or whatever it may be, that would 

interest itself sufficiently enough that we can get some kind of program going in this Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I certainly am against the amendment. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Motion to adjourn agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  

30 

 

Thatcher Coderre Weatherald 

Howes Bjarnason Mitchell 

McFarlane MacDonald Larochelle 

Cameron Estey Gardner 

Steuart Hooker Coupland 

Heald Gallagher McPherson 

McIsaac MacLennan Charlebois 

Guy Breker Forsyth 

Loken Leith McIvor 

MacDougall Radloff Schmeiser 

 

NAYS  

23 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Kramer Romanow Bowerman 

Willis Smishek Matsalla 

Wood Thibault Messer 

Blakeney Whelan Kwasnica 

Davies Snyder Kowalchuk 

Dewhurst Michayluk  

 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1476 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE  

LOUDSPEAKERS 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege before we proceed with the 

next Motion, I understand and I may be mistaken in this, Mr. Speaker, because again I have no direct 

knowledge, but I understand that in the Government Members‟ lounge there is a loudspeaker 

broadcasting proceedings of this House. Now if this is so, Mr. Speaker, we certainly haven‟t the same 

privilege on our side. If they are entitled to it, if they can have a loudspeaker there, I‟m just raising this 

as a matter of privilege that we should have the same facilities on our side. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Well I‟ll have the matter under investigation and I thank the Member for bringing it to my 

attention. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 5  

INTER-SESSIONAL COMMITTEE  

ELECTION ACT 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. R. Romanow 

(Saskatoon Riversdale): 

 

That this Legislature recommend to the consideration of the Government the immediate establishment 

of an Inter-sessional Committee of this Legislature, with such powers and authority as may be 

necessary, to review and recommend to this Legislature amendments to The Election Act. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): Mr. Speaker, I‟ll admit to the House before I start my address that it is 

with some trepidation that I enter this debate. I have never had any legal training and I‟ve never 

considered that I have a really legally oriented mind. However, I feel I do qualify from the standpoint of 

the school of hard knocks for the last 28 years in the political arena. I‟m sorry but I have to say that 

during those turbulent years, statesmanship has not been the quality uppermost in the political forces that 

I have had to deal with. But be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, I do have some very decided criticisms of 

The Election Act as it is presently written. I happen to be one of those people, and I am speaking 

absolutely for myself who were sorry to see the former Attorney General‟s Election Act terminated. I 

feel it could have been improved rather than destroyed. The great cry that election results were delayed 

is not necessarily a valid one. To me it is not necessarily just speed that counts, but that justice, fair play 

and all-around opportunity should be given for full and complete expression of the electorate. I feel that 

with all its shortcomings that Act did just this. I‟m sure that the future will see a return of some of the 

cardinal principles of that Election Act. That be as it may, I wish to confine myself to the present Act 

which to me is as flagrant in its shortcomings as the former Act. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1477 

 

May I start with Section 80. Any of you who have The Elections Act may look up the section I refer to. I 

am not intending to delay the House by reading them. Section 80 reads quite simple and straightforward, 

yet of all the sections in this Act, Mr. Speaker, that were broken and disregarded and openly defied in 

the last election  

this one was the worst. Candidate‟s representatives objected to a voter on the strength of this section 

only to have a DRO simply say to the voter, “Are you prepared to sign a declaration?”, and the objection 

was immediately overruled. It is no use talking about suing officials or voters. If those breaking this 

section, knowingly or otherwise in the October election, had been prosecuted, the courts would be 

running for a full year, Mr. Speaker, if they undertook to fine every voter who broke this particular 

section and every DRO also who made some doubtful interpretation of it, the position would be 

impossible. In one case when my own representative objected to a voter on Section 80, the DRO simply 

said that she  

that is the DRO  

had been told to let everything through. I ask the question: told by who  

the Liberal organizer, returning officer, Liberal constituency executive or Liberal candidate? I defy even 

the Attorney General to ferret out a problem like this and bring down justice. Mr. Speaker, the fact of 

eligible voters voting in a poll other than their own poll does not affect the outcome of the total votes, if, 

of course they only vote once. But I submit, Mr. Speaker, that the only simple honest answer to this 

problem is that all declared ballots be put in envelopes. I say again, Mr. Speaker, this section in the 

October 11, 1967 election was a pure farce. 

 

Again in Section 86, subsection (2) we have a reference to the privilege of a candidate or his 

representative to require a vote to sign the declaration. And you‟re back at the self-same place. The 

DRO must do this on the threat of a penalty which is, I think, as it ought to be. But again this guarantees 

a candidate nothing; the ballot is irretrievable. Suing a voter or a DRO means little except to those who 

get a great deal of enjoyment out of vengeance. Let me repeat. There is only one answer and that is, if 

we are going to have declared ballots, they must go into envelopes. Let me illustrate. The Liberal 

application for a recount following the 1967 October election was based by and large on unopened 

hospital ballots by people who had no right to vote, votes, Mr. Speaker, which when the Liberals finally 

got to the recount, they dare not open. Had these votes not been in envelopes they would have been 

counted and all the expensive painful procedures of the courts would not have altered the vote one jot or 

one tittle. What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that all the penalties and the possibilities of court 

proceedings don‟t change what has been done so far as the candidate is concerned. This is what I object 

to and I reiterate once more that, unless declared ballots are going to go into envelopes, there is always 

going to be a great source of injustice and annoyance and difficulty. 

 

Again, to me, Mr. Speaker, as a layman, there appears to be a certain amount of woolly thinking and 

fuzzy writing in the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1478 

sections pertaining to when or when not I or someone else may be a candidate. First let me point out that 

in Section 49, the nominating of a candidate does not state that the signers of a nomination paper must 

be electors. It only states that the witness must be. It is only in the nomination paper, the form itself, that 

this is suggested. It is not a statement, it is a suggestion. However, Section 165, dealing with what a 

candidate may or may not do for the purpose of promoting the election, specific periods before or after 

the issuance of writs or between official nomination and polling day. Just imagine my own position in 

1940 when I was a candidate for four years according to my party, four years that I waited for a 

frightened Liberal Government to call an election. Again in Section 168, covering wagers or bets, it says 

before or during election without any qualifications of the particular time whatever, be it from two 

months before the writs are issued, be it between the writs and official nomination, or be it between 

official nomination on polling day. Yet by Section 166, one would be left with the impression that, if he 

had barely looked in at the door of a nominating convention, he would be tied by all the Don‟ts of that 

section even should an election be four years away. 

 

In Section 65, does a hotel room constitute a residence? If so, when? In Section 66, does contribution to 

a religious society mean my weekly offering to my church? If it doesn‟t, why doesn‟t it state so? If it 

does, how ridiculous can we get? Section 170 says a person is not allowed to give meat, drink or 

refreshments on nomination day. Mr. Speaker, I want to know, what nomination day? The day I was 

nominated by my party or the official nominating day following the issuance of the writs? I would say 

official nomination day, but when I read Section 166, I don‟t know what it means to be sure. To me the 

rational and logical approach is that legally one is not a candidate, at least until after the writs for an 

election are issued, and maybe not until after official nomination day. I don‟t know. 

 

In Section 170, I get further confused regarding the intent on nomination day. Not so much in the section 

itself but when taken together with other sections, some of which I referred to, it is confusing to a 

layman. I say this knowing full well that our legal minds may think otherwise. All I am asking, Mr. 

Speaker, is that many of these sections be clarified so that the laymen, that we are putting into official 

positions on election day, are able to read this thing and understand it and know what it means. 

 

In Section 135, there are two days allowed following a recount for an appeal. I‟m not sure that this is 

sufficient. As I looked at it this year when I was the one that was waiting for those two days to lapse, it 

seemed enough, but when I turn around and look at it from the other person‟s position I‟m not sure that 

it is. The question arises then; is two days a long enough period to consider the question for an appeal 

following a recount? On the other hand it seems to me that following a recount and the gathering of 

information by the elected Members and the gazetting 



 
March 28, 1968 

1479 

 

of the elected Members, that a month‟s time as set out in The Controverted Elections Act before even a 

notice of intent to apply for an application, is far too long a period. 

 

I have one other serious quarrel with The Controverted Elections Act. I see no reason why the candidate 

holding the election by a narrow margin should be made responsible for the votes that are considered to 

have been illegal or the voters who had no right to vote. If I am holding election, we‟ll say by a majority 

of 15, and the Judge says there are 15 or there are 16 people who were not qualified to vote, I don‟t 

consider it justice that the election should be thrown out. How can anyone tell for whom the 15 votes 

were cast. In all probability half of them were for the winning candidate. I submit, Mr. Speaker, unless 

there is some better idea, that in close election the unopened votes should be divided on the same 

percentage by which the candidate won the election. I say that, whether I am the winning candidate, or 

whether my opponent is. I feel very strongly, Mr. Speaker, about the amendments to The Election Act. 

As I said at the opening, over the years I have had to deal with and fight against, many of the sections of 

the Act which seemed very confusing and unfair, not just to me but to many, many of our laymen, some 

of them much more able than I am to deal with legal matters. 

 

There is one other thing that I am concerned with. I consider that the group responsible for the 

mechanics and the operation of elections should have to take more responsibility for the irregularities 

and the things that their own officers and their own appointees do or fail to do. It is not good enough. 

What happened on October 11, 1968? The gate was opened for all kinds of irregularities and as soon as 

it was over, the people who lost started gathering all the irregularities together that they themselves were 

responsible for, in an endeavor to carry the election into a controverted position. I say, Mr. Speaker, it is 

time, be it our side, or the other side, that the party responsible for operating the mechanics of election 

should have to take more responsibility for what has happened during that election. 

 

I am not going to take anymore time of the House as I am sure that there are others who are going to 

speak on this question, maybe with more clarity and a better understanding of all that is involved. But 

these are some of the problems that have troubled us especially in elections that are close. In fact, if an 

election isn‟t close there is no difficulty about it. As one, Mr. Speaker, who has lost a great deal of 

perspiration and worry over the years, I maintain that it is high time that there is some clarification on 

some of these sections and some of them should be rewritten. Mr. Speaker, I shall support the Motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): Mr. Speaker, in rising to support the Resolution proposed by the 

Hon. Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1480 

I do so with full knowledge and conviction that the present Act has its inadequacies and legal loopholes, 

if one looks for them as has been evident during the elections of 1964 and 1967, under a Liberal 

Government. 

 

An Election Act, Mr. Speaker, that had served adequately the electors of Saskatchewan for some 16 or 

20 years and in five consecutive elections under the CCF collapsed totally in 1964 with the election of 

the present Liberal Government. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): It was your Act. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: Now, Mr. Speaker, in the legal and technical involvement in the Hanley constituency 

after the 1964 election, the Premier gave his reasons for the undue delays of electing a candidate. His 

reasons were reported in the Saskatoon Star Phoenix of November 6, 1964, and may I quote: 

 

Thatcher blames election setup for delay in Hanley. 

 

Premier Ross Thatcher charged here Thursday night that the long delay in settling results of the 

disputed Hanley constituency is due to the “inefficient, clumsy, cumbersome” election machinery set 

up by R.A. Walker, former CCF-NDP Attorney General. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members are aware that it was this Attorney General who was involved in this 

election. To quote further from the same press release, I want to quote in part: 

 

Mr. Thatcher noted that Mr. Walker and W.S. Lloyd, leader of the opposition were „now clamoring for 

changes in the Election Act. 

 

„Yet year after year when they were the government they refused to take action to remedy its defects. 

And year after year, when we were the official opposition we asked them to do so.‟ 

 

I will come to the point where the present Government and the present Premier did have a hand in 

changing and amending The Election Act which was according to his words, “cumbersome, clumsy and 

inefficient.” 

 

Mr. Heald: We improved it and you voted for it. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: Need I mention, Sir, that numerous other worthwhile and beneficial social 

achievements, not only The Election Act, have completely or partially collapsed as props were being 

knocked out. Their future under the Liberal Government in the new Saskatchewan is somewhat clouded 

with uncertainty and not only The Election Act. The Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) 

the other day appeared to be concerned that, if this 



 
March 28, 1968 

1481 

 

Legislature recommends to the Government the establishment of an Inter-sessional Committee, with 

powers and authority as may be necessary to review and to recommend to this Legislature amendments 

to The Election Act, it is something out of the ordinary. What are his misgivings, Mr. Speaker? Why and 

over what is the Member so concerned? Is the Minister concerned because an Inter-sessional Committee 

may, as it should, come up with recommendations for amendments that will make it possible for our 

democratic elections and the results to be achieved without prolonged litigations, court procedures, and 

the use, as the Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) mentioned the other day, of some smart lawyers 

or legal advice? My area of concern, Mr. Speaker, is not whether or not a political party can obtain a 

good legal talent. And, of course, most of them are I must admit. My area of concern is that the wishes 

and the will of the majority be bowed to and assented to by all political parties concerned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: In the words of some of the Hon. Members opposite, “We put people before politics.” 

To me, Sir, the expressed will of the electorate by a majority vote is the basis of our democratic system. 

It is only too evident, Mr. Speaker, that serious breakdowns in The Election Act appeared after the 1964 

election. Hon. Members will recall that the Canora constituency after the 1964 election had several 

hundred ballots cast by duly qualified voters and remain uncounted until this day. Canora constituency 

was represented in this Legislature by a Member during four sessions whose election in the minds of 

many people was in doubt. There were several other constituencies where the vote was so close that 

Members who were elected were left with uncertainties as to their position as Members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the first session of the 15th Legislature, in the spring of 1964, the Hon. Premier 

speaking in this Legislature made reference to The Election Act changes as proposed in the Throne 

Speech. May I quote: 

 

The Throne Speech refers to proposed changes in The Election Act. It has been evident for some years, 

Mr. Speaker, that there are deficiencies in our Election Act. We protested this, time and time again, in 

the House when we were in the Opposition. But the election last year made a shambles of our electoral 

machinery. For one month, nobody apparently knew who was the government. For weeks after, 

perhaps there were eight members who were not sure if they had been elected or not. As a matter of 

fact, here today, nine months after the election, there are three members who are still not sure whether 

they will be here next year or not. The unbelievable experiences of the voters in this election surely 

emphasize the need to streamline voting procedures, and bring them into line with practices elsewhere 

in Canada. So the Government will ask the legislature to introduce changes in our Saskatchewan 

Election Act this year. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1482 

Mr. Speaker, these were strong words. In a press release after the 1964 election in the constituency of 

Hanley and in the Premier‟s remarks in the session of 1965 in respect to the then existing Election Act, 

there were words of condemnation of The Election Act as it existed. At long last, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier and the Members to your right, Sir, were determined that they would so amend the inadequacies 

of the Act so as to make it possible to have or obtain complete results by winning candidates on the 

completion of polling or shortly thereafter. Changes to delete sections and amendments were introduced 

and I presume with the advice of the Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) and the Attorney General 

(Mr. Heald). What is the state of affairs because of these changes this very day, Mr. Speaker? Are there 

not several Members sitting on the side of the Government who are not sure whether they will be here 

next year? Neither are they sure that they have been elected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) in moving the Resolution was 

aware of the fact that the Government has had a chance of amending The Election Act and had created 

similar conditions which it claimed existed up to the 1964 election. Hon. Members recognize that no 

improvements were made by this Government action. It is therefore my humble opinion, Mr. Speaker, 

that if an Inter-sessional Committee of this Legislature, consisting of Members from both sides, divorce 

the political stripes, was to be set up, it should and could come up with recommendations for 

amendments to The Election Act to take out certain areas of doubt which now exist due to the fact that 

the Act is somewhat vague and because of legal personnel or as my Hon. Friend the Provincial Treasurer 

says, “Because smart lawyers create blocks to impede final election results.” 

 

Mr. Heald: You suggest amendments . . . 

 

Mr. Michayluk: I might, Mr. Speaker, state without any fear of contradiction by any Hon. Member in 

this Legislature, that I may be the only Member who as Returning Officer in the 1952 election, went 

through a recount following that election and again in 1967 went through another recount as the 

candidate in a Provincial election. I want to concede to the Hon. Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) 

that he has top score or marks for recounts. But I consider myself as the Member who has had 

experience in official recounts as Returning Officer and as a candidate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my considered opinion that the recount of 1952 set a stage, although regrettably not 

followed in the same pattern by many recounts that have followed since. Prior to the 1952 recount there 

had been no recount in Saskatchewan for a good many years. 

 

I will place on the records some of the facts surrounding the 1952 recount. The results of the final count 

wherein all the absentee ballots of eligible voters were counted gave the CCF candidate a majority of 40 

votes, if I recall the correct number, Mr. Speaker. The Liberal candidate made application 



 
March 28, 1968 

1483 

 

for the recount and as Returning Officer I was summoned to the Court House. Within a short period of 

two and a half days the count was concluded and the CCF candidate was declared elected by a majority 

of some 24 votes. There were no disputes, no legal technicalities, no search for legal loopholes. As a 

matter of fact both parties had legal advice. However, the proceedings went on smoothly and there was 

no effort to stall the recount or the proceedings. Mr. Speaker, in the election of October 11th last fall, 

and after the amendments were introduced by the Liberal Government in 1965, the counting of the 

hospital ballots in final count was a complete and a total disregard for the democratic obligations, the 

rights and privileges of duly qualified electors in the Redberry constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: The agent for my Liberal opponent, with total disregard for the eligibility as I have 

mentioned for voters, challenged and raised objections to the counting of ballots cast by eligible voters 

on the grounds which he himself as a candidate, could not substantiate or his agent. The Returning 

Officer under these circumstances did not and could not count the ballots. Mr. Speaker, what were some 

of the objections raised? One voter in hospital and 91 years old, an eligible and a duly qualified voter 

was challenged by the agent of the Liberal candidate because of his age. This gentleman should be well 

known to the Hon. Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) as he is the grandfather to his first wife. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: The lady who resides in the same community as I do, and has resided in the village 

since 1942, had her ballot challenged on the grounds that she did not have residence qualifications on 

October 11. Ballots of two other young voters, whom I had the privilege to teach in 1952 and 1948, were 

challenged on the basis that they were not naturalized Canadians. Both of these gentlemen were born 

and grew up in Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact their fathers were born in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 22 ballots were challenged on this basis and refused to be counted by the 

Returning Officer during the final count. Here I do not lay the blame on the Returning Officer. Mr. 

Speaker, a ballot cast by a patient who was in the Saskatoon Sanitorium, who is and was a duly qualified 

elector in my constituency, was refused to be accepted, even though a sworn affidavit was produced to 

the Returning Officer, but objected to by the agent for the Liberal candidate. I maintain, Mr. Speaker, 

that this situation would not have arisen had goodwill been displayed and adhered to by the participants 

in this particular final count. The Act allows or provides for these loopholes, Mr. Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald). The Liberal candidate and his agent were aware that some of these people were eligible voters. 

However, they were also aware that if these ballots were counted my majority would be increased. 

Therefore, they objected. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1484 

Therefore, to prevent the counting of these eligible ballots cast by eligible voters, they objected to 22 of 

these ballots. It is here, Mr. Speaker, that I want to turn to the Attorney General in respect to the 

weakness of The Election Act. 

 

Mr. Heald: I‟m listening. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: The Election Act, that allows such inconsiderate and indiscriminate objections to 

overrule and prevent the counting of ballots cast by duly qualified electors from making basic 

democratic majority decisions does, I contend, require amendments and change. Mr. Speaker, the Hon. 

Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) made a specific mention to Kelvington constituency, and I want 

to be frank and ask the Hon. Members opposite in Government if the situation which I have just 

mentioned does not exist in both Kelvington and Nipawin constituencies. I am sure that both Hon. 

gentlemen know people whose votes were not counted and who are eligible voters in both Kelvington 

and in Nipawin. 

 

Mr. Heald: On a point of order. I know that the Hon. Member wouldn‟t want to be out of order, but I 

would simply remind him that when he gets talking about Kelvington, and I think Nipawin, there are 

some court proceedings going underway here. I know that you wouldn‟t want to be discussing 

something that is sub judice and I just point that out to you. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: Thank you, Mr. Attorney General. I realize that these proceedings are going on 

because of the changes that were made by the Liberal Government in 1965. This is the way The Election 

Act was improved, yet still permits this to go on. 

 

Mr. Heald: On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker. I am raising a point of privilege now because he made 

the statement about some changes in the Act and he is not correct. He is talking now about The 

Controverted Elections Act. There have been no changes in this Act and I wouldn‟t want him to be 

inaccurate in that respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order! Now let‟s consider just what we are debating. We are not debating The 

Controverted Elections Act, although it has been brought into the argument. What we are debating is 

whether or not this Legislature should agree to the setting up of an Inter-sessional Committee to study 

The Election Act. Now that is the debate before the House. 

 

Mr. Michayluk: I want to thank you for your decision, Sir. I want to mention to the Attorney General 

that an Election Act that allows situations of this nature to exist and leaves indecision some six or seven 

months after the election, an Election Act that leaves two constituencies or more 



 
March 28, 1968 

1485 

 

undecided after the Premier and the present Liberal Government had amended the Act in 1965 does, I 

contend, require amendments and these amendments should be brought in by an Inter-sessional 

Committee. And it is in respect of this committee that I am speaking. An Act that permits or allows 

these situations to exist that I have just mentioned in my humble opinion needs amendments and change. 

A Government and a Legislature that allows the situation to exist, Mr. Speaker, makes a farce of our 

democratic system of voting. An Act and officials who permit any candidate or any agent to disallow the 

counting of ballots of voters, who are duly qualified, even though it is known by all parties concerned 

and the Returning Officer that they are qualified. I contend, Mr. Speaker, an Election Act will only serve 

the democratic process when it embodies provisions that will make it impossible to disregard the will of 

the majority of our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members of the Government claim that The Election Act as it existed under the CCF is 

unworkable and had its faults and defects. We maintain that the Liberal Government had had a hand at 

making amendments to the Act which they claimed was unworkable. Most Hon. Members will agree 

that the Act today is unworkable, as Hon. Members of the Government have said it was prior to 1964. It 

is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that I want to agree with the Hon. Member for Saskatoon Riversdale 

(Mr. Romanow) that an Inter-sessional Committee be appointed to recommend to the Government 

changes in The Election Act that would make the Act more realistic, more workable and will ultimately 

enhance our democratic process of government for the election of a government. 

 

I will support the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): Make it short, boy! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): I‟ll try to, Mr. Premier. Mr. Speaker, I would have 

preferred to have made the remarks after dinner but perhaps while we are digesting some food, we might 

have some food for thought with respect to The Election Act and hopefully that some Hon. Members 

opposite may be able to digest some brief comments that I will make in closing the debate in this 

Resolution. 

 

I was reluctant to enter the debate again, Mr. Speaker, on the Inter-sessional Committee. I want to say at 

the outset though, that I concur with what I consider to be some very salient and worthwhile 

observations made by my colleagues from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) and Turtleford (Mr. Wooff). It 

doesn‟t take a lawyer long to take a look very briefly and determine that The Election Act as it is 

presently constituted is a source of great aggravation for most of the Members of the Legislature and for 

the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. However, Mr. Speaker, a deep sense of disappointment and 

frustration has 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1486 

prompted me to enter into the debate at the close and to make the remarks that I am now going to. I 

could find no better words than disappointed and frustration, after having heard the Government 

spokesman who officially rose to speak and those like the Hon. Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) who didn‟t 

officially rise to speak, taking part in the debate on this Resolution. 

 

If I might, the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron), regretfully, Mr. Speaker, is to my mind 

the prime example of the type of conduct when he entered this debate that causes public dislike and 

disillusionment with politicians. We have here, Mr. Speaker, a Resolution that simply asks the Members 

of this House to say if they feel that a revision of The Election Act is a good thing, and if so, does an 

Inter-sessional Committee of this House meet the requirements. That‟s the simple question. All one had 

to do was to annunciate the reasons for or the reasons against the Resolution as put before this House. 

And notwithstanding my pleadings, the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) waded into the 

debate with yet another review of the past. His answer to this Resolution was to dredge up things that the 

CCF did or didn‟t do when they were the Government. Again, Mr. Minister, the young Members on this 

side of the House are not further interested in the events before 1964. It may come as a shock to the 

Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources and to the Front Bench, but some of us entered politics because we 

wanted a chance to discuss and debate the problems of 1968 not 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: It may surprise the Hon. Minister and his Government that the world has changed since 

1964 and before and rather rapidly too, Mr. Minister. I am afraid that you and your Front Bench 

colleagues have been left behind by the change of times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: Now because of these changes, not only technological and social, it is only logical that 

from time to time Legislators are going to have to review the questions as they relate to the 

determination of an election. Thus the proposal put forward by this Resolution, and that is, unless we are 

so old of spirit that change can no longer be heard or felt, the people of Saskatchewan are asking this 

Legislature to make some positive, clear-cut stand on the question of clarifying The Election Act. What 

interest is it, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Hon. Members opposite, to tell us about 1944 and 1951, 1964, every 

year but 1968 and what are we going to do about the future? What enlightenment, Mr. Speaker, do the 

Members get who come here, believing that Parliament is a worthwhile institution where ideas and 

problems of today can be discussed, where can we exchange views honestly and freely without the 

continual harping and reminders to me and my colleagues of the action of the government of yesteryear. 

Again I say to the Minister and his Government that you are now the Government, so govern. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1487 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: At the same time, Mr. Speaker, not only did the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 

Cameron) fail to comment on the Resolution. He said something that I thought was particularly 

ominous. Throughout his comments he repeated the fact that when he was in Opposition his views 

weren‟t listened to. I have been sitting here now for some six weeks and I can tell why they weren‟t 

listened to. But, Mr. Speaker, I am not here to decide whether or not the Minister‟s statements were 

accepted or listened to when he was in Opposition. The important thing here, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

Minister‟s statement is an implication that Members on this side of this House, because we have 

something to offer in Opposition will not now be listened to because he wasn‟t listened to when he was 

in Opposition. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the Minister has enunciated what I interpret to be a policy of 

retribution, in addition to a policy that there is some sort of equity in partisanship, the gamesmanship of 

elections that this Government practises on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: If you want to put it in simple and plain language even for the Minister, what he is 

saying is this, because you didn‟t listen to me we‟re not going to listen or respect your views. It is a 

recurring theme that Members opposite are telling the young Members and those on this side of the 

House in this debate and other debates that crop up from time to time. Well, I am going to say this, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Treasurer and to the Minister  

and you may not like it  

but we on this side are going to criticize you when we feel necessary. We‟ll continue to remind you that 

you‟re the Government despite the fact that you are trying to forget. We are also going to present 

resolutions such as the Election Reform Resolution before this House now for the honest consideration 

of Members who want to take part in honest and legitimate debate on the problems of today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can only say that the back benchers and the newcomers opposite must be also frustrated 

and disappointed with their leaders who are continually refusing to come to grips with today‟s problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may call it 12:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): Mr. Speaker, in rising, I haven‟t had a chance to see 

who the groups are but I want to assure them on behalf of the Legislature, through you, Sir, that they are 

very welcome. We hope they have a very fine day here, and that they have had a 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1488 

fine number of hours before coming here and we wish them a good trip home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Regina South): In the east gallery we have a group of grade eight students from the 

Massey school in the Regina South constituency under the direction of Mr. Nichol. This is the second 

class from this school this week and I want to welcome them on your behalf and the Hon. Members‟. I 

know they have enjoyed themselves so far, and I trust their visit to this portion of the session will be 

informative and educational. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have with us today students 

from Brevoort Park school in Saskatoon, who are here with their teacher, Mr. Carlson. I am sure we all 

thank Mr. Carlson for giving these students the opportunity to be with us today. We wish these students 

well in their studies in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. McIvor (Arm River): Mr. Speaker, I have a group of students here in the Speaker‟s gallery 

from Loreburn. There are 20 in all in the group and they are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 

Anderson. He formerly brought a group of grade seven students in; this is a group of grade eights, I 

understand. I am sure all Members will join with me in extending them a very warm welcome to the 

Legislature of our Province and we wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Romanow, Resolution 

No. 5. 

 

Mr. Romanow: Mr. Speaker, before recess I was making a point that the Opposition will not relinquish 

its duty to the people of Saskatchewan to discuss the major issues of the day such as this one that is 

before the House on The Election Act. 

 

I wanted to make some brief reference also to some of the remarks by my very good friend, the Hon. 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), whom I can only describe as one of the best silent arguers that the House has. 

That is to say, he speaks primarily from his favorite position, that is when he is seated. In this debate, his 

main contribution was repeatedly jabbing with the comment, “Get a good lawyer.” Over and over again 

he jibed Members on this side when we discussed the merits of a Select Committee on The Election Act, 

that we should get a good lawyer. I feel that my colleague from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) summed 

up the views 



 
March 28, 1968 

1489 

 

of the Government when he said, and I think it is exemplified by the Treasurer‟s (Mr. Steuart) 

comments, that they view elections as merely a matter of playing games. To them, Sir, as my colleague 

from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) pointed out, you determine the true wishes of the people of 

Saskatchewan at election time in cases of crisis by „getting a good lawyer.‟ Forget about the citizen‟s 

inherent democratic rights to be heard, simply get a lawyer. I say that view is disappointing and it seems 

to run against the basic grain of democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: Now, the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald)  

I am sorry he is not in his chair  

receives our sympathy, because amidst all of the confusion that reigns on the Front Benches opposite, he 

did attempt to grapple with the merits of the Resolution. Firstly the Hon. Attorney General argued that it 

is not good to get too involved with inter-sessional committees. I feel, to be fair to him, that there is 

some merit to the argument that Government has the duty to bring in legislation and ultimately be 

judged on it by the people of Saskatchewan. However, Mr. Speaker, it is my contention that The 

Election Act is not an ordinary piece of legislation. It is very special legislation and a very special Act. 

Not only does it determine the rights of the individuals here, it also determines the rights, if you will, the 

rules of the game, for all of the people of Saskatchewan. Now, when I say all of the people of 

Saskatchewan, I am also referring to those men or women of the Province of Saskatchewan who belong 

to other political parties not here represented. For example what do you do with Mr. Martin Pederson, 

who is the Leader of the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, and who represents legitimate views of 

hundreds of Conservative members of the Province of Saskatchewan? Members know there is a Social 

Credit party as well. Now these people represent legitimate views of many citizens. I disagree with their 

views. They‟re not represented here in the Saskatchewan Legislature. However, by virtue of the fact that 

they are taking part in positive deliberation, debate and participation in elections, by virtue of the fact 

that they are citizens, by virtue of the fact they have democratic rights, it‟s only proper that they, too, 

should be allowed to express their views in the present shaping of the new Election Act. Accordingly 

only an Inter-sessional Committee will incorporate, at least will listen to the Members of the Opposition 

parties‟ views, no matter how much we may differ with those views ideologically. However, on the 

Attorney General‟s (Mr. Heald) argument they will not now have a voice in the determination of the 

rules of the election game, I feel this is inequitous. It‟s unfair, and again, Mr. Speaker, undemocratic. 

They too must be heard. 

 

Secondly, I would submit the contention of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), is valid. 

Committee work is an important aspect of the Legislature. I feel that many back benchers on both sides 

of the House would be able to occupy their times profitably taking an active interest in the work of this, 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1490 

and hopefully, in many other areas. Good committees. If a Select Committee is taken away from the 

impassioned tempers of Legislature debates, I feel that Members can work together in harmonious 

circumstances. I disagree with the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald). This is not simply a 

housekeeping Act. It is an Act that deals with our most fundamental, basic, democratic rights and time 

through an Inter-sessional Committee is needed for the careful consideration of these basic democratic 

rights. Accordingly, only an Inter-sessional Committee on The Election Act can do the job. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, thirdly, I am fearful that many of the public now hold cynical views about 

Saskatchewan‟s politicians, about politicians in general. I feel that there is a feeling in the country that 

only one side of the argument, that only one political party is going to determine the electoral future fate 

with respect to Members and the composition of the future Legislatures. And I say this that if the Liberal 

Government opposite votes against this Resolution, it then leaves itself open to the accusation that it 

wants to keep the operation of the electoral machinery in their private domain. The maxim is that not 

only must justice be done but be seen to be done. Sir, as much as I would want to accept the assurances 

of the Hon. Attorney General, it too must be done. I repeat again to all Members let‟s all pitch in 

together in a non-partisan way to show all Saskatchewan that democracy is above politics. I know some 

of the people opposite don‟t know the meaning of the word non-partisan, and its rules will no longer be 

determined in the back rooms. 

 

May I summarize my arguments in support of this Resolution. We need an Inter-sessional Committee 

now to approach the revision of The Election Act in a non-partisan manner. I‟ve talked about the 

specific areas of concern as being remedial, judicial review, and the fact that the Act must be gone over 

and examined with a fine-tooth comb. I feel that all parties and as many people as are interested should 

be given the opportunity to be heard. I have also presented the argument, Mr. Speaker, that a committee 

of this nature may very well be the very beginning of a permanent structure that will benefit the 

Legislature and the workings of democracy in Saskatchewan. And now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to rest 

on that and appeal to all the Members and their sense of fair play and to support this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  

24 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Baker 

Kramer Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 



 
March 28, 1968 

1491 

 

 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

 

NAYS  

31 

 

Thatcher Coderre Mitchell 

Howes Bjarnason Larochelle 

McFarlane MacDonald Gardner 

Cameron Estey Coupland 

Steuart Hooker McPherson 

Heald Gallagher Charlebois 

McIsaac MacLennan Forsyth 

Guy Breker McIvor 

Loken Leith Schmeiser 

MacDougall Radloff Grant 

Weatherald   

 

RESOLUTION NO. 7  

CREATION OF A CONSUMERS’ AGENCY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose 

Jaw South): 

 

That this Assembly, recognizing an urgent public need, recommend to the consideration of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the creation of a consumers‟ agency that would vigorously undertake 

the development of a broad and effective program of consumer protection, education and information; 

an agency which would also make every effort to work closely with the appropriate branch or 

department of the Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): Mr. Speaker, there is another very important topic that I 

feel the residents of Saskatchewan have been looking to the Government for leadership on and that is the 

question of consumer protection. I rise in this debate only to sound what I feel may be a rather 

dangerous feeling emanating from the Government opposite and that is, that I believe that there is a 

legitimate fear that this Government might not be acting with the degree of precision and decisiveness 

that is being asked of it now, as a result of the Report on the Royal Commission on Consumer Problems 

and Inflation, and as a result of the very many legitimate demands of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

I am concerned about the Government‟s motives and intentions about consumer protection in this area 

for the following reasons. Firstly, Premier Thatcher was asked a question several days ago in this 

Legislature by my colleague from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies). In reply the Hon. Premier referred to 

the recommendations by Judge Batten as being, “nebulous.” Now to me, this is a danger sign that the 

Government may be perhaps softening up on its approach, or at least being somewhat derelict in its 

concern 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1492 

for the consumers and for the very serious recommendations that have been found and set out by Judge 

Batten in her report. I assume that the Hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher), being the Leader of the Government 

of Saskatchewan, must necessarily pick and choose his words very carefully. It is after all the nature of 

government that Members of the Legislature and the people of Saskatchewan as well as Members of the 

press gallery will be looking very carefully to what Government spokesmen say on vital topics of the 

day. And more so, of course, in the case of the Hon. Premier. Now, when the Premier says that the 

recommendations are nebulous, what I am really asking and why I am speaking on this Resolution is: 

does this Government now issue a warning to the residents of Saskatchewan that the recommendations 

of Her Honour, Judge Batten are really not precise or clear enough and as a result the Royal 

Commission and its recommendations will be pigeon-holed. For my part, I feel the recommendations are 

clear and precise in a number of areas, and I regret very much the use of the word nebulous by the Hon. 

Premier. I would hope that at the earliest opportunity he will clarify whether or not his Government 

intends to take positive immediate action on the recommendations, or will he view these 

recommendations as being imprecise and imperfect? 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about the attitude and the motives of this Government on 

consumer protection, because when I look and I analyze the action that it has carried out to date, I find 

that there has been regretfully an almost total lack of immediate attention to getting the machinery 

instituted, so that the recommendations of the Batten Report may be implemented. Now those Members 

who have had the opportunity of perusing the recommendations will obviously come to the conclusion 

that there will be required a certain degree of machinery implemented and set up now by the 

Government. To some extent the recommendations of the Batten Report will need further study. 

Officials in the appropriate departments of Government will presumably have to be making reports from 

time to time, looking into such matters as labelling, packaging and the like and the numerous aspects 

that Judge Batten has talked about. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is going to take a considerable length of time 

for the Government to get this machinery instituted. It is going to take some considerable time for the 

machinery to set out its modus operandi, get the personnel it‟s going to have to obtain in order to look 

carefully and completely into this problem of the specific recommendations made by Her Honour. To 

date, regretfully, we do not have any such indication that the Government is either going to set up a 

consumer branch within one of the departments of Government, that it is going to set up a special 

committee of the Cabinet, or some such other agency with a view to getting this machinery 

implemented. I am going to say a word or two about the additional importance of getting this machinery 

set up now in order to deal with the consumer problems that are before the people of Saskatchewan at 

this time. 

 

Thirdly, I am concerned about the Government‟s motivation and intentions with respect to the Report 

and this Resolution. It is an extension, Mr. Speaker, of the second observation I have 



 
March 28, 1968 

1493 

 

made, that is to say there has been no move or no action from Members opposite to start doing 

something on this Report. That third observation is that immediately after the Report was tabled  

I grant that for the Hon. Premier and the Members of the Front Bench, now that the Legislature is in 

session, it is difficult perhaps for them to take time off  

the person that went to Ottawa to discuss the matter of consumer problems with the Registrar General 

and the Minister in charge of Consumer Affairs, was the Commissioner, Judge Batten. I don‟t quarrel 

with the necessity or with the value of Judge Batten‟s communication there, but I feel that it would have 

been a positive show of strength and assurance for the consumers of Saskatchewan, if the Premier or the 

Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) or some such other committee perhaps, as the extension of the 

second observation that I‟ve made, had taken the time out to also go and to make their views clearly 

known to the Registrar and the Consumer Affairs Minister. 

 

It‟s unfortunate that many of the electorates of Saskatchewan and many people throughout Canada 

perhaps don‟t really understand the sometimes very tremendous, positive value of Royal Commissions. 

The Royal Commission on Consumer Affairs by Judge Batten, I feel, is really a very good piece of work 

on consumer legislation and protection. In order to highlight and to emphasize the importance of Royal 

Commissions recommendations, it appeared to me that the logical step by the Hon. Premier and his 

Government would have been to fortify and to buttress the recommendations and the submissions 

contained therein by having made some very personal, positive representations in the form of a formal 

brief to the Federal Government. 

 

Because of these three things and other comments from time to time, I am concerned about this 

Government‟s true motives in protecting the consumer. Now a committee of Government or a branch of 

the Government to work out the implementation of recommendations, I briefly alluded to, and as I have 

said would be important, because it would show to the people of Saskatchewan that the province‟s 

Government is taking immediate, positive steps. But I feel also that there would have been two 

additional values, two additional merits for some announcement by the Government that it was going to 

act immediately, and I mean more than just that announcement act by way of appointment of a 

committee, two other values if it had so chosen to act. 

 

Now firstly, I feel that such a committee or a consumer agency of the department or any given 

department, perhaps even a special Corporate and Consumer Affairs Department of Saskatchewan, 

would have been the first step in taking a positive step for guaranteeing and protecting the inequities that 

the consumer has to face now. That is to say, that very shortly the Premier could have got his machinery 

into operation and I am sure he would have now without having to wait for the Prairie Economic 

Council, without having to wait for the actions of the Premier of Alberta, and the Premier of Manitoba, 

without have to wait for any of the actions and decisions of these Premiers, he could have now moved to 

remove some of the problems in the field as they present 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1494 

themselves to Saskatchewan. After all what could happen  

and the Premier and his Government haven‟t made this very clear yet  

what would happen if one of the Premiers decided to balk, or decided to reject the recommendations of 

Judge Batten? What then? Where does this Government go on the path of consumer protection at that 

point? Will we then be faced with the argument, as Legislators, that now it is impossible to do anything 

because one or more of the Premiers of the Prairie Economic Council has balked on one or more of the 

recommendations of Judge Batten? This is the type again of positive action, Mr. Speaker, that would 

have alleviated the legitimate fears that I have and I know many of the people of Saskatchewan have in 

this area. 

 

Secondly, I feel that some announcement of a committee or a corporate department would have been 

beneficial because it would have been the beginning of this liaison that the Hon. Premier has talked 

about. The Premier mentioned in reply to questions from my colleague from Moose Jaw South (Mr. 

Davies), that the Prairie Council would be meeting to discuss this matter. And I dare say that before you 

go and meet with a Prairie Economic Council this Government is going to have to make sure that it 

knows exactly what recommendations it‟s going to accept or reject. This Government is going to have to 

go to the Prairie Economic Council, whenever and if it does meet, with positive proposals as to how it 

views the recommendations should be dealt with and what areas they should be moving in. This requires 

this committee or this department to start now, and to start some planning now, so that there may be 

some formal liaison, some formal contact with the Prairie Provinces. I accept, and I want to say this 

quite personally, the Premier‟s assurances that there have been verbal communications made to the 

Premiers of the other Provinces. But I feel that it would have been a lot better to re-enforce public 

confidence in the Government of Saskatchewan of the day to show that this Government really has 

concern for the consumers, if the Premier had made some announcement that as an immediate step it 

was going to set up a department say of corporate affairs or consumer agency of department of 

Government to look into and approach the Prairie Provinces immediately and forthwith. He has at his 

disposal very many able civil servants. Right now there should be submissions being prepared and ready 

for the Prairie Council, submissions that Members on this side of the House and elsewhere should be 

reviewing with a view to giving a positive contribution and comments thereto. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say this again that the people of Saskatchewan want a show of action on behalf of 

this Government for the protection of the consumers of the Province of Saskatchewan. May I say that 

there are some very real specific recommendations that may be acted on right now by the Government 

and the Premier. I am not going to deal with these recommendations at length. They are set out for Hon. 

Members to read and peruse. I think the best example starts at page 431 and on, as one good example of 

the recommendations of Judge Batten. This is Chapter 14, Mr. Speaker, and it deals with labelling, 

packaging, promotions and innovations. I want to draw to the attention of the Premier and his 

Government two recommendations that I don‟t view 



 
March 28, 1968 

1495 

 

especially as being nebulous, that I view as being specific. Page 302, the recommendation is as follows, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

This Commission further recommends that the governments of the three Prairie provinces enact 

legislation to require that the grading standards of all products sold by grade be prominently displayed 

in the stores of all retail sellers of groceries and grocery products. 

 

That to me is a specific recommendation, one that the Government could have indicated some action and 

some implementation thereof. Another one says this: 

 

This Commission recommends that the governments of the three Prairie provinces legislate to require 

that cents-off deals be so marked as to show the average price of the previous month (except where the 

product is new) and the price from which the discount is being taken. Furthermore, it should be 

required in order to ensure that these are genuine discounts, that these deals would not be offered to the 

trade for more than two months and not reappear for at least three months after the preceding offer. 

 

These are not nebulous recommendations; these are firm and precise recommendations, enunciated in a 

clear and forthright straight manner by the Commissioner. I think this is an area now that the 

Government could be moving to right now. Mr. Speaker, the Batten Commission Report documents well 

the need for a consumer agency of Government. To put it bluntly, although I don‟t do much of the 

shopping in my household, the world of the consumer is really a jungle in the supermarket. Discounts, 

packaging, grading, advertising, promotions, gimmicks, myriad of prices and deductions that confront 

the average housewife are something that is beyond comprehension. To me it is unfair, it is not giving 

the proper protection for the people when they have to be faced with a myriad of problems such as these, 

walking in to do what should be the everyday chore of buying essential goods. We‟ve got to look into 

the question of packaging. We‟ve got to make sure that really what the person is buying is contained in 

the product so purchased, that that person isn‟t being fooled or hoaxed by gimmicks or by such other 

advertising and promotional efforts. 

 

Packaging is an obvious area of concern, Mr. Speaker. The Batten Commission Report talks about it 

being often misleading. The Report talks about labelling falling below the needs of the consumer. I have 

made some comments about advertising and I want to make it clear that I am not against advertising, but 

as it now exists in the consumer field, Mr. Speaker, Judge Batten says that very often it is not 

comprehensive and it is not fair. Grading, I have also read the specific recommendation to the Members 

of the House and to the Government on this particular area. These are specific recommendations. Mr. 

Speaker, may I say this, that the Batten Commission was about a year in assessing this information that 

is tabled before the House. It heard witnesses. It received briefs and submissions from hundreds of 

interested 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1496 

citizens. It moved only after there was a considerable amount of agitation, a considerable amount of 

pleading by Members on this side of the House, that the Government of the Province of Saskatchewan 

move and move now for the solution of consumer problems. So that when we are discussing this 

Resolution for a consumer agency, when we are discussing the need for the Government to take positive 

action, we are not talking about something that has only cropped up by virtue of the tabling of the 

Report. We are talking about something that has existed for years and for months before the Report, and 

it existed all the time that we are debating this Resolution, and unless this Government acts now, it will 

be existing for quite some time to come. It is no longer good enough for the Province of Saskatchewan 

to have an indifferent attitude in this regard. 

 

What does this Resolution say, Mr. Speaker? It is a straightforward, simple Resolution that says, as I 

interpret it, this: We the Government of Saskatchewan and the Legislators are giving you the people of 

Saskatchewan early assurance that we are going to do something with teeth and positive strength to 

enforce those recommendations that can be enforced now for the good of the people of Saskatchewan. 

All it says that we want to open up the educational aspects of consumer protection. All it says is that it 

may take a year to get the consumer agency set up, or more, but at least our intentions and our motives 

are in the best places in this regard and no longer can we wait. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I took part in this debate because I feel that this Government has thus far, despite the 

pleadings of the Members of this side, been either indifferent or unable to come up with the type of 

decisive action that Mrs. Housewife of Saskatchewan wants. I don‟t want and I don‟t think the Members 

of this House want to have the matter rest, after we have adjourned in two or three weeks or whenever, 

to have the matter rest with simple assurances that it will be discussed before a Prairie Economic 

Council. I thank the Premier for those assurances. My plea is simply this, lest this Government not be 

accused that it is not acting in the best interest of the consumer, lest this Government not be accused that 

it is turning a deaf ear to the plight of the average consumer and the citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, for whatever reasons that the Premier and his Government must act and accept a 

Resolution such as the one that has been tabled and submitted to this House by my colleague from 

Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies). Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this very important 

Resolution. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): Mr. Speaker, there are a few comments that I would like to 

make in connection with this Resolution. First of all I should tell all Hon. Members that consumer 

protection is a field in which I have always taken a keen interest, and I think my record of legislation in 

this House over the past four years is evidence of that interest and evidence of concrete action as a result 

of that interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I used words similar to the words that I have 



 
March 28, 1968 

1497 

 

just used two years ago, and I think that they have more relevance today than they had at that time. I am 

not going here to comment upon all the legislation which has been enacted in this House in the last four 

years that directly gives protection to the consuming public of Saskatchewan. Nor do I intend to 

comment respecting other programs that have been established in this area. The culmination of the 

concern of this Administration, Mr. Speaker, was shown in the establishment of the Batten Royal 

Commission or as its title properly reads, Prairie Province Cost Study Commission. The Report of that 

Commission has been tabled in this House and its contents are well known. I am sure that you will all 

agree that the Commission has thoroughly investigated the matters designated within the terms of 

reference. 

 

I am particularly pleased that this Commission was struck by the three Prairie Provinces and not by a 

single Province alone, in that problems and concerns in this area of consumer affairs are not localized or 

isolated, but cross provincial and even national boundaries. Remedies, therefore, have to be effected in 

many areas on the same basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two years ago I said in this House that the Budget and staff of the Department of the 

Provincial Secretary would be increased to make possible the carrying out of new programs in regard to 

consumer affairs that were established or were going to be established. That increase in staff and funds 

was forthcoming and I for one am proud of the programs that are now being carried out and the manner 

in which they are being carried out in that Department. Generally these programs are regulatory in 

nature, consisting of supervision and investigation into activities that fall within the purview of 

consumer protection legislation. 

 

The changes in business practice and the increase in business activity in the last 10 years require 

changes in legislation to keep abreast with the times. This change of legislation has been 

notwithstanding what the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) said, that Saskatchewan is 

recognized as being in the forefront of all of the Provinces in Canada in this regard. And if he doesn‟t 

believe me I ask him or I suggest to him, that when he goes back to Saskatoon he talk to the ladies in the 

Saskatchewan section of the Canadian Association of Consumers and ask them who has done more for 

the consuming public in Saskatchewan  

this Government in four years or the party that he supports did in 20 years. Just ask them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: Mr. Speaker, the necessity to provide protection to consumers is a continuing one, and it is 

the intention of this Government to treat it as such. This Government will continue to be receptive to 

representations and suggestions that will provide legitimate measures of protection to consumers and the 

Government will continue to formulate and implement programs in 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1498 

this regard from within. The overall program of the Government in the area of consumer affairs has of 

necessity consisted of regulatory measures set out in legislation passed in this House. The Government 

now recognizes that other programs should be adopted to supplement the legislation in the Statute Books 

I agree that programs aimed at providing information and the rendering of assistance to private 

organizations in the community should be undertaken and I assure the Members of this House that they 

will be undertaken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Resolution under consideration recommends to the consideration of the Government 

the creation of a consumer agency, an agency that would vigorously undertake the development of a 

broad and effective program of consumer protection, education and information, an agency that would 

work closely with the appropriate branch or department of the Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am in agreement at this time with the Resolution under consideration, with the exception 

of that portion which suggests the creation of an agency to carry out the Government programs. As I 

have said, all of the present Government programs with respect to consumer affairs are the responsibility 

of the Department of the Provincial Secretary. The staff and other resources of that Department are 

geared for this activity. They have established procedures and processes and have knowledge of 

individuals and companies in the field which is under consideration here. The creation of a new agency 

or commission or department at this time would, I suggest, result in a dislocation of the programs of the 

Government. A new agency or commission at this time would involve cost in terms of dollars and time 

and effort, which would all temporarily disrupt the program as it is now being conducted. Mr. Speaker, 

the Royal Commission established to conduct the investigation into consumer affairs was a Three 

Province project. The areas inquired into and solutions recommended had common reference in the three 

Provinces and not to only one of the Provinces. One of the Commission‟s recommendations was in fact 

the establishment of a “Consumer-oriented Government Agency” to concern itself with problems of the 

consumers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that it would not be in keeping with our present approach in this area to embark 

upon the establishment of an agency for consumer affairs without consultation with the Governments of 

the provinces of Alberta and Manitoba, and determining upon the basis of mutual study whether existing 

departments might be better equipped or more suitable to carry on the program of consumer affairs. 

Discussions of this kind, I feel very strongly, will avoid hasty measures, may reveal more practical 

alternatives, or may lead to joint policies in which practical alternatives, or may lead to joint policies in 

which two or three of the Provinces may participate. In other words, Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is 

that the establishment of a department or agency or commission to undertake a program of consumer 

protection is premature at this time. I said premature, Mr. Speaker, not undesirable. Now I know that 

there will be some elements outside the province and perhaps in the province and perhaps even in this 

House, who may be opposed to establishment 



 
March 28, 1968 

1499 

 

of any type of governmental authority on the grounds of excessive government interference. To those I 

would say that government involvement where public opinion expects such participation, is not only 

legitimate, it is the duty of those administering the affairs of the Province to accept that responsibility 

and we do accept that responsibility. 

 

I said that the establishment of an agency at this time is premature. The vehicle by which the 

Government program is carried out must not occupy time and attention at the expense of the program 

itself. Now that would be a grandstand effort, I suggest, Mr. Speaker. The Member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) said, “Why didn‟t the Premier go to Ottawa instead of Judge Batten? Why 

didn‟t the Attorney General go to Ottawa instead of Judge Batten?” That, Mr. Speaker, would have been 

a grandstand play. Consultations took place between the Registrar General and Members of this 

Government, and it was decided that at this point in time when the Report had just been tabled, that the 

logical person to discuss the details of the representation was Judge Batten. Now, of course, there are 

going to be consultations between the Registrar General and the various Ministers in the various 

provinces. There are going to be officials‟ discussions. As a matter of fact the Registrar General‟s 

Deputy Minister was in my office yesterday morning and we had a very wholesome discussion about 

this matter. But the fact remains that for the Premier or myself or any Member of the Government to 

jump on a plane and fly off to Ottawa right after the Report was tabled and was released to the public, 

would not have effectively enhanced any consumer protection program in the Province of Saskatchewan 

or anywhere else in this country. 

 

My position is, Mr. Speaker, that the more important aspect of the matter of providing protection to 

consumers lies in the area of expanding our present program and establishing lines of communication 

with the other Provinces in this area. The vehicle or means by which this is done is not significant I 

suggest, if the desired results are forthcoming from the program. It‟s results that we want, not whether 

we have a consumer protection or a consumer affairs agency or whether it is handled in the Department 

of the Provincial Secretary. The means or the vehicle is not important. It is the results that are important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has been in power for four years. As I have said, the program of 

consumer protection already established consists for the most part of the enactment of new and in some 

cases the revision of existing legislation. I say that it is now time, and I am about to have my officials do 

this, to determine the responsibility of government in all areas of consumer protection and I use the term 

consumer protection in its broadest sense. For example, would it be advisable to integrate areas now 

being separately administered such as securities, under The Securities Act, into the Consumer Affairs 

Program? That would be one example of some of the considerations that we have to look at. Now it is 

also the intention of the Government to maintain lines of communication with the other two Prairie 

Provinces 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1500 

and the other Provinces of Canada with respect to developments in these Provinces. Co-operation and 

liaison with the Government of Canada will also be maintained and extended and improved I hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this Resolution as it now reads. The creation of an agency or a 

commission or department is not in my view as important as compared to the programs of consumer 

protection. The program is the thing, not the vehicle. The important aspect of the matter is policy with 

respect to a furtherance and expansion of the program that we presently have rather than creating a 

separate body to carry out that function. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are practical considerations involved as well. The legislation in force would require 

extensive change in order to transfer administrative organization to any new agency. The change in 

legislation required for this purpose alone could not possibly be presented to this House during the 

present session in view of the late date. Mr. Speaker, because I feel that an extension and furtherance of 

programs of consumers‟ protection takes precedence over a new separate vehicle for these programs, 

and because I feel that the present resources of the Department of the Provincial Secretary can 

adequately function in this regard, and because of the obvious practical difficulty which would present 

itself in the creation of a new agency for consumer affairs at this time, I would like to propose an 

amendment to the Resolution which I will now read: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

“commend the Government for the policies that it has formulated and carried out with respect to the 

matter of consumer protection in Saskatchewan, and recommend to the consideration of the 

Government an expansion to its program in this regard in cooperation with the Governments of other 

provinces in Canada and the Government of Canada.” 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): Mr. Speaker, before we proceed with the general debate 

on the Motion, may I say a word about the amendment as such. I suppose that the amendment was rather 

predictable in a way, but it is necessary I think that attention be drawn to what the amendment does. It 

cancels out the important part of the main Resolution. The important part of the main Resolution was 

that what is needed in Saskatchewan in order that government may do the job on behalf of the 

consumers is an agency. This would be an agency which was specially designed and specially directed 

to work on behalf of the consumer. The problem has been well described as a very large one. It is the 

opinion of those on this side of the House that it merits an agency whose function is to work in that 

particular field. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) has argued that the program is more important than 

the vehicle. One can‟t disagree with that, except if you don‟t have a vehicle you don‟t get any place very 

far these days. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1501 

 

This is a problem which is looming larger and larger and does require in our opinion a vehicle of its 

own, designed for this purpose. The amendment, unfortunately, makes it impossible for the people of the 

province to acquire such a vehicle. We will grant the Attorney General the right to glow in feelings of 

self-satisfaction with respect to a number of consumer problems. In a number of ways these have been 

most admirable indeed. The point is that we are sorry to see him stop quite so soon. We are sorry to see 

the limitations which even his rather acceptable speech, I think, will impose. I have heard really not 

enough to convince me that the proposal that he has outlined will recognize the conditions which are 

presented in the Resolution. There is, Mr. Speaker, an urgent public need for this vehicle which will 

undertake the development of a broad and effective program of consumer protection, education and 

information. I simply don‟t have confidence that this will be done under the terms which the Attorney 

General has outlined and therefore, I speak in opposition to the amendment in favor of the original 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Debate continued on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): Mr. Speaker, I will as far as I can in my closing remarks say 

something only about the remarks of the Attorney General (Mr. Heald). First of all may I say that while 

I disagree very much with much of what he had to say this afternoon, what he had to say about many 

matters was at least in a considerably more positive vein than what we heard from the Premier in this 

House and to that extent I think that some credit is coming to him. 

 

He has made his main defence here in this way: that some programs are now in existence and that it 

would be premature to establish a vehicle for further consumer action in this province; that in any case 

there should be some further consultation with the Premiers of the three Prairie Provinces before any 

action is taken. Now, with respect first to the latter, Mr. Speaker. It is quite apparent from the content of 

the Resolution that I have moved that nothing whatsoever forbids the consultation of the Premiers of the 

three Prairie Provinces before action is taken. Indeed, the Resolution asks for consideration. It does not 

even ask that that consideration be immediate, so I suggest the objection that has been posed by the 

Attorney General rests upon a very shallow foundation. There is no reason why this consultation cannot 

take place, and following that the Government determine what it can do with respect to the consumer 

agency. I think, more to the point, though, is why there has not been something in the way of 

consultation during the past month since this Report has come down. I listened the other night to one of 

the Federal leadership candidates on television, Mr. MacEachen. He was being asked about this whole 

matter of consumer agencies and the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1502 

position of the Premiers of the three Prairie Provinces. He reiterated what we had already heard from 

Consumer Affairs Turner, that the Government had not heard from the Premiers. He indicated that he 

and the Federal Government were most anxious and willing to help and hear from the Premiers. He said 

that they must at least have some indication from the Governments as to whether they want to co-

operate with them. Other Members of the Federal Government have indicated that they don‟t on a 

question of protocol want to walk into the Province of Saskatchewan or the legislative offices of the two 

neighboring Prairie Provinces and thrust their offers of assistance upon the Government. 

 

Well, I think, it is very apparent, Mr. Speaker, that the last 28 days and the remarks of some of the 

Government leaders opposite are an indictment, and show the Government‟s lack of interest and perhaps 

hostility to proceeding with action to set up machinery that would really get something done in the field 

of consumer affairs. 

 

All the evidence is that the Government has done absolutely nothing except to display apart from the 

remarks of the Attorney General this afternoon, a thinly disguised criticism and disregard to the Batten 

Report and the consumer himself. It shows also that the action of the Government, in setting up the 

Commission last year, was a device to escape the demands for action via the Royal Commission route 

until after the Provincial election was over in this province. 

 

The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) has said that he and the Government have always had an interest. 

Well, we need more than an interest at this time. We need something that will provide that what he says 

is not necessary, and that is the vehicle or the machinery to do the job. I want to point out that this is 

made quite clear in the Report of the Batten Commission. On page 361, the Commission first of all 

points out that the existence of the Federal Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs will not meet 

the needs of consumers which fall under Provincial jurisdiction or are provincial or local in the nature of 

the problem or the opportunity for solution. They go on to say that equally apparent to this Commission 

is the fact that the Federal Department will not sufficiently meet consumer problems to enable the 

Provinces to avoid paying direct attention to them on a much more extended scale then at present. It 

therefore seems now to be necessary to create a section within the Provincial Government whose sole 

responsibility is to advance the consumer interest. Later in the next paragraph the Commission goes on 

to say: 

 

A separate section on consumer affairs in provincial governments is not a duplication of efforts for the 

same kind of reasons that the federal Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs is not a 

duplication of other agencies. The extreme scatter of the consumer interest between departments at the 

federal level, shown in Chapter 16 . . . 



 
March 28, 1968 

1503 

 

I draw this to the attention of the Attorney General: 

 

. . . is duplicated at provincial levels. This not only makes comprehensive approaches impossible but 

creates other problems as well. Consumer problems tend to become secondary to the main objectives 

of promoting the trade or industry with which the department is concerned. 

 

I don‟t want to wear the House with a long recitation of other reasons given by the Batten Commission 

but the whole chapter is an elaboration of the idea that a single section or agency is absolutely 

indispensable in the carrying out of the recommendations that it makes. 

 

The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) says that there is now some machinery that is coping with the rather 

limited framework of what he chooses to call consumer legislation. I won‟t argue with him on that, but 

he says that there would be a duplication and this is one of the reasons why a new agency would not be 

advisable. The Attorney General tells us that there would be a dislocation as a result of setting up 

consumer agencies and more costs and there would also be a disruption of the present program. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I can only say that this is supreme nonsense. Why would there be a disruption? Why would 

there be a dislocation in existing programs should the Government proceed to consider the setting up of 

a single consumers‟ agency? As the agency is set up, the activities that the Attorney General has spoken 

about can easily be drawn into the framework of the consumer body, and there should be no need 

whatsoever for any dislocation or disconnection at any time at all. 

 

I say again this is nothing but the kind of evasion that the House has seen in the setting up of a 

Commission and the disregard of the Government in carrying out its recommendations. Because 

remember again that we are not saying here this afternoon that the Government has to proceed next 

week to set up the agency that the Resolution calls for, I think we would like to see the earliest possible 

action at least to discuss these matters with the other Prairie Premiers and with the Federal Department 

of Consumer Affairs. But the Resolution does not call for that kind of summary and hasty action that 

would interfere with any existing program. The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) is well aware of that. 

Now, I have noted some other comments that he has made with respect to lauding the efforts of the 

present Liberal Government. I am prepared to give the Attorney General some degree of commendation 

for his own efforts particularly, but I don‟t think that he should say that more has been done in the last 

four years than in the previous 20, because again this is patently absurd. One has only to look at the 

legislation that consumers have benefited from in this province from 1944 to 1964; for health, for 

hospitalization, for labor and many other sections including the farming population of this province, to 

know that as I said before, it is simple nonsense. 

 

The Attorney General says as another reason why nothing should be done is that costs are going to 

result. I have no 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1504 

hesitation, Mr. Speaker, in saying certainly costs are going to have to be incurred to put a decent 

consumer program into being. I point this out; that the Batten Commission has told us that some $20 

million alone is being lost by this province yearly just in the amount that they are being overcharged in 

grocery items at supermarkets. That‟s just the overcharge and it only takes in a small range of items. We 

can afford to spend a fair amount of money, Mr. Speaker, to try and prevent this outright robbery  

and I think that‟s what it is  

of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: That‟s a lot of bunk. 

 

Mr. Davies: Mr. Speaker, the Premier says this is a lot of bunk, and I suggest that in that comment 

resides his whole attitude to consumer legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies: Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Premier, it is not bunk, and I want to say this, that one of your 

colleagues that sat on your side of the House when you were in Opposition and who is now a judge is 

the chief author of the Report that you are now damning. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: That‟s the silliest statement made this session. 

 

Mr. Davies: I am prepared, Mr. Speaker, to discuss some of the reasonable comments that the Attorney 

General (Mr. Heald) has put before us this afternoon, but I again say that what the Premier has indicated 

now in his aside remarks and in the remarks that he has made on other occasions, shows his attitude to 

consumer legislation. And I am afraid that they indicate the kind of progress that we will expect to make 

on the recommendations of the Batten Commission. I say it is a shame. 

 

The Attorney General said that some people are saying: why didn‟t the Premier or the Attorney General 

go to Ottawa? Well, my Resolution, Mr. Speaker, does not call for the Premier to go to Ottawa or the 

Attorney General to go to Ottawa, nor any other member of the Government to go to Ottawa to discuss 

matters with the Consumer Affairs Minister, nor for anyone else of his staff, because these people are 

ready and willing to come to Regina to discuss these questions. There was never any demand made on 

my part that the Premier go to Ottawa to see that a program be instantly launched. So there is no 

question about there being a need of any of the Ministers of the Government to go to Ottawa on this 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I regret the fact of the amendment that has been introduced by the Attorney General, it is 

as I have indicated, nothing more than an attempt to procrastinate and to sidestep the very reasonable 

and valid request that the Government 



 
March 28, 1968 

1505 

 

consider the establishment of an agency. I am afraid that the citizens of this province are also going to 

regret the introduction of that amendment when they come to read about it in the press and hear about it 

over other media. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 10  

AGRICULTURE MACHINERY TESTING PROGRAM 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey) 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that the 

Agriculture Machinery Testing Program be reinstated and that the scope of the Agricultural Machinery 

Administration be extended so as to provide reports on all components of the agricultural production 

industry. 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): Mr. Speaker, I am only going to make a few comments on this motion. 

First of all I want to say that I am not of the opinion, Mr. Speaker, that no good ever came out of the 

money that was spent in the Agricultural Machinery Administration, the testing of farm machinery, but I 

do believe that to do a job, comparative testing, and all the other work that would need to be carried on 

under the Agriculture Machinery Administration, we would need to be spending at least ten times as 

much money as what we are spending. I think that if we were prepared to spend ten times as much 

money as we were spending, probably we could get much better results out of the AMA as it existed, but 

if we were to do this, Mr. Speaker, I think that the other Prairie Provinces would have to come in with 

us. The other Prairie Provinces to my knowledge never indicated any willingness to take part or 

contribute anything to the Agriculture Machinery Administration when it was in operation. More than 

anything, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the testing of farm machines is not going to be effective unless we 

have legislation in this Province that made it compulsory for every manufacturer of farm equipment, 

every manufacturer that put an implement on the market in Western Canada to have their machines 

tested before they could be put on the market. Now I don‟t think that we have reached that day when we 

are prepared to pass that kind of legislation. But if we are going to do testing of machines, the only way 

that it is going to be effective, and the only way it is going to protect the farmers who buy the machines 

is to force all implement manufacturers to have all their machines tested before they were put on the 

market. 

 

Something that I want to remind Members of the Opposition today is the fact that the bulk of the money 

spent by farmers on farm machinery is spent on tractors and on combines. Practically no testing was 

done either on tractors or on combines, but at least two-thirds of the money I would imagine that is 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1506 

spent in the field of agricultural machinery would be spent on tractors and combines. While the AMA 

was in operation one of the major implement companies, one of the ones that sells either the most or 

second most machinery in dollars in Saskatchewan or in Western Canada never allowed one of its 

implements to be tested. The fact remains that it still sold either the largest or the second largest volume 

of machinery in the province and in Western Canada. May I say before I go on any further on this that 

when the AMA was disbanded, that most of the services that were carried on by the AMA were 

transferred to the University, but another service can still be had through the Family Farm Improvement 

Branch of the Government. Not too long ago one of the civil servants of the Government made a call on 

me in Yorkton, asking whether or not I had any complaints about a certain distributor. He was making a 

call out in my constituency and made this particular call. It was a case where a farmer who had 

purchased an implement from Canadian Co-operative Implements Limited outside of the Province of 

Saskatchewan in the town of Roblin had a complaint, because the CCIL had decided to sell a different 

particular machine. It was a swather. The swather that the complaint was registered about was no longer 

being handled by CCIL or by the CCIL agency in Roblin. This individual wrote to the Department of 

Agriculture and it was referred to the person who was working with the Family Farm Improvement 

Branch. He went out to visit this farmer and also the dealership in Roblin, and the problem was cleared 

up. So, Mr. Speaker, the services of this nature are still available to anybody who wants to do it. I think 

that the University of Saskatchewan is doing a good job in the College of Engineering in testing many 

farm machines. I want to read just some of its activities, Mr. Speaker. For example they are in their 

research activities, testing fertilizer equipment. I want to say at this point, Mr. Speaker, that many, many 

machines that farmers spend a lot of dollars on besides tractors and combines were never tested under 

AMA, for example, fertilizer equipment, the conveying of fertilizer equipment and the spreading of 

fertilizer equipment, synthetic baler twine, grain drying. I believe some testing of grain dryers was done 

while the AMA was in operation. Seed distribution, now this is something I think, Mr. Speaker, that is 

very important. For example I bought a disker  

incidentally I read the report that AMA had published on this particular disker before I bought the 

disker, and it was a rather good report as compared to some of the other diskers, a disker which costs in 

the neighborhood of $2,500  

and as far as the report was concerned it was probably right to some extent, but I bought the disker not 

just for a tillage machine but for a seeding machine. Something they didn‟t tell me was that this 

particular disker scattered the seed. If you were going five inches deep with the disker, it scattered the 

seed all the way from the surface of the soil to five inches deep. I found after two years of operating this 

disker that my germination was only about 75 per cent as good as it should have been. Now this is 

something that the University of Saskatchewan has done some testing on, 

 

The measurements of the vertical distribution of seed 



 
March 28, 1968 

1507 

 

placed in the soil by various seeding machines were made in the field during 1964 and 1966. 

 

I am reading from the Department of Agriculture Engineering Report of the College of Engineering 

Advisory Council, January 16, 1968. 

 

The results indicated that the seed is not placed at a specific depth but is scattered over a considerable 

range of depths by many machines. In 1966 double disk drills which were studied seeded at an average 

depth of two inches, while diskers seeded at an average dept of three inches. Drills placed the seed 

more uniformly than diskers, but it was apparent that with either type of machine the depth of seed did 

not coincide with the depth of the furrows. A study was begun in the laboratory to determine the 

factors effecting placement of seed by a disker. 

 

With regard to combines, this, Mr. Speaker, I think is a most valuable service. Probably the place where 

farmers can lose more money than any other is in the operating of a combine. This particular branch of 

the University is testing grain loss monitors, and I want to read from the report: 

 

The grain loss monitor which monitors the amount of grain being lost over the straw walkers of a 

combine has been under development for the past three seasons. A meter on the operator‟s platform or 

on the tractor in the case of a full-type combine indicates the rate of bushels per hour of which grain is 

being lost. The rate of grain loss is dependent on the feed rate as well as crop conditions. The device 

enables the operator to maintain a forward speed or feed rate, so the loss of grain will be at whatever 

level of loss that he feels is justified by the circumstances of the harvest. The monitor has been 

successfully used in wheat, oats and barley on three different combines. The units operated without 

difficulty or attention during the entire 1967 season. The use of the device for detecting grain loss over 

the cleaning shoe of a combine remains to be investigated but it is thought it will also function for this 

purpose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is an area I think that was very necessary. There is no way that a farmer could lose 

more of his profits than in throwing 2 or 3 or 5 bushels per acre out when he is operating his combine. 

By the testing of this grain loss monitor, it‟s going to show the operator of the combine quite accurately 

how much grain he is throwing over into the straw. They also tested grain and straw separation, and 

sprayer droplet winnowing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have no more to say on this, only I believe that the Government would be ill advised to 

go back into the agriculture machinery testing business unless it was prepared 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1508 

to spend in the neighborhood of $3 to $4 million. I don‟t think that it would be fair to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan or the people of this province that we should spend that kind of money to have an 

effective testing program if the Provinces of Manitoba and Alberta were not going to share part of the 

costs of this. The farmers of Alberta and the farmers of Manitoba would be getting part of the benefit of 

this expenditure. 

 

I vote against the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): Mr. Speaker, I don‟t intend to take too much time on this Resolution, but I 

would like to bring to the attention of the House what such groups as the Farmers Union in their brief to 

the Government, dated January 25, 1968, state as follows. The Agriculture Machinery Testing Program 

on page 17: 

 

Currently a Royal Commission on farm machinery conducted an exhaustive study into the farm 

machinery industry. The farmer is the only consumer of farm machinery and as such is vitally 

interested in the outcome of the Commission‟s findings. It is hoped that one of the recommendations of 

the Commission will call for the re-establishment of the Farm Machinery Testing similar to the 

program once conducted by the Agriculture Machinery Administration in this province. Now we 

would anticipate if such a recommendation were made it would call for such a program to be instituted 

at the Federal or regional basis. We would welcome at this time a public pronouncement by your 

Government that it would support such a program. 

 

Now there is the Farmers Union brief to the Saskatchewan Government and I know that it speaks for a 

lot of farmers. 

 

I also know that the United Grain Growers have passed a similar resolution and they also represent 

farmers. I know as a farmer that a lot of our money, the most of our money is spent on farm machinery, 

therefore, we get taken in every once in a while. We need to have investigations that are not now being 

carried out. One machinery agent has informed me that his company has deliberately fouled up the 

numbers on their ball bearings in order to confuse the buyers of bearings so that they will keep buying 

with their own company and not go anywhere else. Now if there was a change in the design of the 

bearing I could understand; but when they deliberately go out and foul up the numbers of bearings to 

confuse the issue then I think there should be something done at the legal level. Such things should not 

take place. There are many things that could be done in standardization such as rub bars, chains, 

conveyers, and so on. The AMA could push towards this and I think the Provincial Government will 

have to take some stand on that question. It is utterly ridiculous when you come to buy a guard for a 

combine and find the variation between one make and 



 
March 28, 1968 

1509 

 

another is just enough so that you cannot use this guard on another combine. Companies could get 

together and standardize these things; the material is all the same. But, the farmer is the one who has to 

chase from one town to another, from one agency to another in order to get one machine fixed up. But 

when the companies get to the point of confusing the bearing numbers, well this is a little bit ridiculous 

and something should be done and made compulsory about it. 

 

Now I don‟t want to take too much time, I know that the House is being pressed, time is going by, but I 

certainly stand behind this Resolution, moved the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer), and I am sorry that 

I cannot accept the attitude of the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher). I am informed that Alberta did 

contribute towards the AMA, perhaps not a large sum. I think instead of scrapping like the present 

Government has done, it would have been much better if it had insisted that Manitoba and Alberta take 

part in this program. With this, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that I will support this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the Resolution moved by the Hon. 

Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer), a Resolution in respect of the reinstating of the Agriculture 

Machinery Testing program whose reports and findings were utilized by the farmers for a good number 

of years under a CCF Government. This program and its need were thoroughly outlined by the mover, 

and I want to congratulate the Member for Kelsey. He is a young farmer and his main concern is in 

respect of the subject which he brought in this Resolution into the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the fact that the mover outlined the purpose of this testing program was to 

appraise and test under actual working conditions implements sold or offered for sale in Saskatchewan 

and also to publish reports on the test conducted. Now this program was to provide a direct service to 

farm people by providing performance data on machinery that was tested. Farmers received information 

and counsel on all matters relating to the expenditure of the farm income on farm machinery. In addition 

to this, Mr. Speaker, and in direct service to farm people, it started out by assisting the manufacturers to 

improve farm machinery that was sold in the Province of Saskatchewan. Hon. Members will agree, Mr. 

Speaker, that in a province where an annual expenditure amounts to $60 million in the purchase of 

machinery  

an amount which represents one-quarter of the farmer‟s net income  

information of this nature should be made available to farmers for the investment which they make in 

the purchasing of farm machinery. 

 

The Hon. Member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher), Mr. Speaker, mentioned that a sum of $3 or $4 million 

would be necessary to carry to the full a program of this type. I certainly agree with him that, if $4 

million were spent, it would be the right investment to spend on the basic agricultural industry whereby 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1510 

the farmers spend approximately $60 million per annum in the purchase of this machinery. Contrary to 

the opinion of some Members, the submitting of machines for tests was voluntary on the part of the 

manufacturers. There was no compulsion, there was no restriction placed on the sales of machines, nor 

was there any particular machine recommended or approved in the sense that it had passed some 

accepted rating. What the AMA test reports did offer to the farmer was the comparative buying 

information, the use of which the testing program believed would be of enormous assistance to the 

farmer‟s chance in getting his money‟s worth. Mr. Speaker, the testing program did not decide for the 

user, the specific type, the size and the make of the machine that he should buy, but did provide the 

consumer with the field performance data on which he could base his decision for the selection of farm 

machinery. 

 

Let me reiterate, Mr. Speaker, the services provided to the Saskatchewan farmers by the agriculture 

testing program may be summarized into four parts. First, the farmer was able to obtain professional and 

unbiased evaluation of a machine‟s performance in typical Saskatchewan conditions before he bought 

the implement. Second, he obtained information on adjustment and operator hints that would have aided 

him in obtaining better performance from a machine after he had purchased the machine. Third, he was 

able to gain information regarding modifications that the company has made or proposed to make in 

regard to the machine in question. Fourthly, he obtained the data on capacity of the unit that best suited 

his enterprise. Mr. Speaker, it is only fair to the farmers and the agricultural industry that a testing 

program considers both functional and durability categories of farm machinery. Farmers are really 

interested in how well the implements will work. Not only are they interested in how the implement will 

perform but they are also concerned how long the implement will perform its work. The mover in 

bringing down the Resolution, Mr. Speaker, mentioned various farm organizations‟ and manufacturers‟ 

interest in some form of testing program. Hon. Members will agree, Mr. Speaker, that a great many 

machines are placed on the market for sale in Saskatchewan and in Western Canada each year that do 

not measure up to the functional and durability standards the farmers would like. It is only through an 

independent machinery testing program that these machines could be placed on the market for sale in 

Saskatchewan each year and could be tested. Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that no other announcement 

made by the CCF Government did more than the announcement in 1958 in respect to the setting up of 

this agency for machinery testing. Not only was this program to test farm machines, but also to ensure 

adequate repair parts and service facilities for farm machines sold in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

After this, Mr. Speaker, the test reports were made available to farm people in the province at no cost 

and some 16,000 farmers were on the mailing list. Also on the mailing list were numerous farmers in the 

Province of Alberta, as my friend from Kinistino mentioned, whose Government contributed part of the 

cost of operating this testing program. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1511 

 

This is the reason why, Mr. Speaker, with the announcement of the discontinuing of the machinery 

testing program, as the farmers had known it under the previous Government, widespread concern was 

expressed by farm organizations: the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union and 

various groups interested in the agricultural industry. 

 

The first concern, Mr. Speaker, shortly after the announcement by the Liberal Government of the 

discontinuance of the machinery testing program was expressed by the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 

delegates at the concluding session of their fortieth annual meeting held on November 13, 1964 in 

Regina. The delegates agreed to ask the Provincial Government to continue testing machinery under the 

Agricultural Machinery Administration. The Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union concern was reported in an 

article under the title of, I quote, “SFU head thinks farmers will question AMA move.” May I quote 

further, “Mr. Roy Atkinson, President of the Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union made this statement, 

 

„A statement issued by the government and the university that the agricultural machinery 

administration was to be moved to the campus of the latter would be viewed with grave concern by 

farmers who have come to value the testing program of the former AMA,„ SFU President, Roy 

Atkinson said today. The announcement leaves no doubt that the most valuable part of the program has 

been eliminated, he said. 

 

The joint statement says that „the net effect of the move is discontinue the comparative testing of farm 

machinery.‟ This was curious wording, Mr. Atkinson said, in view of the fact that the AMA reports 

had never compared one make of machinery with another. On the other hand it was certain that farmers 

had compared reports and would continue to do so if the university provided information of any value. 

 

Then the article goes on further, Mr. Speaker, and may I quote again: 

 

The only way the government and the university could prevent farmers from making comparisons was 

to give them no useful information about individual machines, the SFU Executive declared. 

 

Quite apart from the wording of the statement, the fact of transfer to the university jurisdiction is a 

guarantee that the program will be emasculated. The university, which accepts grants and scholarships 

from machinery companies, cannot be expected to provide critical test analysis of the performance of 

farm machines. 

 

That the farmers in the agricultural industry want machinery testing agencies is amply demonstrated in a 

survey and a study 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1512 

carried out by the United Grain Growers in which some 761 farmers were questioned. A study which 

included 130 farmers in Manitoba, 295 farmers in Saskatchewan, 323 in Alberta and other interested 

groups indicated 88.8 per cent favored comparative testing of farm machines sold on the prairies. Fifty-

four of these who replied said the three Provincial Governments of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta 

should administer such an agency. While 24.5 per cent advocated Federal Control and 15.6 wanted farm 

organizations and 3.4 suggested a joint body of Provincial and Federal Governments and farm 

organizations to administer a testing program. Mr. Speaker, in briefs presented to the Royal Commission 

on Farm Machinery by interested groups in 1967 amply demonstrate the wide and deep concern for the 

need of an independent machinery testing program. Professor H.B. Harrison of the Department of 

Agriculture Engineering, published by an unbiased agency which would extend the program to more 

functional performance data of significant use to the farmer in specific reference to farm machinery 

tests. Mr. Speaker, in a presentation to the Royal Commission on farm machinery the Provincial 

Minister of the Province of Manitoba urged the Federal Government to take the initiative in establishing 

a farm machinery testing centre on the prairies. Machines he said could be tested under conditions 

peculiar to the area and modification if necessary. 

 

All this, Mr. Speaker, makes abundantly clear the desire and the need for an independent machinery 

testing to be carried on behalf of the agricultural industry. What is more, Mr. Speaker, all this only 

confirms a statement made by the Hon. T.C. Nollet, the former Minister of Agriculture for the Province 

of Saskatchewan to the House of Commons Committee on agriculture on May 19, 1961 which stated, 

and may I quote in part: 

 

Public testing services for farm machinery, Saskatchewan‟s experience with the farm machinery 

testing program has indicated that very few new models of farm machinery come on the market free 

from mechanical defects, a problem now being aggravated by the increasing number of models. In 

addition it is clear that many farm machines are not designed primarily for Saskatchewan or Western 

Canadian use, although the performance of farm machines under specialized conditions that may 

prevail here is often not indicated by company literature. Therefore we believe that the Saskatchewan 

program, 

 

and this is the program that was done away with or removed by the present Government. 

 

is of substantial assistance to Saskatchewan agriculture and could be usefully extended to other areas. 

We urge the establishment of a Western Canadian and Eastern Canadian Regional Public Farm 

Machinery Testing Agency, jointly financed by the Federal Government and the Provincial 

Governments concerned. We believe that the 



 
March 28, 1968 

1513 

 

Saskatchewan Farm Machinery Testing Agency could provide a useful basis for such a Western 

Canadian Agency. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, was the concern of the former Minister of Agriculture for the welfare of the 

agricultural industry of Saskatchewan and of Western Canada. What has happened to the agricultural 

machinery testing program with the election of a Liberal Government would amply be demonstrated, 

Mr. Speaker, by a poem and with your permission may I read the poem to the Hon. Members. It‟s 

entitled, “Before and After ‟64.” 

 

I watched them tearing a building down, 

A gang of men in a busy town, 

With a ho heave ho and a lusty yell, 

They swung a beam and a side-wall fell. 

I asked the foreman, “Are these men skilled, 

The men you‟d hire if you had to build?” 

He gave a laugh and said, “No, indeed, 

Just common labor is all I need. 

I can easily wreck in a day or two 

What builders have taken years to do.” 

So, I thought to myself as I went away, 

“Which of these roles have I tried to play? 

Am I a builder who works with care, 

Measuring life by the rule and square? 

Am I shaping my deeds to a well-made plan, 

Patiently doing the best I can? 

Or am I a wrecker who walks the town 

Content with a labor of tearing down?” 

 

This short poem, Mr. Speaker, expresses the wide feeling and the concern in respect to the many 

programs that the wreckers to your right have wrecked and are prepared to wreck. Mr. Speaker, had the 

present Government and the Minister of Agriculture continued the Agricultural Machinery Testing 

Program and broadened the scope instead of wrecking it, the bringing in of a Resolution to reinstate this 

vital program may not have arisen in this Legislature. Because of this callous disregard for the best 

interests of the agricultural industry, the particular interest on the testing as it existed, I would ask all 

Hon. Members to support this Resolution calling for the reinstating of the Agricultural Machinery 

Testing Program and its extension so as to provide reports on all components of the agricultural 

industry. I will support the Resolution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): Mr. Speaker, there were several comments I wanted to make in regard to the 

comments made by the Member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher). He stated that the AMA may very well 

cost ten times as much in order to do a job. This isn‟t really the point here. The point is that the farmer is 

not getting machinery that is doing the job and regardless of the cost we have to supply him with 

machinery and repairs that do the job so it is an absolute necessity. I don‟t believe the cost of 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1514 

administration should enter into it. If it does, it probably will cost more money. Then we have to 

approach the Federal Government for some sort of assistance in regard to this. He also stated that the 

Provinces adjoining Saskatchewan had not requested the information. Well why do we have to wait for 

them to request the Province of Saskatchewan to join in on such a plan. This is irrelevant, because we 

are concerned with the Province of Saskatchewan primarily and not Manitoba and Alberta. He made 

reference to the fact that the AMA had not tested combines and tractors. I don‟t have the statistics 

available, but I know of three combines that they tested, the Massey 92, a Versatile and I believe a Klaus 

combine that was brought in from off the continent. They did test tractors, a number of tests, but I think 

this is a duplication of tests because the Nebraska test runs a very thorough test on tractor horse power 

and fuel consumption, which if we did it here would just be a duplicate of testing. He also stated that 

legislation could be passed to compel machinery manufacturers to test their equipment before they put it 

on the market. However, we felt that we weren‟t at this stage where we should make them do this. This 

is really not any good to the farmer because they do, I believe, test their prototype machines now. But 

when these machines are proven to be relatively desirable and put on the market, then the profit picture 

enters into the companies‟ production decisions, and when they mass produce them they start cutting 

corners, so the prototype machine is not the same machine the farmers buy at the end of the production 

line. Secondly, when these machines are tested they are tested in the manufacturer‟s plant area  

and this may be in Iowa  

it certainly is not going to be tested under the same conditions as the machine would be in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. Now we know, as I have stated before, machine companies are making every year 

increased profit in regard to farm machinery. One of these that I would just like to bring forward again is 

Massey Ferguson. In the years from 1961 to 1965, their sales increased by 56 per cent; their profits 

increased in the same period of time by 164 per cent. For the year of 1965-66 their profits were up 13 

per cent. The Manitoba Farmers‟ Union has made a claim that since 1952 implement prices went up 175 

per cent, parts went up 354 per cent. These companies are definitely making profits and very near these 

statistics too, but they are not doing the type of research that they should be doing. Consequently we 

need an independent organization that is going to do this research for us. The company policy is planned 

obsolescence. It‟s a policy of changing machines regularly so that there is a turnover of machines that 

will increase their profit through sales volume. 

 

We further need standardization of parts. I pointed out when I brought in this Resolution that a great 

many farmers were strongly urging a standardization of parts, when in 1966 there were over $15 million 

spent in the Province of Saskatchewan alone on agricultural machinery repair or parts. It definitely 

shows that there could be something done in regard to standardization when we find that chains and 

bearings of exactly the same quality are being sold at one dealer for a given price and at another for 150 

or 100 per cent more in price. This as my 



 
March 28, 1968 

1515 

 

Hon. Colleague from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) was saying is done deliberately so that it confuses the 

farmer when he is purchasing. 

 

Another very major reason that testing should be done in the Province of Saskatchewan in regard to a lot 

of our machinery is that 40 per cent of the grain produced in Canada is grown in Saskatchewan. Sixty 

per cent of all wheat that is produced in Canada is grown in Saskatchewan, which definitely brings out 

evidence that this is the place where machinery should be tested, combines, tractors, seeding equipment. 

 

Just to take a moment or two longer I would like to read a few comments given by farmers in regard to 

problems they have in regard to machinery and machinery breakdown that is taken from a submission by 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to the House of Commons. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, in closing the debate he cannot enter any new material 

into the debate, other than to answer things that have been brought up by other Members. 

 

Mr. Speaker: In closing a debate it is a well known fact that a Member may answer the arguments 

advanced by others or he may explain a misunderstood part of what he said when he first spoke but he 

may not introduce new material or advance a new argument. 

 

Mr. Messer: Mr. Speaker, it‟s not really necessary to read these then, I think probably most Members 

are aware of the criticism the farmers not only in the Province of Saskatchewan are voicing now, but in 

all prairie provinces in regard to machinery testing. An independent agency such as the AMA is 

definitely needed, and I urge all Members of this Assembly to support the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  

23 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky  Baker 

Kramer Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kowalchuk 

Dewhurst Michayluk  

 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1516 

NAYS  

31 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Weatherald 

Howes Grant Mitchell 

McFarlane Coderre Larochelle 

Boldt Bjarnason Coupland 

Cameron MacDonald McPherson 

Steuart Estey Charlebois 

Heald Hooker Forsyth 

McIsaac Gallagher McIvor 

Guy MacLennan Schmeiser 

Barrie Leith Loken 

Radloff   

 

Mr. Speaker: May I draw your attention to Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 64, 

subsection (5). The Speaker, when his attention has been called to a breach of order in the course of a 

division, has directed that the division should proceed, and has dealt with the matter when the division 

was completed. 

 

I would further draw your attention to Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 63, 

subsection (3). A division must take place if the Speaker is unable to decide from the members‟ voices 

whether a motion is carried or lost. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 11  

ESTABLISHMENT OF A MUNICIPAL FINANCING CORPORATION 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina 

South East): 

 

That this Assembly recommends that the Government give consideration to the establishment of a 

Municipal Financing Corporation to assist local government with capital projects by providing the 

means whereby local governments may market debentures without having to depend exclusively on 

the open market. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): Mr. Speaker, since the day this session opened I have heard 

Member after Member rise in his place and pledge to serve his constituency well, promise to abide by 

the rules, promise to be an honest and trustful Member of the Legislature. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, this is 

the intention of most of the Members. But political honesty and integrity go beyond an individual 

Member‟s intent. Let me explain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the last session of the Legislature a Resolution was introduced by the Hon. Member for 

Cannington (Mr. Weatherald)  

I am sorry that he doesn‟t seem to be in his place. It read this way, let me quote: 



 
March 28, 1968 

1517 

 

That this Legislature recognizes the difficulties being experienced by local governments in the sale of 

municipal debentures and urges the Government of Saskatchewan to investigate the feasibility of 

establishing a Municipal Loan Development Fund to assist with the purchase of municipal debentures. 

 

This Resolution got the unanimous support of the Legislature, it became one of 15 Liberal election 

platform planks. The election plank read this way: 

 

Establish a revolving loan fund for the purpose of making loans to municipalities and school systems at 

reasonable interest rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the New Democratic party also included in its election program a statement which said that 

we would establish a Municipal Finance Corporation to provide loan capital to local governments. In 

other words what we said in our election platform is similar to what is contained in the Resolution 

proposed by the Hon. Member for Regina South East. 

 

Our proposals would have gone further than the one proposed by the Liberal party, but basically they 

embrace a similar idea. Mr. Speaker, when the Resolution introduced by the Hon. Member for 

Cannington was debated last year he had this to say. Let me quote: 

 

Local governments have been experiencing difficulty in obtaining the necessary credit and that is the 

reason that I have presented this Resolution . . . I feel that it is a problem which needs attention and 

which this Government is ready to act upon. 

 

Note these words, Mr. Speaker, he said, last year that this Government, this Liberal Government was 

ready to act upon the Resolution that he had proposed. He then went on to say: 

 

In many cases projects have been built but the local governments now finds itself unable to sell the 

debenture issue in order to refinance temporary credit at banks and through credit unions and so forth 

. . . A substantial list could be made of projects which have been deferred due to lack of ability to 

obtain the necessary funds by financing. 

 

He went on and said: 

 

The problem of inflation and the rising cost of living in the past year has been an acute one . . . I have 

presented this Resolution because I feel that now is the time for a new type of action to be taken that 

would help improve the method in which local government finances are made available. 

 

He said that there is a drastic need for such a plan. It should 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1518 

be of considerable magnitude to supply the required funds. He estimated borrowing to be approximately 

$50 million per year. He suggested that one of the ways the funds could be obtained was from the 

Canada Pension Plan. He castigated the former Government for not taking action for developing such a 

plan. The arguments presented by the Hon. Member for Cannington were quite convincing. His 

Resolution received the unanimous approval of the Legislature. Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member for 

Cannington had anything to do in helping form the 15-point election platform of the Liberal Party, then I 

suggest to him that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has since then reneged and double-crossed the 

proposal that the Hon. Member put forward and that was put forward in the Liberal election platform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: You know, since this House opened there has been complete silence on the part of the 

Members opposite including the Member for Cannington about this promise that they made during the 

election campaign and about the Resolution that they introduced during the last session. You know, I am 

surprised that the Hon. Member for Cannington has so far not risen in support of the Resolution 

presented by the Hon. Member for Regina South East. I would hope that he would have seen fit to rise 

and to give support to this Resolution. Now I am surprised also, Mr. Speaker, that he hasn‟t had the 

courage during the time he has spoken in the House to raise a voice of criticism towards the Government 

that it has not placed this item on the priority list for the consideration of the Legislature at this session. 

He has been very silent on this issue so far. I would suggest to the Hon. Member for Cannington that he 

might present a Resolution censuring the Government for not including this for consideration at this 

session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday, the Hon. Provincial Treasurer rose in his place and spoke for a few minutes 

very loudly. He looked under the rugs of the past 24 years. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is 1968. It is not 

1944, it‟s not 1948, it‟s not 1952 or 1956 or 1960, this is 1968. Mr. Speaker, the 20 years of CCF 

Government is a glorious record, acknowledged as such by the majority of the people of Saskatchewan 

and by a great many people in the Dominion of Canada. There is no Government in Canada or political 

parties that can claim so many remarkable achievements in the interest of people than the record of the 

CCF Government over a period of 20 years. Mr. Speaker, this is the second term of the Liberal 

Government in office; it is the future that the people are concerned about. Yesterday is gone. Tomorrow 

must be our concern. Today the people are concerned about the failures of this Government, not any 

shortcomings of the CCF Administration of 1944. The Provincial Treasurer last Tuesday chided the 

Hon. Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker) about the economic problems the city of Regina is 

facing. He said that the city of Regina had the highest per capita debt of any city in the Dominion of 

Canada or at least any city in the Province of Saskatchewan. If this is true, then I submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that this Liberal 



 
March 28, 1968 

1519 

 

Government since taking office in 1964 had a great deal to do with creating this situation. It is because 

of the policy of discrimination that has been followed by this Government towards the city of Regina 

and the citizens of this city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: There is no other community that has received a worse deal and a raw deal than the 

people of Regina from this Administration. Let me be specific. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1964 Liberal candidates running in this city promised the people of Regina that, if they 

formed the government, they would increase grants to schools and municipalities to reduce municipal 

taxes. As far as the people of Regain are concerned, they said that they would provide 50 per cent of all 

education costs in the city of Regina. What is the record? Today this Government is providing 28 per 

cent of education costs in the city of Regina. They promised to provide an equitable share of gasoline 

revenues for the city of Regina for road construction and maintenance. Mr. Speaker, this Government is 

going to be taking or receiving $45 million or just about $46 million in gasoline revenue. On a per capita 

basis, the people of Regina are going to pay about $6.7 million towards the gasoline tax but Regina is 

not getting any of that money. If you look at their 1964 election platform they also promised to exempt 

Regina purchases from provincial sales tax. (This is for municipal purchases). Mr. Speaker, four years 

have gone by and not only have they not removed the tax from municipal tax purchases, but now we 

have a new increase. I noticed in the Regina Leader-Post of last week there appeared this report. It says: 

 

A study of the effects of the tax increases on the municipal estimates indicate that the substantial sum 

will have to be provided in 1968 current estimates if the city is to operate within the amount to be 

provided by the city council. About $46,000 must be provided in the estimates to meet the cost of the 

increases in provincial taxes. Mr. Smith reported the amounts broken down into $13,000 for gasoline 

tax and $33,000 for education and health tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina is going to be paying $33,000 more as a result of the increase in the 

sales tax and $13,000 in gasoline tax. They promised to eliminate the city purchases from the sales tax 

completely. They are going to receive $165,000 in the Education and Health tax from Regina City alone. 

They promised to remove that tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me point out some further examples of the raw deal that the people of Regina are 

getting. We are going to be receiving only a 15 cent per capita grant toward the support of the Library. 

Other communities are getting $1 per 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1520 

capita. We in the city of Regina are only going to be receiving a per capita grant of 75 cents towards 

public health services. The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) should have told us when he talked the 

other day that in the city of Prince Albert the health services are assumed by the province and are 

costing $2.75 per capita. The people of Regina on a per capita basis are discriminated by $2 per person 

per year towards the support of public health services. Take the case of police protection. Take a look at 

the Estimates  

$4 ½ million is provided for police protection for other communities and the city of Regina is going to 

get nothing. 

 

These are but a few examples of the raw deal. Let me get back to the accusation that the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) made the other day in regard to the Hon. Member for Regina South East, Mayor 

of this city. He talked about the city of Regina being in debt. I want to remind the Provincial Treasurer 

and the Members opposite that since His Worship Mr. Baker took office nine years ago, the general 

taxes, the general mill rate in the city of Regina during the nine-year period has only increased by 4½ 

mills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: Mr. Speaker, since this Government took office it increased the taxes since 1964 on the 

people of Saskatchewan on an average per capita basis by $75 per person. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: Compare that record! Mr. Speaker, His Worship has been the one man who has tried 

desperately to keep municipal taxes down. He has been very successful and deserves commendation as 

compared to what this Government is doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if Regina has difficulties, and I admit we have them, this Government must assume a large 

share of the blame. Mr. Speaker, the need for us adopting this Resolution to help and assist the 

municipalities has become more urgent than ever before, because of the fiscal and the monetary policy 

of the Liberal Government in Ottawa, which has allowed interest rates to climb month by month, year 

by year. It has made it almost impossible for municipalities to borrow money on the open market. 

Interest rates have to be paid now at eight and nine per cent and very soon they will have to be paying 10 

per cent for the sale of debentures. The need for establishing a municipal finance corporation to enable 

the municipalities to get money for capital construction is urgent. That money should be made available 

to municipalities at reasonable rates. If the Hon. Members on the Government side supported the 

Resolution the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) presented last year and if they meant what 

they said, they are bound and compelled to support the Resolution presented by the Hon. Mayor of the 



 
March 28, 1968 

1521 

 

city of Regina. If they fail to support it, then I say that what they did last year was nothing more than a 

bit of cheap political chicanery and political dishonesty introduced prior to the election. If they fail to 

support this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, then this will go on record as the Liberals‟ failure to keep trust and 

to keep faith with the promises they make and with the Resolutions they introduced and supported one 

year ago and then oppose the next year. Mr. Speaker, I will support the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say one word or two to 

my Hon. Friend who just sat down. As usual we have heard this story of him crying for help in the city 

of Regina so often, that most of us know it by heart. According to his figures he said that the cost to the 

city of Regina next year will be $33,000 because of the increase in sales tax. At that rate the city of 

Regina in the last three years saved $100,000 in the sales tax having been reduced from five to four per 

cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: What did you do with that money, Henry? 

 

Mr. McIsaac: What did we do with that money in the city of Regina? Just ask the Mayor  

Buffalo hats, wheat pins and what have you. This is where the Mayor of Regina saw fit to save the 

money that this Government tried to save the citizens. The Library grant to Regina, certainly it is not 

very large. But I want to tell the Hon. Members opposite it is many times larger than what it was when 

his Government was in power. Library spending in this province today is almost twice what it was just 

two years ago. We are extending library services to other libraries in the province that certainly don‟t 

have the same service as is available to Regina. He would lead us to believe that the people from Regina 

do not drive on any other highways except on the streets in the city of Regina. And this is typical of the 

logic in almost all of the arguments he put forth here this afternoon. 

 

As far as this Resolution is concerned, Mr. Speaker, a similar Resolution was brought in last year and it 

was passed. It is the program and the policy of this Government. Certainly we intend to support this 

Resolution. The fact of the matter is as my Hon. Friends are well aware, this Government is in no way 

responsible for the high cost of money today. We just felt that this was not the time to go out and borrow 

money on behalf of the Province to in turn loan it to the municipalities. Rather than that we have asked, 

not only our own departments but our municipal governments, to try and curtail capital spending as 

much as possible. Certainly we are going to support the Resolution. As soon as the time is appropriate 

we will establish the fund. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1522 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): I was prepared to get into a real rebuttal but when I heard the 

Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) say that he is prepared to support this fine Resolution, it has sort of 

taken the sales out of me a bit. But I would like to commend the Member for Regina North East (Mr. 

Smishek) for his tremendous message this afternoon with regard to my own occupation. I assure you, 

Mr. Smishek, that I‟ll be down in your constituency more than twice next time to help you get re-

elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: He has expounded the wonderful record of the Mayor of Regina and the Council in what we 

have done in the last nine years by only increasing our mill rate 4½ mills. But he didn‟t tell the whole 

story when he mentioned the 28 per cent that we get from the province on education costs. He forgot to 

tell you that the education mill rate went up 19½ mills in these nine years. Education of course should be 

a cost to the Provincial Government and some of the capital cost to the Federal. The Minister of 

Education sarcastically mentioned the Buffalo hats that we give away. I am very pleased to do that. I 

assure him that he will never get one. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: I can buy my own! 

 

Mr. Baker: I think one or two of them over there have received them. I am still looking forward to . . . 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): Discrimination! 

 

Mr. Baker: . . . Well okay. I‟ll think it over and perhaps I will. 

 

Mr. Steuart: Maybe Jackie Hoag . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: Why spoil a good afternoon? Now with regard to grants, Mr. Speaker, that we received  

the Library grants were mentioned at 15 cents per capita and the 75 cent grant we get for our health 

department. It is a mere pittance what we are getting when you think of the services that we provide, 

particularly for the people who have come from our Saskatchewan Weyburn Hospital and the other 

institutions. We look after some 56 patients without receiving any grant for it. When they first came into 

our city some four years ago, we had hundreds to look after. I could go into this and speak a whole hour 

on the question. It has been discussed here to a considerable extent and I don‟t want to create any more 

problems than there already are. I am not one that tries to gain political favor from people who 



 
March 28, 1968 

1523 

 

are unable to help themselves, but I do want to reiterate that I am not as guilty as some of the Members 

over there for what has happened in this province. 

 

Coming back to the Municipal Loan Fund, I am pleased that the Government will support it, but I think 

that we should pinpoint and recap some of the things that this will do. It is true that it will create a real 

savings to all the municipalities in getting debentures sold at lower interest rates. It will assure smaller 

municipalities particularly that they will be able to sell their debentures, instead of having them left on 

the shelf gathering dust. In many instances they have had to sell them at an interest rate which was out 

of the ordinary in this province. As I mentioned the other day, we in the city of Regina have done them 

many favors in picking up many of these debentures. I get personal calls from towns and villages and 

others to purchase them, being offered at even higher interest rates. However, we are fair and buy them 

at reasonable interest rates so that not too great a burden is placed on these municipalities. The figure I 

used was something like $18,186,000 purchased in debentures, including ours, in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The sinking fund situation in our city - and I can say this without fear of contradiction - is one of the 

finest setups in all of Canada. I am proud of it. We have had men on council, who have helped plan this 

to a point where our self-liquidating debt and our debt redemption program is well looked after in our 

community. I may say much better than any other municipal government in this province. 

 

This loan fund will give our local government board something to work with when it has to sift out 

various priorities for civic governments. It will continue to keep a well-balanced economy in every area 

of our province. It takes this sort of capital investment to keep our employment constant, instead of the 

booms and busts that we have realized over certain times in the past. It will provide extra revenue for the 

province through the various taxes levied. With regard to the other point which I touched on the other 

day, it will certainly leave private and risk capital for investment in industry, for investment in different 

types of housing, commercial construction and apartment dwellings. 

 

This Motion has the support of the urban organizations and I believe that we have passed similar 

Resolutions several times in the past two years. I wouldn‟t propose this to the same extent if we didn‟t 

have monies available like we have through the Canada Pension Plan, to which you and I contribute. I 

think these monies should be loaned back to all the people of Saskatchewan. The simplest way is to pick 

up debenture issues. I realize that we cannot buy them all, but we should purchase a good portion, in 

order to keep our local areas buoyant. I hope that the Government will act now. I think the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) said that it hopes to do it within four years. I say now is the time. Seeing we are 

unanimously 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1524 

in favor of this Motion. I don‟t see why we couldn‟t make a start this year and provide some funds for 

that purpose. It is so necessary particularly in view of the tight money situation, high-cost money and the 

high interest rates we are faced with. 

 

The Government can borrow it cheaper than we can. Why not use your preferred position to build that 

new Saskatchewan? I would ask for a unanimous endorsation, Mr. Speaker, of this Resolution to keep 

our local governments functioning at maximum efficiency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  

56 

 

Thatcher MacLennan Blakeney 

Howes Breker Davies 

McFarlane Leith Dewhurst 

Boldt Radloff Meakes 

Cameron Weatherald Berezowsky 

Steuart Mitchell Romanow 

Heald Larochelle Smishek 

McIsaac Gardner Thibault 

Guy Coupland Whelan 

Barrie McPherson Snyder 

Loken Charlebois Michayluk 

MacDougall Forsyth Brockelbank 

Grant McIvor Baker 

Coderre Schmeiser Pepper 

Bjarnason Lloyd Bowerman 

MacDonald Wooff Matsalla 

Estey Kramer Messer 

Hooker Willis Kowalchuk 

Gallagher Wood  

 

NAYS  

Nil 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 2  

GUARANTEED PRICES FOR FARMERS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): 

 

That this Legislature urge the Provincial Government to immediately request the Federal Government 

to adopt an agricultural policy that would ensure financial return to provide an adequate standard of 

living to farmers by guaranteeing prices of farm commodities based on the cost of production and 

subject to yearly review; such prices to be announced early enough each year to allow farmers to plan 

their current operations. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1525 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): 

 

That all the words after the word “agricultural” in the second line be deleted and the following words 

substituted therefor: 

 

“And trade policy establishing a trade commission under the Department of Trade and Commerce to 

negotiate with the various importing countries of the world and establish markets for Canadian 

agricultural products that would ensure favorable financial returns to our farmer producers.” 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on the amendment, I want to say that the 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), when he rose the other day and moved this amendment in the 

House, completely dumbfounded me, for any better word. How the Minister of Agriculture for the 

Province of Saskatchewan could rise and move such an alternate Resolution which really, Mr. Speaker, 

completely destroys the Resolution as was originally moved by myself, I cannot understand. It is hard 

for me to think that the Minister could be so callous. I listened to him carefully while he spoke, and he 

did not have one word to say about the problems of the small farmers. He did not even mention or 

discuss or bring forth one solution of the mass exodus of small farmers from the farms. He went on and 

mentioned the Vulcan Report. The very interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, was that he by-passed the first 

two paragraphs of the Report on page 1, which I would like to put on the record. It says: 

 

The crop year of 1967-68 has been a shock to the farmers, to grain companies and to people 

throughout Canada. The assumption was made that the level of sales achieved in the two previous 

years would quickly become the norm and that farmers could produce all the wheat that improved 

technology and increased fertilizer application could. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): Mr. Speaker, I quote the Vulcan Report and he is 

trying to answer some of the things that I said from the Vulcan Report, by quoting from Canadian Wheat 

Problems and Prospects. That is a different report altogether. 

 

Mr. Meakes: Okay, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll correct it on that. I still say that he completely neglected to come 

back to mention one solution to the problem that this Motion talked about, one solution to stop the 

exodus from the farms. I want to put on the records, Mr. Speaker, the cost-price index increase since 

1960, the cost index of the commodities that farmers must buy and the cost of production. It has risen 

from the figure $276.7 in 1960 to 1966 to $343.2. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that  

and I listened carefully to the Minister  

he completely 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1526 

ignored the cost-price squeeze that is facing agriculture today. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that he is 

completely divorced from farm problems. It seems to me that he is living in his ivory tower, and then he 

says sell more products. Mr. Speaker, I want to say this that selling more products is not going to keep 

the small farmer on the farm if he doesn‟t get a price for the produce that he sells that will meet the costs 

of production. We‟ve been fortunate in the last five or six years that we raised above-normal crops and 

some years, two crops in one. This is the only reason we have kept as many small farmers on the farm 

that they have been able to stay there. It seems to me that by this amendment, Mr. Speaker, he is saying 

really “To heck with the farmer.” It seems to me that, if this is the kind of solution that he is going to 

give to agriculture to solve the problems of agriculture, we are just going to see a continuing increase in 

large farms and heading for corporate farming. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this is just another sign, 

another proof of Liberal philosophy. This amendment is really only one aspect of a good viable 

agricultural policy. The amendment in itself is okay but it is no more useful than an aspirin for a 

headache. It doesn‟t cure the ill. It is not going to do anything to stop the flow of people from 

agriculture. I say again, selling farm produce at current prices will not cure the cost-price squeeze. The 

Minister went on and he talked about some of my friends over there having no interest in agriculture or 

in the lot of the small farmer and as long as I stay in this Legislature, I‟ll fight for them. 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): You‟re driving everybody out. 

 

Mr. Meakes: You know, Mr. Speaker, the only time some people listen is when they have their own 

mouth open and talking. I have plenty of time to stand here, Mr. Speaker, but I want to come back to the 

Minister. He went on and he talked about who would set a guaranteed price and what would the 

guaranteed price be. You know, Mr. Speaker, 25 years ago I heard the then Minister of Agriculture for 

Canada make the same kind of a remark. That was Jimmy Gardner. The Liberal philosophy and the 

Liberal mentality haven‟t changed. He can‟t even see that one possible answer might be an average 

between the two. I‟m not saying that this is the average, but we have many qualified agricultural 

economists who I‟m sure if they were asked to do it could come up with some figure. The Liberal party 

is never prepared to try anything new. Surely a Liberal Government in Ottawa which subsidized gold, 

and found a way of doing it - they had no hesitation in doing this - could well do this and subsidize this 

watered-down amendment, but I want to say this that the words the Minister was using the other day are 

practically the same words that R.B. Bennett said in 1930 when he said he would blast his way into the 

world‟s markets. He said he was going to send a bunch of people around the world to try to drum up 

sales. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1527 

 

I object to the meat being cut out of the Resolution. I say again it is not going to do anything to cure the 

ills of agriculture. I say that this Minister should hang his head in shame for even getting up and moving 

it in this House. I‟m sure that many of his own constituents will agree with me that his solutions to the 

problems of agriculture are not meaningful. I say he is not even speaking for agriculture. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m going to oppose the amendment and I‟ll support the Motion. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 3  

ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J.E. Brockelbank 

(Saskatoon Mayfair): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the introduction of legislation 

to establish an independent electoral boundaries commission charged with the responsibility of 

drawing Saskatchewan‟s electoral boundaries based primarily on the principle of representation by 

population. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, as you well know I‟ve been trying vainly several times to grab the floor on this 

Resolution as it wandered by. I finally have success within my grasp and I have an opportunity to close 

the debate on this Resolution which I had great hopes for at one time. I feel that I must make some 

remarks about the previous speaker when he spoke on this Resolution on March 26, the Hon. Member 

for Hanley (Mr. Heggie). His speech can roughly be broken down into three parts. In the beginning, part 

one, he listed all the abuses that had taken place in Saskatchewan since 1905 when redistribution was 

carried out by politicians. Mr. Speaker, this part of his presentation represented one of the strongest 

arguments in favor of an independent electoral boundaries commission. 

 

Part two of his presentation would have to be the area in which he displayed the great depth of his 

research that was done on the subject of the Federal Election Boundary Commission. He wasn‟t sure 

who all the Saskatchewan commissioners were nor did he know how many there were. Confidentially, 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t believe he would recognize a commissioner of that Commission if he sat directly in 

front of him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: If it were possible, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the Saskatchewan Federal Electoral 

Boundaries Commission to send a representative into this Chamber to be given equal time in this debate. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1528 

Part three of the Hon. Member for Hanley‟s dissertation on electoral boundaries dealt with some historic 

background, specifically rotten boroughs and pocket boroughs in old Great Britain. Our rate of advance 

in electoral reform can be measured by the fact that today we have rotten boroughs and pocket boroughs 

in Saskatchewan. Respectively they would have to be Prince Albert West and Hanley. The Hon. 

Member for Hanley clinched his argument by stating that all these previous prerogatives should be left 

in the hands of politicians who have been committing the abuses since 1905 in Saskatchewan and in the 

British Isles for decades. The Resolution that I present, Mr. Speaker, which reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the introduction of legislation 

to establish an independent electoral boundaries commission charged with the responsibility of 

drawing Saskatchewan‟s electoral boundaries based primarily on the principle of representation by 

population. 

 

I believe it deserves our support. 

 

I had the opportunity a couple of weeks ago to attend a closed seminar sponsored by the Extension 

Department of the University of Saskatchewan and the Saskatoon Public Library. That seminar brought 

together Members of the Conservative party, New Democratic party and the Liberal party for the 

purpose of discussing another matter of election reform, namely the Federal Government‟s report on 

election expenses. I was pleased to see representatives of these three parties get together to discuss a 

matter of real concern to the people of Canada. I mentioned in my previous remarks that the 

Government in Manitoba was being presented with some resolution by the Opposition, which is a 

Liberal Opposition, headed by Mr. Molgat in the Province of Manitoba. Mr. Molgat was saying that the 

Government should not tamper or try to make the composition of the commission in the Province of 

Manitoba partisan. It is mentioned that the architect of this non-partisan commission - and it is common 

knowledge - was Premier D.L. Campbell, who was Leader of the Liberal Government in the Province of 

Manitoba a number of years ago. This, Mr. Speaker, was from a clipping from the Leader-Post of March 

16, 1968. 

 

I believe that the request brought forward in this resolution is of real importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan. The measure of the value of good legislation or resolution, should be; is it good for the 

people? If it is good, Mr. Speaker, we should vote in favor of it. The test should not be; since it was not 

done in the past, we should not be considering doing it now. In the presentation of the Resolution, 

calling for an independent electoral boundaries commission, I omitted any reference to any past 

government redistribution. I begged the Members to be forward-looking on this Resolution and do the 

same. At this time I want to thank the seconder of the Resolution for his forward, direct approach to the 

problem that faces us all. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1529 

 

The Premier who spoke third in the debate was the first to look backwards. At that point, Mr. Speaker, I 

was sure the Resolution could meet defeat. Needless to say our side of the House can produce examples 

where electoral boundary juggling has harmed the interests of the people of Saskatchewan for every 

example their side of the House can present in this area. Consequently the debate from the Premier‟s 

remarks onward was a useless exercise and a waste of time. The Premier‟s desire to settle any kind of 

political reform in this province will not go unnoticed. You will have noted, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Premier did not refute one point in my remarks about the discrepancies that do exist in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. In my Resolution I pointed out that there are serious, unnecessary differences between 

one rural area and another, between one urban area and another, between urban areas and rural areas. 

Apparently my statistics are irrefutable because they stand unchallenged. 

 

In his remarks, the Premier did make a couple of statements which bear some observation and I‟m 

quoting directly from the records of the House: 

 

This Government of course has taken action to reform those situations. And we have removed the 

multi-seat constituencies in Regina, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. Today every voter votes for one 

candidate. And surely that‟s the fair way to do it. 

 

I am not in disagreement with single member constituencies, Mr. Speaker, but it does seem strange that 

the Premier‟s idea of fairness means that, although the CCF party received 1,000 votes more than the 

Liberal party in Saskatoon City, they received only 2 out of the 5 seats due to the arranging of 

constituency boundaries by the Liberal party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: In fairness, attention must also be paid to the weight of an individual‟s vote from one 

constituency to another. The second quotation of the Premier which is of some note is as follows: 

 

The Government will use the same mechanism in the redistribution field as has been used in this 

province since 1905. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the examples I presented show this method is partisan and outdated. My examples are 

unchallenged. The Premier‟s statement shows that the Liberal Party is committed to old partisan ideas. 

The Liberal Government in 1944 was committed to old outdated ideas and it was swept aside by 

Saskatchewan people. This Government, Mr. Speaker, will also be swept aside. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1530 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  

22 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Kramer Romanow Bowerman 

Willis Smishek Matsalla 

Wood Thibault Messer 

Blakeney Whelan Kowalchuk 

Davies Snyder Dewhurst 

Michayluk   

 

NAYS  

32 

 

Thatcher Grant Weatherald 

Howes Coderre Mitchell 

McFarlane Bjarnason Larochelle 

Boldt MacDonald Gardner 

Cameron Estey Coupland 

Steuart Hooker McPherson 

Heald Gallagher Charlebois 

McIsaac MacLennan Forsyth 

Guy Breker McIvor 

Loken Leith Schmeiser 

MacDougall Radloff  

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer) moved second reading of Bill No. 46 - An Act to amend 

The Insurance Premiums Tax Act. 

 

He said: On The Insurance Premiums Tax Act, the Government receives revenue from a 2 per cent tax 

on all premium income from insurance of property or persons located in Saskatchewan except premium 

income under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. We see no reason why premiums under The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act should be exempt from this 2 per cent insurance premium tax. So as 

I announced in my Budget Speech effective January 1, 1968, we propose to remove the exemption, that 

is for this current year, of the Automobile Accident Insurance fund from the 2 per cent insurance 

premium tax. We estimate that this will increase our budgetary revenue by some $500,000 a year or in 

this particular year we are in. With this very brief explanation on the principle of the Bill, I move second 

reading of Bill No. 46. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might call it 5:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:30 o‟clock p.m. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1531 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): Mr. Speaker, before I called it 5:30, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) had introduced this Bill which is designed to impose a tax on insurance premiums and 

particularly premiums payable under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

express opposition to this Bill, opposition on three counts: 

 

Firstly, this Bill is one of a long series of taxes; the sales tax increase from 4 per cent to 5 per cent, the 

sales tax on new items, increased charges for vehicle registration, increased charges for drivers‟ 

licences, an increase in gasoline tax, deterrent fees, pari-mutuel taxes, insurance premium taxes and the 

rest. Just how impressive has been the Provincial Treasurer‟s raid on the pocket books of the people of 

Saskatchewan is illustrated by the Order Paper which we have before us. I invite Hon. Members to look 

at this Order Paper and make a little check of how many Bills impose a new tax or a new fee. In the 

Adjourned Debates section of the Orders, there are five Bills in all, three of which, The Hospitalization 

Tax Act, The Fuel Petroleum Tax Act and The Education and Health Tax Act impose new taxes. Going 

down to the Committee of the Whole section of the Orders, we see new fees to be contained in The Real 

Estate Licensing Act, and The Collection Agents Act, The Employment Agents Act. We turn the page 

and there are still more taxing statutes, in Bill No. 46, The Insurance Premiums Tax Act, and further 

down, Bill No. 68, The Horse Race Regulations Act and the Act to Amend the Cancer Control Act. 

Those three Bills impose new taxes. And I‟m sure that I‟ve forgotten a few taxing Bills because the 

Provincial Treasurer has taken to tucking his tax imposts into all sorts of corners of legislation. On a 

quick count there are six new tax Bills and three new fee Bills that are on the Order Paper now. It seems 

to me that we could have taken two or three bites of this particular cherry. The Provincial Treasurer 

could have introduced some of these tax Bills last year and some this year and some next year. There 

doesn‟t seem to be any reason for increasing every conceivable tax in one year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to oppose this Bill on another ground and that is because it attacks the 

principle of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. The Automobile Accident Insurance Act has been 

on the books for 24 years. The plan has been in operation since 1944 and since 1944 it has been a pool 

operated for motorists. Nothing was put into the pool except by motorists, The Treasury put nothing into 

the pool and took nothing out of it. It was, time and time again, reiterated in this House when we were 

the Government and when the Liberal party were the Government, that the rates set by The Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act were set by the motorists themselves. This was a pool of money which belonged 

to the motorists. Nobody put money into the pool other than the motorists and nobody tapped it other 

than the motorists. We had a slight breach in that dike last year when a tax was imposed to finance 

driver training. We didn‟t particularly object to that move because perhaps driver training is a legitimate 

charge against the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1532 

motoring public. But now we have a tax levied against Automobile Accident Insurance Plan premiums 

not for any designated purpose except financing the regular programs of the Government. For the first 

time we‟ve had this insurance plan used as a taxing device. Mr. Speaker, this is by no means the first 

insurance plan which has been used as a taxing device, nor by no means the first Crown corporation 

which has been used as a taxing device. Members opposite have decided that they are going to use the 

Telephone Company as a taxing device; they‟ve decided they are going to use the Power Corporation as 

a taxing device and now, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve decided that they are going to use the compulsory 

Automobile Accident Insurance Plan as a taxing device. I think this is an erosion of a fine program, one 

of the programs which genuinely put Saskatchewan ahead. And what, Mr. Speaker, is the Government 

offering as an excuse for this? What did the Provincial Treasurer offer as an explanation in introducing 

the Bill? He said, “Well other insurance premiums are subject to tax, why should not the Automobile 

Accident Insurance Act premiums be subject to tax.” That‟s an interesting argument, an interesting 

argument, Mr. Premier. I wonder if the Provincial Treasurer is aware that health insurance sold by 

private companies is subject to a tax, a premiums tax. I wonder if this means that next year he‟ll be 

coming into this House imposing a premiums tax on the Medical Care Insurance premiums. What other 

conclusion could you logically draw from his remarks? We have had private companies selling private 

automobile insurance subject to a tax. We have had a compulsory program that everyone participates in, 

not subject to a tax. The Provincial Treasurer says, “We must even them up. We must make the 

compulsory program pay tax just like the voluntary insurance.” I repeat, Mr. Speaker. We have private 

health insurance which pays a premiums tax and we have a compulsory health insurance program the 

premiums of which are not subject to a premiums tax. Is the Provincial Treasurer going to come in here 

next year and say, “We must even them up, we must use the Medical Care Insurance premiums as a 

basis for taxation.” It seems to me that this is the road we are travelling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my third reason for opposing this Bill is that it is an overt step to undermine The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act. Mr. Speaker, it is well known that the Government opposite is 

negotiating with private insurance companies to sell out The Automobile Accident Insurance Plan. 

 

An Hon. Member: How childish can you get. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: I‟m not being childish. You can read Mr. Ted Davis‟ articles in the Toronto Globe and 

Mail. And he is pretty reliable on these points because he has a straight pipeline to the Premier‟s office 

as is well known and he has advised on this point. I would like Hon. Members opposite, if they can, to 

deny that the Government is carrying on negotiations with the All-Canada Insurance Federation right 

now, right now. In fact this is going on. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1533 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: Yes, I‟m not surprised that the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) doesn‟t know 

about it. There‟s no particular reason that he would be aware of the plans of the Government. But it 

seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the evidence is in, that the Government is in fact negotiating. Step by 

step we are seeing this plan being set up to be knocked off. We had in The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act amendments this year a small change, nothing alarming, but for the purpose of putting 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act policies in line, in line with the private policies. We have this Bill 

which we are now discussing and which is designed to get the Automobile Accident Insurance Plan tax 

position in line with the private ones. Why the need to get all these things lined up? I think that the 

answer is clear. The Government wants it so that when the time comes, when the Automobile Accident 

Insurance Plan is in fact sold out, the number of changes which have to be made will be reduced to a 

minimum. We are seeing this thing being done gradually, step by step. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Government is negotiating to sell the Automobile Accident Insurance Plan or sell it out. I say that step 

by step it is making The Automobile Accident Insurance Act conform to private insurance principles so 

that the ground will be laid for this sell-out. I say that this is another Bill which is designed to do just 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is nothing short of a setup or sell-out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: Under these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, I will oppose the Bill. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): Mr. Speaker, I am not going to say a great deal in closing 

this debate. The charge that we are lining up the Government Automobile Insurance to sell out to the 

private sector is of course nonsense. We have had discussions with some people in this regard, and I 

suppose as long as we are the Government, people will come and talk to us. I suppose that when you 

people were the Government, they came from time to time to talk to you. 

 

The difference may be that we set down and talked with them. We talk to a great many business men 

and industrialists. That‟s why they come here. You people should have talked to them and listened to 

them and maybe you would still be the Government. But you didn‟t choose to do that. I can say 

categorically that we have no intention of selling the SGIO. We have no intention of doing away with it. 

But we don‟t see why it shouldn‟t carry its proper share of the financial load. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1534 

Among other things that we are doing we have initiated, for example, driver training and we will spread 

this all over the province and the cost will come out of Government revenue. There is no reason why it 

should not be paid for from a tax on insurance because we hope that this is one step that we are taking, 

in fact we are confident it will improve the driving in this province and will cut down the accident rate 

and will very markedly affect this insurance program. So there is no reason why it shouldn‟t carry its 

weight. The people who buy insurance should pay a small portion towards these programs that we are 

initiating and will develop and expand. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new. There is no ulterior motive other than to say that this Government 

program, as we have always believed of all Government programs, when they are in business and are 

competing in the market place of the province, should carry its proper share and its proper load of the 

tax burden of this province. To say that we are taxing the Power Corporation, of course this is a piece of 

unmitigated nonsense. We took the Power Corporation - now that he brought the subject up - without 

raising the rates. In fact after having lowered the rates in the city of Regina, and without raising the rates 

anywhere else in the Province, we took the Power Corporation from a position where it was not making 

any money or making very little money to a position last year where it made $11 million. We were able 

to take some of this money - and a great deal of this money came from industry and business - and gave 

the people of this province for the first time a dividend. If this is such a terrible principle why had the 

former Government - and I don‟t blame them for this - why had it done the same thing with the 

Telephone Corporation? Now the reason it hadn‟t been able to do this with the Power Corporation is 

that, led by Mr. Cass-Beggs and his peculiar theories of business and the way that the Corporation was 

run, it never had the money to do this. We changed it! We put it on a business-like basis and we were 

able for the first time not to tax the people but to return some money back to the people. If that isn‟t the 

purpose surely of a publicly owned corporation, then I don‟t know what is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just a simple tax to allow the users of the Automobile Accident Insurance Plan to 

help pay part of the cost of running government. This money will be returned to them in the form of 

services. I hope that all Members even the ones opposite, will support this very enlightened tax measure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  

29 

 

Thatcher Grant Mitchell 

Howes Coderre Larochelle 

McFarlane Bjarnason Gardner 

 



 
March 28, 1968 

1535 

 

 

Boldt Hooker Coupland 

Cameron Gallagher McPherson 

Steuart MacLennan Charlebois 

Heald Breker Forsyth 

McIsaac Leith McIvor 

Guy Radloff Schmeiser 

Loken Weatherald  

 

NAYS  

21 

 

Lloyd Dewhurst Michayluk 

Wooff Meakes Brockelbank 

Kramer Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kowalchuk 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Steuart 

(Provincial Treasurer) that Bill No. 63 - An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Steuart: Are we going to have the same speech? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: If they are all the same taxes, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t see why we shouldn‟t have the same 

speech. It seems to me that every conceivable tax has been raised and the reasons for raising them are as 

specious and unreasonable in one case as they are in the other. There seems to be no reason why the 

same logical arguments would not commend themselves to Members opposite in the one as case as the 

other. Certainly each and every one of these taxes, Mr. Speaker, is a tax which this Government has 

imposed and which it promised not to impose. Each and every one of them is brought in by a 

Government which was pledged to reduce taxes and has dishonored that pledge time and time again. 

Each and every one of them ought to be rejected by every Member in this House who believes that he 

ought to honor his election pledges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spoke at some length on this Bill before and I don‟t intend to take any great amount of 

the time of the House on the Matter. It seems to me, however, that a couple of comments ought to be 

made. I was surprised at the figures offered by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). I am particularly 

surprised at his estimate that the tax on hotel rooms and the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1536 

like yield only $300,000. It seems to me that that figure is low. It seems also to me that his estimate of 

$10 million for the extra one per cent on the present tax base is low. I predict that when the year‟s 

receipts are in, certainly the $10 million figure will be higher. In fact the tax burden being imposed by 

the Provincial Treasurer is greater than he is prepared to admit. I suggest that he is like a squirrel and he 

is laying aside a few nuts . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: I‟d certainly like to lay aside . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: Sitting where he does, he is certainly well acquainted with that particular commodity. I 

suggest that he is laying aside a few nuts so that when the time comes to distribute a few goodies he will 

have some money laid aside. I don‟t think that there is any doubt that the tax will yield a greater sum 

than he has estimated. In fact, he is giving the House information which will turn out to be false. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was particularly surprised when Members opposite indicated that they felt that the burden 

of this tax on municipalities was something which was so trivial that it called for nothing but a joke. 

They suggested, Mr. Speaker, that savings by the municipalities, when The Education and Health Tax 

Act may have been at a lower figure than it is now had been frittered away on Buffalo hats. I don‟t know 

whether the Government opposite is in any position to criticize any municipality in this province for 

their use of publicity media. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that any Government which can spend very 

large and, as yet, undisclosed sums on balls on the opening of the Legislature, on official openings of 

picnic tables, and on official openings of all manner of other Government projects, is in no position to 

criticize any municipality which gives away the odd Buffalo hat to a distinguished citizen, and I think, 

with very considerable perception withholds them from Members opposite. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: Where is Standing Buffalo tonight? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: At least he‟s not sitting beside Sitting Bull, the Member from Prince Albert West. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it is worthwhile to note that it is probable that this tax or a considerable portion of 

this tax would not be necessary, if the Government would adopt for itself some of the economy 

measures which it is recommending to all of the municipalities and school boards in this province. I 

don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, why it is necessary to carry on the reconstruction of the Legislative Building, 

piece by piece, and particularly I don‟t know why it is necessary to do it when 



 
March 28, 1968 

1537 

 

the House is in session, so that it is a considerable hazard for a Member to get to his office from the 

Legislative Chamber. Evidently, Mr. Speaker, this is being done as an economy measure. I am not 

complaining about the fact that the Legislative Building is being renovated, but I ask Hon. Members to 

ask themselves, whether a more expensive way to renovate this building could be found than to do it 

each evening with the need to tear down one scaffold when the work is finished at night and put it up 

again when the work is resumed the next night, probably paid at time and a half, hour after hour, day 

after day, week after week. Just why it was not possible for the Government to arrange its affairs to 

vacate a wing of this building and get the renovation done, cheaply and expeditiously, I do not know. I 

trust that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) will tell us that on his estimates. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): Where is the relation between this and 

Education Tax? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: The relationship between this and the Education Tax as requested by the Hon. Minister 

of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) the Member for Maple Creek, I thought would have been obvious. 

It seems to me that the need to tax a man when he goes in and buys a meal for his wife and himself and 

each meal costs $1.10 each, so the total amounts to $2.20, the need to get 10 cents out of him could well 

be avoided if a few simple economy measures were adopted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Speaker, I do not want to suggest that great sums of money could be saved by a 

more economical method of renovating this building, but I am going to suggest that huge sums of money 

could be saved if the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) would use a few little economy measures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: Mr. Speaker, I think that it is well known that between 1963 and 1966 according to the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics‟ figures, the unit cost of building highways in Canada increased by about 

27 per cent. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): Talk about 1956. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: I don‟t know what the interjection of the Hon. Member for Rosthern is about, but 

doubtless he will talk about what he wants to talk about when he joins this debate. I want to talk about 

the period which has just passed and for which the Members opposite are responsible. I want to talk 

about the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1538 

slipshod administration which has led to the necessity to the piling on of tax after tax after tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: I want to talk about the fact that whereas elsewhere in Canada highway costs increased 

by about 27 per cent and whereas the highest cost outside Saskatchewan would be under 35 per cent, in 

Saskatchewan the unit cost of building highways is increased, not 27 per cent, not 35 per cent, but 63 per 

cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: I want to say that if the Government opposite had been able to control its highway costs 

as every other Government in Canada did - and I am not talking about how many miles they build but 

how much it costs them to build a mile of road or move a yard of dirt - if they had been able to control 

those costs as every other Government in Canada has done, the savings would be by my calculations of 

the order of $12 to $14 million. Yes, $12 to $14 million between 1963 and 1966. I invite Hon. Members 

to take out their pens and decide how much the highways would have cost had cost increases been 30 or 

35 per cent and not 63 per cent. 

 

And under those circumstances if we had $12 or $14 million more in the Treasury it is entirely possible 

that this Bill would not be necessary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: And I think that the maladministration of the Government is the prime reason why we 

are faced with this tax increase. I think, Mr. Speaker, that under these circumstances we ought to oppose 

the Bill. It is not good enough for the Members opposite to say that Prince Edward Island has the same 

tax or New Brunswick has a higher tax. We are not blessed with the same resources that Prince Edward 

Island or New Brunswick has. We have very much greater resources. We ought to be able to turn those 

resources to account so that the ordinary taxpayer of Saskatchewan is not called upon to pay new tax 

after new tax. Mr. Speaker, this is just one more tax which illustrates the deceit of the Liberal party 

when they fought the last election and the maladministration of the Government in their last term of 

office, and I will oppose the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): I just want to say a word or two. I don‟t like any Member of the House 

making a charge, a blanket charge that any Member or all Members on the other side of the House were 

deceitful. I certainly make no apologies for where I stand on this 



 
March 28, 1968 

1539 

 

particular tax. 

 

During the election campaign of 1967 I preached one thing and that was, “There is no free ride with the 

Liberal party.” Mr. Speaker, my opponent, the Socialist from Melville who ran against me promised 

everything and anything. The sky was the limit. I told people - and I have all the radio scripts, all the 

television scripts that I used during the course of the campaign - and I said one thing, “I am promising 

nothing but good government. Good responsible government.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: I said, “You are not going to get anything for nothing from a Liberal Government.” Mr. 

Speaker, the majority of people in my constituency wanted good government. They didn‟t want 

something for nothing. I resent any Member getting and making a blanket charge that we got elected 

deceitfully. He gets up and says, “Every Member in this House should vote against this Bill.” I want to 

remind him and he was sitting somewhere along in this row of seats about five or six years ago, the fall 

of 1961, and I was sitting back there. I remember the Government of the day increasing the sales tax not 

by 25 per cent but by 60 per cent in one whack. And Member after Member tried to get up and justify 

the increase of 60 per cent. We gave them a pretty hard time. Then after they saw that they were badly 

beaten on the argument, one day their old friend Tommy Douglas came in and you know after he put the 

skin on it, you‟d think that maybe they had made a mistake. They should have increased it 150 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government is being responsible. This Government is spending more money on 

education, more money on health, more money on welfare, more money on highways, than the other 

Government ever thought of spending and we are being responsible and we are balancing our Budget. 

We could have done like the CCF did in 1960, 1961 and 1962 - amortized 50 per cent of the taxable 

expenditure on the Department of Highways. We didn‟t do it because it is wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I make no apologies whatever for supporting this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): Mr. Speaker, I always get a real charge when the Regina 

Centre Member (Mr. Blakeney) gets up and talks about finance. 

 

Mr. Michayluk (Redberry): So do we! 

 

Mr. Boldt: You know I am always reminded, when he was the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1540 

Minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance, how he plowed $500,000 every year into 

the Saskatchewan Guarantee and Fidelity Company that was doing business in Russia and South 

America. But at no time would he let the people of Saskatchewan know where that money went. That 

was even hidden in the reports. It was only until the Liberal Government came into office that this was 

revealed. Then he comes to us and says, “Oh, the Liberals are a bunch of crooks and they hide the 

taxations from the people of Saskatchewan.” He always leaves the impression that there is something 

drastically wrong with the Department of Highways. 

 

Well there certainly is nothing wrong in the Department of Highways as I have said before. You know I 

had a contractor - and I will name him - Mr. South, come to me last summer and he said, “You know in 

1956 I got 55 cents a yard for moving dirt on Highway No. 2.” I don‟t think that I signed one contract 

where we have given a contractor 55 cents a yard for dirt moving. This happened in 1956. Now in the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics, and you have it, it will show that in 1965 our prices as compared to 1956 

are about 10 per cent higher than they were when you were the Government. It was when the Federal 

Government participated in the Trans-Canada Highway, the budget of course was quite high, but the 

moment the Trans-Canada Highway was finished, the Budget dropped. You had a higher Budget in 

1955 in highways than you had in 1963. Can you imagine that? This is progress. In 1955 you had a 

higher budget than you had in 1963. The contractors were all geared up to do a good piece of highway 

work, but you just took the money out of the budget and the contractors were left sitting there with their 

construction equipment. There was no money to earn and of course the prices had to go down. It was 

just like during the Dirty Thirties when it came to the Highway Department. Of course the prices went 

down. They went up in 1963 to 1964. Most of the contracts were let by the former Government. We 

took office in May and if you had given us the Government one month earlier than you did, we could 

have let some of those contracts. But those contracts were mostly let by the former NDP Government 

and the prices had gone up considerably in 1964. Now they say that we are spending money foolishly. 

Well, I am telling the Opposition, is there a school teacher that is on wages of 1955 or 1956? There isn‟t 

one. Is there a labor man that is working for 10 per cent more than he got in 1955? This is what the 

contractors in Saskatchewan are doing today. They are working on a unit bid price which is 10 per cent 

higher than in 1956, and I think that this is a real good price. The Dominion Bureau of Statistics will 

indicate when you go right through all the pages, that our prices per unit are not higher - and I would say 

that they are lower - than in the majority of other provinces in Canada. I say that we are getting a real 

good price. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: They say that there is a lot of waste in highways. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1541 

 

I‟ll just show you what you did in 1963-64, the last year you were in government. You moved 7.4 

million yards of dirt. Well in 1964-66, the first year that we were in full operation we moved 22.5 

million yards or an increase of over 200 per cent. And in 1967-68 we moved 28.8 million yards or 

another 31 per cent increase, or in other words, the increase percentage-wise in dirt moved from 1963-64 

as compared to 1967-68 is a 290 per cent increase. This represents almost a four-fold increase. You 

don‟t have to tell me that there is waste in the Highway Department. We are building far better 

highways. If you want to compare a unit price from out of the ditch or a unit price of dirt that you have 

to haul out of a burrow pit, the price is not the same. If you want to compare that unit price to a unit 

price out of the pit, you should have your head examined. This is just like comparing oranges with 

apples. There is no comparison whatsoever. Our people in the Highway Department are much, much 

more selective than they were 10 years ago. I don‟t blame the Government for this. Traffic today 

warrants that we build better highways. We are far more particular about the oil selection, far more 

particular about the gravel selection. We are trying to build the best highways possible and this is 

reflected in the cost. I certainly support this Bill because we are building better highways. I supported 

the other Bill about the insurance. I don‟t think that I am out of order when I talk about tax increases. 

They will help to build better and safer highways. They will help to train our students in the schools so 

that they know how to operate the car. 

 

I support this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): Mr. Speaker, it always amuses me when the Minister of Highways 

gets up and talks about what they are doing now. I agree with him when he says that this Department of 

Highways is spending money. Nobody disputes that. But when the Minister gets up and starts disputing 

with the Dominion Bureau of Statistics‟ figures, Dominion Bureau of Statistics‟ figures show that the 

price of moving dirt in Saskatchewan, the price of building highways in Saskatchewan went up 63 per 

cent from 1963, the last year that we were in office, to 1967 when this Government was in office. And 

the Minister gets up and talks about the tremendous amount of dirt that they moved, compares one facet 

of the Department of Highway‟s work with what we did in moving dirt. 

 

There is no doubt about it that they are moving more dirt. Their figures show this, Mr. Speaker. But the 

cost that they are paying for moving this dirt is almost as if this was gold that they are moving. My 

friend, the Member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) has an answer to two questions which he got just today, 

I think it was. The contract price which was $400,000 different from the amount which was paid to the 

contractor who did the work on Highway No. 5 or No. 14. $400,000 was the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1542 

contract price. The final payment to the contractor was $800,000, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Steuart: Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. It seems that every day we have a debate on the Highway 

Department. We are bringing in the Highway Estimates. Now I realize that in this tax Bill that is before 

us they could argue about telecommunications, about meals and hotels, but I don‟t recall in this 

particular instance, that we are doing anything to tax highways. I just wonder if we could save this 

wonderful reference until we get the Highways Department to tell us how much they appreciate this 

wonderful tax Bill we are bringing in. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. You know it always seems to 

bother, a point of order always seems to bother the Provincial Treasurer when someone from this side is 

speaking. This speech made on highways is outside of the floor. 

 

Mr. Willis: I was trying to point out to the Minister of Highways and the Government opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, if there hadn‟t been this waste on highways that they would not have had to impose this one per 

cent increase in sales tax. This was the point that was made by the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney). This is the point I am trying to make and when we get into Highway Estimates, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll certainly prove that, with the help of the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) of course, there is a 

great deal of waste in the Department of Highways. One other instance here where the Minister could 

have saved money for the Provincial Treasurer so that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) wouldn‟t 

have had to up the Education and Health tax by one per cent, was the work which was done on No. 102. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, No. 102 is north of Churchill. We let this contract back in 1963. It isn‟t finished yet, 

Mr. Speaker. There was 120 working days allowed to the contractor in this contract, 120 working days. 

The answer I got last year was that the Department . . . 

 

Mr. Boldt: On a point of order. My purpose in entering the debate is to help the Minister of Finance. I 

think you could make much, much more progress if I would leave the Chamber and I will so do, because 

they are just hitting at me. 

 

Mr. Willis: Mr. Speaker, to complete the example of waste I was giving, here we had 120 working days 

allowed for the 19.7 miles of grade north of Churchill River on No. 102. The contractor is on the 656th 

day right now. It is 656 days since the contractor began work. Now he is being penalized by the 

Department, the Department is collecting from him at a rate of $90 a day, 90 times 500, means that the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) will get an extra revenue of $45,000. But this is offset by the 

tremendous increase in the contract price. I 



 
March 28, 1968 

1543 

 

would say. Speaking directly from memory now, I think the contract price went up four times. Four 

times $45,000, Mr. Speaker, that means that the contractor can afford to pay $45,000 when he gets 

approximately $140,000 over and above this for completing the contract. And the point which we on this 

side are trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is that if the Department of Highways had been more efficient, had 

treated the clay in Saskatchewan as if it were ordinary clay rather than gold, then we wouldn‟t have had 

this tremendous amount of waste and inefficiency by the Department of Highways and the Provincial 

Treasurer would have been saved from the disgrace which has come to him in having to raise all of these 

taxes to balance his Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: I must inform the House that the mover of the motion is about to close the debate, if 

anybody wishes to speak he must do so now. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): Mr. Speaker, you were putting the question when the 

Minister got to his feet, it was a clever ruse to get some Members into the House so he wouldn‟t lose the 

vote. 

 

Mr. Steuart: I couldn‟t be that clever. The House was ready for question and I was putting the question 

and I haven‟t declared the result thereof. Mr. Speaker, obviously the Opposition are grinding out the 

same arguments for every one of the tax increases that we have had to bring in. We have brought in tax 

increases that we have had to bring in. We have brought in tax increases and we have some more tax 

increases to bring in. When we finish taking this vote we will proceed with the adjourned debate on the 

increase to the gasoline tax. But nowhere at anytime in their opposition, no matter how long they speak, 

whether it‟s on the Department of Highways, no matter how many red herrings they‟ve attempted to 

drag into these debates, have they ever shown the responsibility of suggesting how they would meet the 

costs of today‟s government and supply the service that they demand on their side of the House and the 

people in this province expect. Now we recognize that an Opposition‟s job is to oppose but we do 

suggest that from time to time they should show a slight measure of responsibility. If they fail to do this, 

then I suggest when the next debate comes up again we won‟t hear from the Member for Melfort-

Tisdale (Mr. Willis). I hope that he has given his last speech on highways tonight, but we may hear it 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the increase in this tax and the widening of the tax base is necessary. The money will be 

spent for education and health. I haven‟t heard the Members opposite suggest that we should cut either 

of these programs. In fact if we have been criticized at all, we have been criticized for not spending 

more. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1544 

Mr. Blakeney: . . . Deterrent fees. 

 

Mr. Steuart: Yes, the fees we put on to try to bring some responsibility to those programs as well. 

Never, never in the history of this province have we seen a more irresponsible Opposition. They have 

shown it tonight and they will continue to show it throughout this debate and throughout this sitting. Mr. 

Speaker, I will urge Members to support this very responsible move to increase these taxes. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS  

30 

 

Thatcher Grant Weatherald 

Howes Coderre Mitchell 

McFarlane Bjarnason Larochelle 

Boldt Estey Gardner 

Cameron Hooker Coupland 

Steuart Gallagher McPherson 

Heald MacLennan Charlebois 

McIsaac Breker Forsyth 

Guy Leith McIvor 

Loken Radloff Schmeiser 

 

NAYS  

22 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Kramer Romanow Bowerman 

Willis Smishek Matsalla 

Wood Thibault Messer 

Blakeney Whelan Kowalchuk 

Davies Snyder Dewhurst 

Michayluk   

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart that Bill 

No. 43  

An Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 43 which is before us at this time, is a Bill which 

I believe the Members opposite, the Government, should hang their head in shame. It‟s plain to see, Mr. 

Speaker, they are all retreating to listen to the box out in the rotunda rather than staying in their places in 

the House, but I intend to make a few remarks on this Bill anyway. This Bill is a Bill which is vicious in 

its nature. The Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) waxed eloquently on this Bill the other 

day and pointed out how the Government had removed the mineral tax from farm land and that was such 

a concession 



 
March 28, 1968 

1545 

 

to the farmers. The majority of the farmers don‟t have, and never did have, the mineral rights to their 

property, so the removal of mineral tax on the farm land I agree was a concession to those farmers 

concerned, but it will not compensate for this two cents increase on farm fuel. The Minister of Mineral 

Resources also said that the savings to the farmers of this province by allowing them to use purple gas in 

farm trucks was a saving of between $4 and $5 million. I‟d like to know where he gets these statistics 

from because three or four years ago when this was brought into the House, it was estimated that it 

would be around $2.8 million of a saving. Then each time that it tells the story it gets to be higher and 

higher until now the saving is between $4 and $5 million. At a previous session we placed a question on 

the Order Paper asking what was the saving to farmers for allowing them to use purple gas in farm 

trucks. The reply we got from the Government, Mr. Speaker, was to the effect that there was no way of 

having the correct information, no way of knowing, because separate account records would have to be 

kept not only by the filling stations but by farmers, because there was no way of knowing what fuel went 

into a farm truck or what went into the tractor, so it could not answer the question because there was no 

way of having the knowledge. Yet we are told now it is between $4 and $5 million. It is just double what 

it was three or four years ago. Now this tax is being placed on the farm fuel purportedly to help finance 

roads, because it says the farmers use roads. There was also mention made the other day by the Minister 

of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) that it is giving great assistance on the building of access roads. 

Now as for a number of access roads that are being built now, Mr. Speaker, when the municipalities 

came in last spring to see this Government, to see if they could go ahead and build access roads, they 

were told they could. The formula was worked out as to what percentage the Government would pay. 

But what happened, according to my information, is that the municipalities were told they could go 

ahead and build the roads and they would get their share of the cost from the Government in three, four 

or five years‟ time when money was available. So in the meantime the municipality builds the whole 

road, finances the whole cost and may get part of its money back at a later date. So it is not paying at the 

present time as much money for the building of access roads as it tries to impress this House or the 

people of this province with. 

 

The Minister also said, “Every one of you on that side of the House voted against purple gas for farm 

trucks.” I wish he would check the Votes and Proceedings and the records of this House for that debate 

and the vote concerned, because it was a recorded vote. The Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) did 

vote against it and he was highly ridiculed by the Government. He said at that time that one of the 

reasons he was voting against it - and time has proved him absolutely right - was because if they allowed 

this to go through it was just opening the door for the Government to come back at a later date and start 

taxing farm fuels. And that is just what is being done now. It is putting the two-cent tax on farm fuels, 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1546 

as the Member for Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) said three years ago, when it made it possible for farmers to 

use purple gas in their trucks. 

 

Now what is this two cents per gallon? It doesn‟t look to be so great, two cents per gallon; but it is not a 

5-cent tax, we have just finished talking about a 5-cent tax Bill. This is ten per cent. The cost of diesel 

fuel in the city of Regina here for the farmers is about 18 cents or maybe a wee bit better, it‟s 18.2 or 

18.3 in Regina, I phoned and got the information, and for bronze it‟s around 22 cents, an average of 

about 20 cents. A two cent per gallon tax is a ten per cent tax. Now farmers living away from the city of 

Regina further from the refineries have an added cost to their fuel. Their fuel would be above the 

average of 20 cents per gallon because there is the cost of either shipping by rail or the trucking added to 

that fuel. So they not only pay the two cents per gallon on the fuel here, but the price of the fuel is going 

to go up because the increased taxes by the Liberals that we have seen in this Legislature this session 

means that the cost to truckers has gone up. The price of the diesel fuel or gas in their trucks is up, their 

license and insurance is up, so they are going to charge more for hauling the fuel out to the different 

areas of this province. That means the farmers‟ costs are going to go up again, not only due to this Bill 

but due to other Bills. 

 

A lot of our tractors today, Mr. Speaker, as you are well aware, because I know you are well aware of 

the hazards of farming and the responsibilities and the worry of a farm, will burn three gallons of fuel 

per hour. And in the busy seasons in seeding time it is quite common for a lot of those tractors to run as 

high as 15 hours a day, sometimes more. Sometimes the farmers will have a tractor and they will have 

the wife help operate it, or there may be a son after school. They keep the tractor running for long hours. 

That‟s going to be a $1 a day tax on those farmers on each tractor if they burn three gallons of fuel per 

hour. 

 

Another thing that has been announced in this Legislature is that farm land is going to be up for auction 

sale. This is going to mean, Mr. Speaker, as I have said before that if this farm land which the farmers 

need on these leases and so on to help round out a unit, comes up for auction sale they are going to have 

less money due to this Bill for to bid on the land, to buy the land which they need in their farming 

operations. If they do not get that land then their unit is going to be undersize. They are going to be at 

more disadvantages in order for to compete in the farming economy today. Then we see headlines in the 

paper, as we have seen this last few days, that the farm income from the province this past year was the 

greatest ever, we see the announcement of the Wheat Board payments, what a large payment it is and so 

forth. Unless we examine the costs of what the farmer has to pay, it looks like the farmers are receiving 

a lot of money. But the Dominion Bureau of Statistics or any other statistics will show that the cost-price 

squeeze is greater on the farmer than any other segment of our economy. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1547 

 

Roughly 12 per cent of Canada‟s population is engaged in agriculture, yet agriculture as a whole only 

gets about five per cent of the gross national product into agriculture. If we were getting our fair share of 

the national productivity returned to agriculture, the taxes the farmers have to pay wouldn‟t bother them, 

because, Mr. Speaker, it is not these taxes that you have to pay that is the final analysis on the final 

count. It‟s what you have left over and the farmers are finding today that the cost-price squeeze is 

greater and greater. Bill No. 43 is another squeeze. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this Government prior to October 11 denied any claim of going to increase 

taxes. I have here a page of the Star Phoenix for Saturday, October 7. The leaders of the campaign were 

questioned on their stand on different taxes, and I would just like to quote one or two of them. The 

leaders of the three political parties that were contesting the election, the Premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition, and Mr. Martin Pederson were asked a number of questions. Here is one of them: “Would 

you continue to permit the use of tax-free purple gasoline in farm trucks?” The answer by the Liberal 

leader was: “This Liberal policy, flatly refused by the Socialists for 20 years, will most certainly be 

continued.” Our leader said that we would permit the continuation of it. The Conservative leader said, 

“Yes, but with better policing to remove abuses.” Another question that was asked was: “Would you 

reduce the Education and Health sales tax and the surcharge on the income tax any further?” The Liberal 

answer was: “The Liberal policy of reducing taxes as industrial and resource revenues rise will be 

continued. We would hope to further reduce the sales and income tax.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: So you can see by the answers and I could go over a whole list, Mr. Speaker, but I 

won‟t weary the time of the House with it. In every case they were promising to reduce taxes, in no case 

was there a promise of increased taxes. As I said previously, Bill 43 is said to be a benefit to the farmers 

as this tax is going to help build roads. Once again I would like to draw the attention of this House to the 

money that is wasted on roads. I have here the answers to two questions which I received today, 

Highway No. 14 from Dafoe through to Elfros. The contract was let for $503,950, roughly $504,000, 

with a 135-day time limit for completion. They‟ve worked on it for two years. It is yet not completed. 

The amount of money paid out is over $777,500 with a $50,000 holdback and still more to be paid out 

when the project gets completed. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that contract is going to be double the 

cost. The information I have is this contract was changed during the construction of the road. The type 

of grade wasn‟t increased but the standard was actually decreased. After they had gone the first two or 

three miles they decreased the standard and did not increase it, but the cost is doubling. But that‟s not 

bad, Mr. Speaker. We look at Highway No. 5 from Watson across to Wadena. That‟s a 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1548 

distance of approximately 30 miles. A contract was let for $414,000, with a time limit of 120 days. They 

have been working for over three years on it now. At the best it‟s only two-thirds completed on that 

stretch of highway. This contract too was renegotiated and I haven‟t got the details of how it was 

renegotiated. But the answer I received today showed that instead of $414,000, they have already paid 

out $881,000, over twice as much and there is still a $50,000 holdback coming to the contractor. And as 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that project is at the best only two-thirds completed. So this is going to be a contract 

let for $414,000 and costing $1.25 million at this rate of going. No wonder our Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) is saying that we have to put a two-cent tax on farm fuels in order to help pay for roads, because 

the policy of the present Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) is depleting all the money for highways 

when huge, vast sums of money could be saved on the highways so that it would not be necessary to tax 

the farmers. 

 

The farmer today, Mr. Speaker, is competing in a very competitive world. He is the only true free 

enterpriser in the entire Canadian economy. He has to produce on an open market, he buys all his 

products from a high-tariff, protected market controlled by monopoly but his products must go on the 

world market at world competition. We have to compete with our farm products against those of other 

nations which have a two-price system for their agriculture and also a guaranteed price and subsidy. The 

farmers of this province must compete against those things. Or we must try and sell our wheat to some 

of the Communist countries behind the Iron Curtain, but we refuse to recognize those countries. We 

refuse to have a two-way trade with them. Consequently it appears that their amount of Canadian or 

American dollars is falling off, so they don‟t have our hard currency to buy our wheat. So we see today 

our sale of wheat is dwindling to about half of what it was a year ago at this time. The average quota 

throughout the province here is four bushels per seeded acre and in a lot of places the elevators are 

plugged. They can‟t accept delivery. How can farmers exist on the average-sized farm in this province 

on a four-bushel quota, pay these exorbitant taxes which have been heaped on and be able to maintain 

their cost of operation and a decent standard of living for their families and themselves? Mr. Speaker, 

you and I readily realize that this can‟t be done. Something should be done to alleviate the pressure on 

the farmer, not heap more pressure on him. I feel that this is a vicious tax, a tax which the farmer 

shouldn‟t have to bear, there are dozens of ways this amount of money could be saved. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I have no alternative but to oppose this motion because it is a motion which is most unfair. If 

the Provincial Treasurer or the Premier don‟t think it is an unfair tax, I would ask them or dare them to 

call a free vote on this Bill. And if they call a free vote, then I would like to see where their back 

benchers voted if they don‟t think this is an oppressive, unfair tax. I oppose this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
March 28, 1968 

1549 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): Mr. Speaker, I first of all want to say how very glad I am to see that for 

the first time in quite a number of evenings the galleries to the north of us here have a few people in 

them. And since the seats are quite empty in this Chamber especially to your right, Sir, I really 

appreciate having them here today. 

 

On rising to speak on Bill 43, The Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act, I recall the other day 

that the Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) surprised me somewhat when he got up to 

speak in favor of that Bill. He spoke so eloquently on another tax, the purple-gas tax on gas used in farm 

trucks, and that in doing so they were today without question justified in bringing in the two cents per 

gallon on all other farm fuel. Now just where the act of giving bread with one hand and taking it away 

with the other, especially at a time like this, when the farmer, and particularly the small farmer, is 

already on a starvation diet, is being justifiable, Mr. Speaker, is beyond all understanding. It reminds me 

of the lesson I learned on my Mother‟s knee, Mr. Speaker, who taught me this, “The Lord giveth and the 

Lord taketh away.” Now during this last four years of Liberal Administration in Saskatchewan, I think it 

was Mr. Lloyd, our Leader, who coined a new version of this biblical quotation: he said this, “The Lord 

giveth, and Thatcher taketh away.” However, Mr. Speaker, after hearing the Hon. Member from Maple 

Creek (Mr. Cameron) trying to justify the two cents per gallon on farm fuel because it had provided free 

purple gas for farm trucks, I am convinced that the newest version of this Saskatchewan Liberal 

philosophy is, “Thatcher giveth and Thatcher taketh away.” Mr. Speaker, after the many promises made 

by the Liberals in 1964, and again in 1967, to help the family farm to survive, to reduce the taxes on 

farms, it was going to be the champions of the farmer. Well let us look at some of the records, Mr. 

Speaker. Now here is a big full-page ad, about a $300-ad of Liberal promises in the Saskatoon Star 

Phoenix. It‟s dated October 4, 1967. Now this same ad was run in the Leader-Post and many other 

papers in Saskatchewan as well. Now you just wouldn‟t believe it, Mr. Speaker, but the first plank of the 

farm promise, right on the very top, is tax-free purple gas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: Now that was before October 11. It is tax-free no more, Mr. Speaker. What irony, Sir, 

another performance of dangling a carrot to the farmer for political purposes by those all-out promise 

Liberals. Now let‟s read some more of the famous full-page article of the MacLaren advertising 

propaganda. Right down further on, the title says, “More Security for the Family Farm.” Security and 

family farm under this Liberal Government! It would almost seem comical if it wasn‟t so tragic. Now, 

“A New Break for the Future,” it says right down here, Mr. Speaker. Whatever happened to the blue 

print for the future after October 11? “Keep things Moving in the New Saskatchewan,” it says 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1550 

farther down here. The last one, Mr. Speaker, “The New Saskatchewan!” Now, not one Liberal across 

the way wants to talk about it, and I don‟t really blame them. After four years of mismanagement and 

bungling, it‟s a new Saskatchewan all right, but not the kind that the people of Saskatchewan want. Now 

at the very bottom of the page are the names of all the Liberal candidates who promised this tax-free 

purple gas, and welshed on the promise and today are going to approve the two cents a gallon on farm 

fuel. A shameful and deceitful act, Mr. Speaker. Not all of them are here, some of them are sitting across 

the way, Jack Charlebois, Alex Prociuk, Clarence Estey, Austin Forsyth and all the way down. The 

Leader-Post carried a similar kind of ad. All the Liberals on the hustings before October 11, Mr. 

Speaker, including the Premier, spouted the same kind of deceit. 

 

Speaking at Strasbourg on September 19, 1967, under the heading, “Premier Reveals Agricultural Plan,” 

the Premier said, “The Premier also outlined action taken with the farmers in mind during the last term 

of office, these included tax-free purple gas.” What a sad difference today, a few months later! It‟s a 

betrayal of the farmers, Mr. Speaker. At the time when the farmer finds himself in the worst economic 

position in years, and at the time when the market for wheat and agricultural products is collapsing all 

around us, at a time of one of our bad years of wheat production, the Government sees fit to further 

burden the farmer with a two cents a gallon farm-fuel tax. As pointed out by a number of other speakers, 

it is the first such tax in any province except British Columbia which has one cent per gallon. Of course 

we can‟t forget the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) jumped up the other day to tell us that 

Alberta has put on a three cent farm-fuel tax. The Minister‟s hearing couldn‟t be just very good, Mr. 

Speaker, or he would have heard the reception of that increase by the farmers in Alberta. I would like to 

quote another article in the Leader-Post of March 26, 1968, “Albertans protest fuel tax.” 

 

The United Farmers of Alberta Co-operative Limited has filed a protest with the Alberta government 

against its proposed three-cents-a-gallon tax on gasoline and diesel fuel used for farm operations. 

 

I‟m not going to go any farther in that quotation. There is a lot more to it, but it proves to you that the 

people of Alberta have also been quite put out about that tax. Now again, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, 

Mr. Speaker, had an article, “Pool Protests Fuel Tax in Saskatchewan,” and I quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has protested the Provincial Government‟s plan to introduce a tax on 

farm fuels. The Pool‟s Board of Directors in its first meeting since the Government Budget was handed 

down says it has received resolutions from delegates and local communities in the province expressing 

their position to the planned two cent a gallon tax on farm fuel. Farmers are asking how can such a 

charge be justified during these days when we 



 
March 28, 1968 

1551 

 

are in such an economic squeeze, the Pool reports. Farm prices have been depressed in the last few 

months. The farm costs have continued their relentless climb, said the Board of Directors. The two 

cents per gallon on farm fuel represents almost a ten per cent increase in this cost alone at a time when 

prairie markets have been declining and prices are lower. It‟s unfortunate that the Government has 

chosen to place an additional burden on the farmers at this time. 

 

So, not only are the Pools protesting, and contrary to what the Minister of Mineral Resources said, the 

farmers of Alberta aren‟t very happy either. Now the farmers everywhere are in such dire straits that 

they must protest any such tax, even in Alberta where the gasoline tax is still quite a bit less than in 

Saskatchewan. At a time like this, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liberals chose to grind out a few 

more dollars out of the already very hard pressed farmer, the farmer who repeatedly asked that the cost 

of production which includes taxes of all kinds, including gas, be tied to the price of the product they 

produce. All they got from the Liberals is lip service. 

 

Let‟s look at the one aspect of the fix the farmer finds himself in. I think that no one explained it better 

than my colleague from Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) who stated facts and figures on the great rising costs of 

farm machinery and taxes and the little-to-no increase in the price of farm products. I have some proof 

of this right here, Mr. Speaker. A load of Number One Northern wheat sold on September 1, 1967, the 

same week our Premier was wallowing in promises to the farmers, sold at $1.52¼ per bushel, with a 

possibility of some final payment next year. Most likely it won‟t be like it is this year. Here is another 

grower‟s bill, same farmer, made out to the same farmer about 20 years ago, on August 25, 1949, a load 

of Number One Northern wheat sold at $1.58½ per bushel, Mr. Speaker, almost six and a quarter cents 

more than that sold in 1967. Then there was a final wheat payment on that too. What I am trying to 

show, Mr. Speaker, is that the farmer cannot stand any increase in his cost of production any more, not 

even the two cent per gallon farm fuel. Here I want to particularly speak of the small farmer, the section 

farmer, the half-section farmer and the even less-than-a-half-section farmer. In my constituency of 

Melville, small farmers make up 90 per cent of the whole total of the farm population. The same can be 

said throughout the thousands of square miles of central parkland of the province. These people are in 

desperate straits, Mr. Speaker. I have here a signed petition by about 500 people in a very small area of 

my constituency, signed freely, and if I may add in anger and in dismay, protesting not only deterrent 

fees, but the farm fuel tax of two cents per gallon as well. Many insisted they wanted a petition to 

qualify especially the farm fuel tax, and Mr. Speaker, in some areas there wasn‟t a single person who 

refused to sign, all people of all political parties. I am sure that it would shock the Deputy Minister of 

Co-operatives to find that many of his staunch Liberal supporters stood to be counted on the side of the 

farmer by signing this petition. Also I have a letter here, 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1552 

from the Neudorf Branch of the Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union and I would like to quote it: 

 

Dear Sir: 

 

The following motion has been passed unanimously at the Saskatchewan Farmers‟ Union meeting of 

45 farmers held on March 21. Moved by Glen Bender, seconded by Art Schmidt that the two cent per 

gallon tax imposed on farm fuels be removed, because it is unjust in the face of falling markets and 

prices. The farmer has no way of recovering amounts of this tax, adds to his cost of production. 

 

A copy of this was sent to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, and also to Mr. Roy Atkinson, of the Saskatchewan 

Farmers‟ Union. This is a protest of 45 farmers of all political parties, Mr. Speaker. I am prepared to 

table this if that is so. Now, Mr. Speaker, many of these people won‟t forget this tax that is being placed 

on them now. They won‟t forget now and as I said before they won‟t four years from now. The Hon. 

Member who just spoke a little while ago from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) will remember that as well 

when the four years roll around, I am sure of it. And I remember the other night he mentioned, the Hon. 

Member from Yorkton did, in such disgusting terms, that they had had debates and that he shut the 

mouth of the CCF candidate for Yorkton . . . 

 

Mr. Gallagher: Stands for all! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: I didn‟t know whether it was a yard of dirt he was talking about then or was it a foot 

of dirt, but that‟s what he said. I want to say this, Mr. Speaker, had they had another two debates in 

Yorkton, this Hon. Member from Yorkton wouldn‟t be sitting where he is sitting today. 

 

An Hon. Member: Oh, is that right! You weren‟t around. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: Mr. Speaker, any of these farmers in my area, the small farmers haven‟t one bushel of 

grain left to sell anymore. I have talked to grain buyers and they inform me that 65 to 75 per cent of the 

small farmers are through with the four-bushel quota, they have nothing more to sell. The ironical part 

of it is that under this outdated system of PFA assistance, thousands of these will receive nothing, even 

though another neighbor a few miles away with a much larger yield of wheat crop will receive some 

benefit. Mr. Speaker, many of these farmers will be hard pressed to buy their fuel and repairs for spring 

operations, let alone two cents a gallon fuel tax. I know the Liberals to the right of you will say that two 

cents is only a small amount, surely this can‟t save a small farmer. Well maybe it can‟t, but in many 

cases it will mean extra payments of anywhere by that farmer of $50 to $100 or even more on the fuel 

tax bill for this next year. But, Mr. Speaker, it would be an aid 



 
March 28, 1968 

1553 

 

if this Bill wasn‟t applied. It would help. However, it‟s typical Liberal independent sector philosophy, 

only the strong shall live and the devil take the hindmost. 

 

An Hon. Member: Shame! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: Neither the Liberal Government in Ottawa nor the Liberal Government here in 

Saskatchewan has really done anything to help the small farmer live. None of them has done anything. 

The Government to your right brags about this, as the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) did the 

other day, of the assistance it has given to the farmer. What help, Mr. Speaker? Out of the 2,500 farmers 

in the Melville area, one or two will get assistance for hog raising facilities. One or two will get 

assistance in expanding poultry facilities. A few will get a bit of dole for land clearing. Is this the extent 

that this Liberal Government is willing to go to help to save the small farmers? Is this the extent they 

and the Liberals value the Saskatchewan family farms? What about the other 2,400 farmers of the 2,500 

in the Melville constituency, Mr. Speaker? Where do they go in the next ten years? The Liberals have 

disowned them; they are going to let them disappear and die, Mr. Speaker. Now, the Minister of 

Agriculture has the audacity to trot out these respiratory medications to a great dying industry. It‟s a 

shame, a great shame indeed to add to the blow by adding this two cents on fuel tax, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier and the Minister of Agriculture go shouting around the province, “Diversify, diversity, and all 

shall be well!” Mr. Speaker, without dwelling too long on the subject, in reality what they are saying is 

diversification for the few. Let me repeat, Mr. Speaker, diversification for the few and again the devil 

take the small farmer and the hindmost. Almost 90 per cent of the total farmers will be left in the cold 

and that‟s right out. The Liberal philosophy of diversification for the few, and, as I pointed out a few 

moments ago, only the few, signifies the death knell for the rest who are left out of that magic circle. 

 

What is going to happen to the small farmer, Mr. Speaker? These others, the 90 per cent of the small 

farmers are doomed to extinction. The egg and poultry market is going, the hog market is gone, the 

cream market gone, I could talk more about that. The theory of diversification will help only a few, but 

for 90 per cent of the farmers it‟s a farce and it‟s a lie. In fact diversification cannot help them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has failed the farmers in this province, it has failed totally in the 

preservation of the family farm. It has knowingly and silently approved the destruction of the family 

farm, and by adding the two cent a gallon tax on farm fuel this Government is driving one of the last 

nails into the coffin of the still surviving but very weak community family farms. Mr. Speaker, this 

Liberal Government of Saskatchewan and the Liberal Government of Ottawa will go down in history as 

the Governments instrumental in the complete and total liquidation of the small family farms. They will 

go down 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1554 

in history as advocators and exponents of corporate monopoly enterprise responsible for the birth in 

Canada and in Saskatchewan of the large land barons, many of them living in foreign lands. They will 

go down in history as those under whose rule the life of the small community was extinguished. They 

will go down in history as those under whom the small family farm disappeared. The greatest tragedy of 

all, Mr. Speaker, is while that race of social up-heaval was taking place, they, the Liberal Government, 

sat silently still and did nothing. Mr. Speaker, I would be a traitor to my people in Melville constituency, 

and particularly the farm people, if I supported this Bill. The very existence of small businesses in the 

villages and towns and yes, even a city like Melville, in my constituency, depends almost entirely on the 

small farmer. This tax is just another measure of destruction of the small people in the constituency of 

Melville. I will vote against this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North East): Mr. Speaker, after listening to the Hon. Member for Melville 

(Mr. Kowalchuk) it should be evident to all Hon. Members in the House why the Member for that 

particular constituency now sits on our side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: There is no longer any mystery why a Cabinet Minister was defeated in that constituency 

by the person who is occupying that seat. 

 

With the kind of help that this Bill gives the farmers it places them in a very pathetic predicament. I 

agree with what has been said by the Hon. Member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst) and the Hon. Member 

for Melville. 

 

There is a group of people that need some benefit from this type of legislation and I would like to speak 

on their behalf at this particular time on second reading of Bill 43. The people who live in urban areas 

have been promised a larger section of the gasoline tax to help build urban streets. I would like to put 

forth the argument for a larger share of the tax for them, particularly because in 1964 of all of the 

literature that was put out by the people who formed the Government at that time and I want the Hon. 

Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) to listen carefully and to look up all his old literature 

and also the Hon. Member for Regina South (Mr. Grant) to check this out. In one of the planks of their 

platform for Regina City they said that they would give to the people of Regina a fair share of the 

gasoline tax to construct urban streets. Well, Mr. Speaker, what do they consider a fair share? Looking 

up the Estimates that we have 



 
March 28, 1968 

1555 

 

before us, the people of Regina on a per capita basis will be paying approximately $50 per capita in 

gasoline tax. Using the figures that were supplied to us by the Hon. Minister of Highways early in this 

session, we will be getting back approximately $5 per capita. I know that as residents of the Province of 

Saskatchewan the people of Regina will readily admit that they must put up part of the cost of building 

Provincial highways. But I think anyone that is fair-minded would say in a moment that $5 returned to 

the citizens of Regina is not a fair share of the gasoline tax to build urban streets. Nevertheless that‟s 

what we were promised prior to the 1964 election. 

 

The homeowners in our community in the city of Regina and the same would apply to the city of 

Saskatoon, I would think, are being asked, by placing taxes on their homes, to carry a particularly high 

burden to construct streets, arterial streets within the city limits. They will be paying out $6.3 million in 

gasoline taxes, I am suggesting that it would be a fairer share to expect $1.75 million of that in return to 

assist in the construction of urban streets within the city limits. I am suggesting that if we pay out $50 

per capita that we should be given back in assistance for this type of work at least $12.50 per capita. I 

am suggesting that to construct Provincial highways we leave with the Provincial Government in this 

particular fund from the gasoline tax the amount of $37.50 per capita. If you look at the figures at the 

present time where we are getting back about $5 when the homeowners are being pressed where they are 

paying as high as $500 and $600 taxes for a small city lot, you have to admit that Regina is being 

discriminated against and the present distribution of the gasoline tax is unfair. I would challenge the 

Members opposite and particularly the Regina Members to keep the promise that was made in their 

literature that was distributed to every mail box in the city in 1964, when they said they were going to 

give a fair share of the gasoline tax to construct urban streets. 

 

We‟ll be paying higher gasoline tax now, we‟ll be paying higher tax for diesel fuel. I think we should try 

and give part of this to the people that are in trouble financially. We should return it to the people who 

are homeowners in the city of Regina. $12.50 per capita is not a great amount out of a $50 payment, 25 

per cent, and I would question if it is even a fair share. It will give the people opposite a chance to keep 

the promise that they made. It will give the homeowners in Regina a break. It will give them some return 

from the $50 per capita that they are paying in gasoline tax. The citizens of Regina need some assistance 

over and above what they are getting at the present time. $5 per capita to build city streets is not a fair 

share. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): Mr. Speaker, in 16 years I‟ve seen progress 

in the direction of lower taxes for the prime producer. In the last 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1556 

16 years I‟ve heard the Opposition who are now the Government say on many occasions that they did 

not believe in a tax on production. Yet now we have come to see in Saskatchewan a most vicious and 

unnecessary tax. I say it‟s unnecessary because the only reason the Government has to impose this tax, 

whether it likes it or not, is because of Government waste. I can give a list of wasteful projects, of wrong 

priorities that it set up and of subsidies to industries. These are the reasons why this Government is short 

of money and so today it is picking the pockets of the people who cannot afford to pay more taxes. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, why didn‟t this Government ask those who can afford to give a few extra dollars if it 

needed this so badly. Why did it exempt the corporations? Why did it not increase income taxes? 

Because those are the people that are making profits as yet. But to tax farmers, many of whom do not 

earn enough to pay income tax is a disgrace to this country and a disgrace to this Parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my father came to this country many years ago and I came with him. The reason we came 

to Canada is because my father refused to pay taxes on pillows and on doors and on everything that we 

had. The only thing that‟s left now for this Government is to tax pillows and the windows that are 

untaxed in our farm homes. That‟s about all that‟s left. Everything else is taxed, and this we call a 

Government of democracy and free enterprise. 

 

I‟ve said why, Mr. Speaker, it is imposing these taxes. Now let me remind the Government what it said a 

few years ago when taxes were still low. I‟ll tell you why taxes were low. Taxes today for the average 

family, according to Dominion Bureau of Statistics, that‟s all the taxes, both provincial and municipal, 

are about $1,302.32 per capita. Those are the figures that I have been able to gather, which means about 

$450 more taxes than we paid four years ago. Yet during this same period of time, Mr. Speaker, the 

earnings of the farmers have gone down and down and down, although everything else has gone up. I 

want to remind the older Members of this House that as far back as 1952 I stood up in this House and I 

said the farmers were in difficult circumstances. I said that half the farmers had left the land and I said in 

another debate this year that most of the farmers are now leaving the land. This Government refuses to 

recognize this fact. It says now as it said in 1952 and as it said when we had a hearing in connection 

with farm costs, it has always argued that farmers are well off, that farmers drive around in Cadillac 

cars. This is what their Members said in this House and they are now accordingly bringing in this kind 

of legislation. 

 

Over there, we have the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) sitting facing me with a grin on his face. He 

thinks it‟s funny. It‟s not funny to me to represent people who are in trouble. What did he say in 1964, to 

the then Government? Hansard on page 245, look it up Mr. Provincial Treasurer, “Taxes on our farmers, 

on our homes, in our towns and cities have increased 400 per cent since that government took power.” 



 
March 28, 1968 

1557 

 

That was the CCF Government in power. 

 

Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, this hit everybody. They wage-earner and small farmer are finding 

municipal taxes a real hardship. We say something must be done to give our municipalities the funds 

they need to carry out their responsibilities in a proper way and without breaking their ratepayers. 

 

That was 1964, four years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, our way would be to call municipal people together and listen to what they have to say and then 

take action to help them, not to control them. 

 

Yet what are you doing today? What are you doing today? You cried about high taxes then, but now you 

imposed every possible tax that you could think of on the people of Saskatchewan and particularly on 

the farmer . . . What else did he say? 

 

Take a look at another Member. Here we have the present Senator, Mr. McDonald, and I have a lot of 

respect for Mr. McDonald. I think he is a very realistic man and I think he is very truthful as to what he 

said at that time. At least he believed what he said. I want to bring to the attention of the Government the 

circumstances four years ago, “Now you are making things worse,” he said then, Hansard, page 336, 

talking about wheat. 

 

This is the highest price of wheat in 43 years, but, Mr. Speaker, farmers have the highest cost they 

have ever had in 43 years. Right today we should have the highest wheat prices we have had for 40 

years. The farm costs are certainly the highest they‟ve been in the last 40 years. Some of these high 

costs have been placed on the farmer‟s back by governments both provincial and federal, and I don‟t 

think that this legislature has played its proper part in endeavoring to decrease this ever increasing cost 

of farm production, and I hope that this House in its wisdom in this session will attempt to alleviate 

some of the problems that confront our farmers, take off their shoulders some of the taxes that have 

been extracted from them today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s four years ago when the taxes were nothing compared with what they are today. That 

was a Liberal who spoke in this House who is a Senator today, who represented the Government, who 

was a leader of that particular party, yet today we find that instead of heeding his remarks, this 

Government is loading down the farm people with more taxes. 

 

Now the Provincial Treasurer and speakers opposite say, “Well this is only two cents a gallon.” Mr. 

Speaker, an average farmer today uses about $1,000 work of fuel (and I don‟t know how he is going to 

pay for it because I know a lot of them haven‟t paid for last year‟s fuel yet, many of them that I know). 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1558 

This may mean only 10 per cent. It may mean only a $100, but let‟s see what another Member said at 

the time on the same subject to see what $100 means. He said this - he happened to be talking about 

workers - he spoke about $100. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is in Hansard, page 489: 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these people are workers, they work for wages and small amounts of money means 

a lot to them. It is all very well for ministers of the crown and high-flying socialists rolling in wealth to 

think the matter of $100 isn‟t very much, but to a worker it means all, particularly when he has a wife 

and children to support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the remarks you made, Sir, in the debate. You recognized what $100 meant to a 

worker or a farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: This Government doesn‟t recognize this particular fact. Take Newfoundland, 

Newfoundland is harder up than the Province of Saskatchewan. It is a small province, but farm fuel tax 

is exempt. In Prince Edward Island, it is exempted by regulation; Nova Scotia exempts for farm 

services; New Brunswick exempts farmers; Quebec refunds the tax on gasoline used in farm tractors; 

Ontario farmers receive full refunds; Manitoba has exemptions for farm machinery and farm trucks; 

Saskatchewan, well, you are now imposing a 2-cent tax levy on farm equipment which is used in the 

production of grain and other farm purposes. The only other Province is British Columbia which extracts 

a 1-cent tax, once again a private enterprise Government. 

 

Now I would like to hear Members speak on the opposite side. They are hearing me speak for my 

people. I have no choice, I‟m speaking sincerely to the Government and I will go back to my people and 

I will report to them that I have spoken on their behalf. The responsibility is on this Government, if it is 

going to tax our people to the point that they won‟t be able to pay taxes. It is going to be responsible and 

I assure you the Liberals will not be here after the next election. I would suggest to them in view of the 

fact that they did not make this kind of promise before the last election, the only decent thing for the 

Government to do now is to have a plebiscite. If it doesn‟t want a plebiscite, then the other thing it can 

do is go to another election on this issue and let the people decide whether this is what they want, this 

kind of legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: I invite the Hon. Members opposite to speak. Where is the Member for Kelvington 

(Mr. Bjarnason)? He is either a farmer or very closely associated with farmers. Get up on your feet, Sir, 

and tell this Government what you think about the situation. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1559 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: Where is my good friend, the Member for Rosetown, (Mr. Loken)? He is a farmer 

and I respect him immensely. Let him get on his feet and speak honestly and sincerely to his 

Government and tell it what he thinks. And what about my good friend, the Member for Humboldt (Mr. 

Breker), who depends upon his income on the farmers of his area, a good farming area. Get up on your 

feet and tell me what your farmers think about this kind of a tax. And what about my friend from 

Moosomin (Mr. Gardner), who is an educated gentleman? I think he farms too, I‟m not sure. Let him get 

on his feet and speak on behalf of his people to the Government. And what about the Member for Elrose 

(Mr. Leith) and what about my friend, the Member from Nipawin (Mr. Radloff), who is my neighbor? 

He has the same kind of farm conditions practically that I have, marginal farmers, sub-marginal farmers. 

Why don‟t you, Sir, get up on your feet and tell this Government what you think instead of letting it get 

away with this vicious tax. Then there are others, the Member for Arm River (Mr. McIvor) and others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: This Government as I said before refuses to recognize, Mr. Speaker, that farmers are 

not making incomes; it refuses to recognize that. Maybe there are farmers here in this Legislature who 

are fairly well off, but farmers I know, most of them, are not in that position. I prepare income tax for 

farmers, I‟ve seen some with net incomes of $150, $300, $700 and deficits of $200, $500, and $1,500. 

This is what I see and so that $100, Sir, is, as you said, very precious to these people. It means bread and 

butter and clothing for their children. That‟s what it means. I told the Minister one time and I‟ll remind 

him again, when he told me in Prince Albert, when I happened to meet him on occasions having a cup of 

coffee, how well off I was as a farmer, I remember telling him at that time and I‟ll repeat what I said to 

him then: “If the business people in Prince Albert (and now I can say also Regina, Saskatoon and all our 

cities which have industries and businesses), if you depended only upon the farmers for a living you 

wouldn‟t have a patch on your pants.” That‟s the situation in Saskatchewan today. Most farmers do not 

have incomes and to prove my point, Mr. Speaker, let me refer to some people who know what‟s going 

on in this province. Here is a report from the Wheat Pool, I don‟t know who the author is, but it is from 

the Wheat Pool. Information has been gathered and here is what they say on page 24, concerning rising 

costs. I would like to see any Member get up and deny that this is not so. What does it say? 

 

Rising Costs. Increase in operating costs since World War II has been common to all industries. Most 

viable non-agricultural industries however have been able to pass along increased unit costs to users of 

the product. It sort of maintains the relative place in our economy. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1560 

Now that is the industrial sector, there is your business sector, they‟ve been able to get along. What does 

it say about farmers? 

 

For the past fifteen years, the farmer‟s dilemma has been that the market place has been reluctant to 

pay a price per unit, which even after maximum economies and efficiencies had been introduced, and 

compensated for, a relentless rise in farm production costs that has averaged 4½ per cent per year since 

1950 and has aggregated 74 per cent over the 18-year interval. 

 

Only 75 per cent over the 18-year interval. 

 

The farmer as a supplier of the domestic market has also seen his share of the consumer‟s dollar shrink 

year by year as processors and distributors have added new inputs to the food basket and have 

endeavored to recover their increase in costs. 

 

Every time anybody wants money, they get it from the farmer, and when governments need money they 

have to go to the farmer, to the man that provides the most bread, milk and butter and they rob him of 

his last penny. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: On the same page, another paragraph: 

 

The real impact of rising costs has been postponed as a consequence of the fact that in the past five 

marketing years, producers have delivered an average of 19.8 bushels per seeded acre as compared 

with 15.9 bushels per seeded acre for the preceding five-year period. The sharply increased marketing 

per seeded acre in the last five years was responsible for most of the rise in gross farm income during 

the period. 

 

This is the only reason why farmers aren‟t even worse off than they are now because we‟ve had five 

years of good crops. But I suspect this year, Mr. Minister, you will find that we may not have as good a 

year. I hope we have, but if we don‟t, then the farmer is really going to be up against it and you are 

going to lose nearly all the rest of the smaller farms that we have left in Saskatchewan. There‟s hardly 

any left now and there will be less by the time you get through with this taxation and other things you 

throw at the farmer. On page 25, there is just one more paragraph I want to read to you, Sir, just about 

the middle of the page: 

 

If the operating margin is narrowing to maintain income at a fixed level, a farmer must increase his 

volume of sales. Thus in the period 1946-50, the average prairie farmer would obtain a net income of 

$4,000 with sales of farm products of $7,700. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1561 

 

Now that‟s a pretty good farm to be able to sell $7,700 and at that time, he‟d get off on the average with 

$4,000 income. 

 

To have an income of $4,000 in 1961-65, he had to have sales of $10,020. 

 

In my country there are very few that have these kind of sales. 

 

Hence in order to maintain an income equal to that in 1946-50, the farmer of the 60s had to increase 

sales by 1/3 and to fully compensate for the 80 per cent increase in the cost of living that took place 

since 1946, the same farmer would have to have an annual cash income of $7,200 in 1965 and his sales 

would have to soar to $14,460. To maintain their income positions, farmers have had to expand 

operations at an almost frantic pace and many have not been able to do so. 

 

This is what I‟m trying to point out, that many have not been able to do so. And who do you think, Sir, 

this Government will collect taxes from? It is imposing them on those who have not been able to 

maintain their income position over the years. 

 

Another proof that I want to bring to your attention is ARDA. In my area this Government negotiated 

with the Federal Government and declared all the area across the north and northeast as a region that 

should be assisted. As a matter of fact the Minister from Prince Albert knows that that area is declared as 

a depressed area in order to get $5 million of assistance for the pulp mill. I wish they‟d got $5 million or 

$10 million for some of the farmers in and around Prince Albert. It would have helped considerably. 

This is the situation, we have this kind of situation. Our people haven‟t got decent homes, these people 

haven‟t got good incomes, these people are in trouble. Yet this Government is loading them up with 

taxes. So the best that they will be able to do is to leave their lands, sell them for whatever they can get. 

There may be a few that may carry on with the help of banks or wherever they may get money to 

expand. Others will get out into the pulp industry taking jobs whether they are young or old. The saddest 

part of all, Sir, is this. We as farmers are not only required to pay taxes but we are required to make 

profits for corporations. As pointed out today in a previous debate, there are companies like implement 

companies which have increased their profits by 150 per cent in the last few years while farm profits are 

completely disappearing. Yet this the Government refuses to recognize, this simple fact. 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): What about purple gas? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: Mr. Speaker, I know that I am very sensitive, when I‟m interrupted, I halt, but I‟m 

also sincere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1562 

Mr. Berezowsky: Well, maybe I shouldn‟t take up too much time. There are others that will want to 

speak as well. I think I‟ve got my points across. I‟ve pointed out to the Government that there has been 

waste in highways. It doesn‟t matter whether it‟s waste in highways here or in building them. Up in the 

far north, up past the Churchill, I know of contractors moving equipment back and forth to Saskatoon. 

The contractor had a contract near Saskatoon and another one north of Churchill and he‟s been going 

back and forth. Somebody was paying the shot. It was us, the farmers, whom you are going to tax to pay 

that shot. We‟ve got highways that it took four years to build in and around Prince Albert and other 

places. These people always make money. These people can afford to pay taxes. We the farmers make it 

possible for them to make profits and we have to pay onerous taxes to the Government as well. I pointed 

out to this Government also that there are bad priorities. You cannot take tax monies that are supposed 

to go for education, that are supposed to go, say, for medical services, for hospital services and pump 

these same monies into industries, into, say, the Saskatchewan Pulp Wood Company or into the pulp 

mill or anywhere else. I‟ve said all along that, if you need money for industry, for goodness sake do as 

we‟ve done for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Get out and borrow the money and then when you 

make profits, repay the debt. But don‟t take tax money that is so hard for us to pay, for industrial 

development. 

 

I want to tell this Government one other thing it has done which I don‟t think is right. It is the giving of 

subsidies and tax concessions. Looking through Hansard, we find a Member asking the Premier what 

taxes he intended to concede and for whom. He said, “For industry.” Now what about us people? Who 

has ever come forward and conceded taxes for us? No! We must pay whether we have the money or not, 

we must pay. This is the worst blow yet; this 2 cents tax on fuel is the cruellest blow of all. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t need to say anymore. You can see very well that I cannot possibly support 

this Bill and that I had to speak as I have spoken against it at all times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): Mr. Speaker, in my brief remarks in this debate, I‟d like to add my 

objection to this tax bill. I think that my colleague, the Hon. Member for Prince Albert East-Cumberland 

(Mr. Berezowsky) made a point here that should be well taken. He stated that the farmer Members or the 

Members representing rural areas should make their position clear with regard to this tax. Now I am not 

a farmer, but I was raised on a farm and I was closely associated with the farm and I still am. The 

amendment to The Fuel Petroleum Act to effect an increase of 2 cents per gallon on fuel petroleum 

products effective April 1 is an undesirable piece of legislation. It is 



 
March 28, 1968 

1563 

 

undesirable particularly from the standpoint of the agricultural economy which during the past year has 

dropped to a low level. And of course when I speak of agricultural economy I am referring to the entire 

economy of Saskatchewan, because agriculture is the primary industry. It is the primary industry of the 

province and wheat is the number one product. Potash and other industries are important but I want to 

submit, Mr. Speaker, that agriculture should not be over looked. And I think here when the Government 

proposes this type of legislation, it is very undesirable in the promotion of agricultural economy. During 

recent years the farming industry has suffered a tremendous setback due, of course, to the sky-rocketing 

production costs. Now, the tax on farm fuel would just simply add to this difficult financial position. It 

would add to the problems that the farmers have in survival because the two cents on farm fuel is 

estimated to cost an average of about $75 to an average farmer. The Government brags, and it did gather 

a lot of support from the farm people when it reduced the tax on purple gas by 15 cents. Now what did 

this amount to? This amounted to an average of about $50 per farmer. 

 

Let us take a look at the increase of two cents per gallon on all farm fuels. This to an average farmer 

would amount to about $75. Now how do you suppose the farmers will accept this? It is very obvious, 

Mr. Speaker, that this Liberal Government is placing a firmer grip on the farmer in the cost-price 

squeeze. As time goes on, with Liberal Governments in Ottawa and Regina, the farmers of 

Saskatchewan are becoming worried. 

 

Now to add to this tax, the farmer will also have to pay a greater tax to the municipalities. Let us take a 

municipality with some building equipment for road construction. A municipality I would estimate 

would use from about 30,000 to 40,000 gallons of fuel. Now this would average about $600-$800 in tax. 

In other words, in the Province of Saskatchewan, this would amount to about $150,000 that the 

Government would take from the municipalities. Then the Government goes ahead and brags about the 

amount of grants that it has given to the municipalities. I agree that the grants have increased. But it 

seems that the Government is adopting a practice here to try and get some of this money back. Now this 

again refers to what the Hon. Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) had said. They giveth and then 

they taketh it. The whole thing is really the application of a magic tax shift. And this is done simply to 

confuse and brain wash the farmer taxpayer. This is just another betrayal of this Liberal Government to 

reduce taxes. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this is a most deceitful practice by a Government that calls 

itself responsible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: How could this Liberal Government truthfully call itself the friend of the farmer? Is a 

government a friend when it adds to the hardship of the farmer? I cannot see that the 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1564 

farmers will accept this. The farmers are now beginning to realize and they are recognizing this vicious 

tax-hungry Government that presents itself in the proverbial sheep‟s clothing. Let me tell the Members 

opposite that in three years‟ time they will be out. They will be hunted out of this office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: From these brief remarks that I have made, Mr. Speaker, it is quite obvious that I will not 

support the Bill. 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): Mr. Speaker, as a Member of a farming constituency, I rise to add 

my voice to the protests which have risen tonight regarding this two-cents fuel tax which the 

Government opposite has placed on every farmer in Saskatchewan. Never in the history of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has a so-called responsible government proved itself so irresponsible as did 

this present Government when it went on a tax-raising spree last March 1. This Government has proved 

itself incapable of governing in the interests of the people of this province, in its indecent haste to gouge 

out of the people of Saskatchewan extra revenue to shore up its extravagant spending. The Government 

opposite has dipped into every taxpayer‟s pocket in this province. And the hand of this Government, Mr. 

Speaker, has gone deeper into the pockets of those least able to pay and those least able to protest. I 

remember seeing a cartoon in one of our noted weekly papers just recently, Mr. Speaker, a cartoon 

showing a hospital room with a man lying in the bed looking as if he were near death, Mr. Speaker. 

There was the Provincial Treasurer standing in the middle of the room with his hand out and the tax bag 

along side asking this person on . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: On a point of order, would the Hon. Member mention what paper this is? 

 

Mr. Willis: I‟ll send you a copy of it, Mr. Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Steuart: The Commonwealth? It was, wasn‟t it? 

 

Mr. Willis: Oh, definitely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: And in the hallway, in this cartoon, Mr. Speaker, back and through the door, it showed the 

former Provincial Treasurer talking to a person on crutches. 

 

Mr. Steuart: That was the CCF party. 



 
March 28, 1968 

1565 

 

Mr. Willis: And this tax on the sick, Mr. Speaker, the cruellest tax of all which has been imposed by 

these people opposite. And the second most is this tax which is adding a two-cent fuel tax on the farmers 

of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: While the Front Bench sit and smile and make remarks regarding the tax that they have 

placed here and treat it as a joke, the farmer Members at the back sit and look glum, Mr. Speaker. But 

only one so far has had the courage in his conviction to get up and say, “This is responsible 

Government, I believe that this Government should be taxing farmers here for fuel tax.” Only one so far 

has said the Government is responsible, only one said that the Government opposite should tax the 

farmers as they go up and down the fields in their tractors, tax them so that when they get out on the 

road a little they appreciate the fact that they are helping pay for those roads. Only one person opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, even the people who represent cities opposite too should realize, Mr. Speaker, that the 

farmers are the backbone of this country. They should be concerned about the farmers as well. They 

don‟t say anything, Mr. Speaker. The farm Members opposite sit and look glum but they are very, very 

silent, Mr. Speaker, silent regarding the two-cents fuel tax, silent regarding the deterrent fees on the sick, 

silent regarding all the other taxes which this so-called responsible Government has seen fit to place 

upon the people of this province. And farmers, Mr. Speaker, are among the least able to appreciate the 

wisdom of the Government opposite in taxing them. In this regard, another quotation from a very noted 

paper here in the province, Mr. Provincial Treasurer. It quotes the Provincial Treasurer in an article here. 

At the top it says: “Province in Good Shape.” And I imagine they are referring to good tax shape. Never 

has a province been taxed so highly, so greatly as it has since the present Provincial Treasurer has come 

into office. Down further in the article the Provincial Treasurer is quoted, Mr. Speaker, and this is a 

gem. The Provincial Treasurer said and I quote: 

 

In Saskatchewan the most surprising thing is the lack of response from those we are trying to help, the 

province‟s taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: He is surprised at the farmers of this province that they do not appreciate the fact that he‟s 

taxing them to help them build roads of course. But the farmers should be able to appreciate the fact that 

this is a responsible Government, that the Government has to get money in order to build roads, in order 

to spend their tremendous amount to build roads, even if it has to take it from the farmers who now can‟t 

afford it, Mr. Speaker. The majority of the farmers in the province cannot 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1566 

afford the extra tax burden which is being placed on them. And not only are they affected by this two-

cent fuel tax, they are affected by the other taxes which were voted on earlier tonight, Education and 

Hospitalization tax; their cost of living is going up because of this. Farmers too get sick, Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s another tax, another way which they suffer because of the responsible attitude of this 

irresponsible Government. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) who has come into his seat at long last, Mr. Speaker, sits 

silently and okays the efforts of his colleague to tax the farmers in the province. He says it is okay to put 

a tax on them; we‟ll get after Ottawa and have Ottawa see if we can‟t storm the world markets, sell more 

of their grain, so they‟ll have more money to pay this tax which the Provincial Treasurer wants in order 

to build roads and do all the other things which have to be done here in the Province of Saskatchewan, 

which have to be done today or even had to be done yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And the Member for 

Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) sits and reads a paper, Mr. Speaker. He too doesn‟t look much 

concerned about farmers in the Melfort-Tisdale constituency. They are not worrying about the tax 

perhaps. The Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) of course, is not worried about the tax; his people 

aren‟t worrying about this tax either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: The Member for Kelvington (Mr. Bjarnason) who is here for a short while, you‟d think he‟d 

speak up on behalf of his constituents. He doesn‟t seem to care, he realizes his particular life isn‟t  

pardon me, Mr. Attorney General - who isn‟t in his seat - for mentioning this case which is before the 

Court. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: And the Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) is very much concerned about the farming members 

of his constituency. Now he‟s going to get up and speak later he said, Mr. Speaker, if I remember what 

he said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: And my friend, the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Radloff) is very much concerned about the 

farmer members of Nipawin constituency. They buy groceries in his store; they buy goods in his store; 

they have to have more money when they buy from his store and there are more taxes which this 

Government takes . . . He too should be concerned, Mr. Speaker. But again, he hasn‟t said a thing here 

regarding the effect of this tax on the farmers of Nipawin. There is no doubt about it that the northeast 

country is a very prosperous country, but the farmers 



 
March 28, 1968 

1567 

 

there are very much disturbed by the irresponsible action of this responsible Government. 

 

They have reason to be concerned too, Mr. Speaker. I, too, along with all the other Members in the 

House got the copy of this magazine, this pamphlet called “Canadian Wheat, Problems and Prospects,” a 

study prepared by Hedlin, Menzies and Associates of Winnipeg, Toronto and Vancouver, a study made 

with financial assistance from the Canadian Cooperative Wheat Producers Limited, representing the 

Wheat Pools of Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan. The Wheat Pools are concerned about the 

farmers‟ plight here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, whether these people opposite are or not. 

 

On page six . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: Any page . . . 

 

Mr. Willis: . . . on almost any page, that is right, almost any page outlines the gravity of the situation 

facing the farmers here in Saskatchewan while these people sit and approve the efforts of the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) to get even more money, $35 million more than last year, Mr. Speaker, to carry 

on with his efforts here, to improve the roads of Saskatchewan, the tourist camps in Saskatchewan, the 

functions which they put on for official openings, all of these things on which they spend money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But here on page six it shows the price which farmers receive for wheat. Back in 1950 farmers received 

a final realized price in dollars per bushel, Mr. Menzies says of $1.85, back in 1950. By 1960, the price 

had fallen to $1.59 and then again . . . 

 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): Tory Government . . . 

 

Mr. Willis: Does somebody over on the other side want to make a speech, I would gladly sit down if I 

thought someone over there would protest. Mr. Member for Yorkton, I know you have the, the word is 

guts, I think, I know you have, but seemingly nobody else across there has. You‟ve already made your 

speech. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: I have not. You‟re forgetful. 

 

Mr. Willis: Then there is one coming yet on this tax Bill. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: Mr. Speaker, the Member made a challenge. He said if somebody would speak on this 

side he would sit down. I volunteer. You back down awfully fast, you‟re pretty good at talking. 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1568 

Mr. Steuart: George, you‟re asking for it. 

 

Mr. Willis: I know you, Mr. Speaker, would have welcomed the opportunity to say something on this 

tax Bill. I know you have the interest of the farmers at heart. I know, too, that the Member for Yorkton 

(Mr. Gallagher) has. He has said so. But the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) is too much 

concerned about closing small hospitals to worry about his farmers. 

 

And then Mr. Menzies goes on, on page 12, about prices to farmers: 

 

Final realized price for grain. In 1960 the price was up again to $1.80 and by 1965 it was $1.99. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) says we should have more of this. We should go out in the 

world market. We should sell every bushel of wheat we can. We should force China to take our grain. 

We should sell to Russia. We should sell to everybody and we should sell at the price which the 

Government in Ottawa says we should. We should sell it at over $2 a bushel. It hasn‟t come about yet 

but he is willing to make a try. The Liberal party here on the other side of the House has been trying to 

get Ottawa to do something about the wheat situation for four years, but it hasn‟t been successful but 

with a new leader, oh, well, now we‟re getting some place. If the Members opposite could only agree on 

which one of the leaders to back. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): Lloyd Henderson. 

 

Mr. Willis: At least, Mr. Speaker, Henderson is in favor of medicare. I think he‟s in favor of medicare, 

I‟m not positive. Mr. Pearson was a little bit concerned that there would be too much fighting among the 

various candidates for leadership. He didn‟t want this fighting going on out in the open, so he told his 

Ministers that they had to . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, on the Education and Health Tax Bill, the Member from 

Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) talked about the highways, on the gas tax bill he is now talking about 

health and education. George, I wonder if you could get to the point before the evening is out. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Well, I must say that I think that on this question that is before the House, An Act to 

amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act be now read a second time, that the Liberal Leadership 

Convention that is going to take place in Ottawa is rather a long piece away. Maybe the Member can 

bring himself into order. I hope he does. 

 

Mr. Willis: I know, Mr. Speaker, that 



 
March 28, 1968 

1569 

 

you too would like to be talking about the terrible waste in highways. In the past you have done it and 

you would just love to be out here in one of the seats attacking this Government for their waste and this 

tremendous increase in taxes which it has put on us at the present time. 

 

Now I got down to 1965 and the price is $1.99 compared to $1.85 back in 1950. 15 years and the price 

has gone up 15 cents, Mr. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane). It is true that we have been 

producing more grain in this country than has been produced over a corresponding period of years, but 

the Liberal Government has not been responsible for this. Nature and the powers on high, unless of 

course Mr. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) you do claim some supernatural power to make rain, etc. 

 

Mr. Steuart: Well, I‟ve got pretty good connections! 

 

Mr. Willis: I know you can certainly pour taxes down on the people of Saskatchewan, blessings 

unnumbered. And then Mr. Menzies goes on in this Canadian Wheat Problems and Prospects. After 

talking about the price farmers received for their wheat, $1.95 in 1960, $1.99 final realized price 15 

years later, he says: 

 

When the increase in cost in 1960 is added to the sharp increase in cost in 1950 when income due to 

wheat sales actually declined . . . 

 

You‟re following me, are you Mr. Minister, on page 13? 

 

It becomes evident . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: Make sure you give the correct figures. 

 

Mr. Willis: — 

 

. . . that the farmer‟s cost is increasingly pressed by the prices he received. 

 

That reminds me of the Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald). The other day he got up and started 

quoting from the Journals. One of our Members here said, “When the devil quotes scripture, I want to 

have the Bible in my hands.” Mr. Wood got the Bible in his hand and quoted to show where the Member 

from Milestone had misquoted. So, Mr. Minister, (Mr. McFarlane) you just follow carefully to make 

sure that I don‟t make some mistake here. 

 

It is fair to deduce that the extent that the continued production and marketing of wheat has been 

profitable to the producers in the 1960s, it has been due largely to the quantities of wheat they have 

been able to market, not to the fact that the prices have gone up and certainly not to the fact that cost of 

farm production has gone 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1570 

up. 

 

In spite of this fact, the Provincial Treasurer across the way feels that the farmers in the province can 

help out the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) in his waste and extravagance in road building by giving 

again to the Provincial Treasurer two cent a gallon for all the gas they are going up and down their fields 

in producing crops to add to the economy of Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other 

parts in this book which emphasize the problems that the farmers have in Saskatchewan. I know two 

cents doesn‟t sound like very much but over the years, over the days, over the hours, when they are 

propelling their tractor up and down it will amount to considerable for each farmer. It is going to 

influence his costs even more and the farmer who is caught between the price cost-squeeze where prices 

are falling and costs are going up, is going to be squeezed even more because of the actions of this 

irresponsible Government, Mr. Speaker, this irresponsible Government where the Provincial Treasurer 

(Mr. Steuart) says one of the most surprising things in Saskatchewan is the lack of response from those 

we‟re trying to help, the province‟s taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: Mr. Speaker, going on here with the condition of farmers in Western Canada, if this report 

which Mr. Menzies produced with the help of the Wheat Pool proves anything, it is that the farmers of 

Western Canada cannot bear future production costs as exemplified by this fuel tax. The price of wheat 

has gone up relatively little. Cost of production has gone up much greater, and the cost of production 

will go up again because of the two cents which these people across the way see fit to place on the 

farmers‟ backs. 

 

Mr. Menzies also gives the index of the cost of commodities and services used by Canadian farmers to 

produce wheat. He says the index based on 1935-39 figures, Mr. Speaker, increase from 199 in 1950 to 

343 in 1966. A tremendous increase in costs while prices go up very, very little. But the Provincial 

Treasurer says his costs have gone up too, Mr. Speaker. He says he has to produce $35 million more in 

taxes this year than he did last year. Is it $45 million? I am sorry, I thought it was $35 million, correct 

me if I am wrong, $35 million I think is the figure. But whether it is $35 million or $45 million the 

Provincial Treasurer says he has to have this extra amount of taxes from the people of Saskatchewan. 

When we were preparing the Budget, Mr. Speaker, the departments and the agencies of the Government, 

including the Minister of Agriculture, I imagine, and the Minister of Mineral Resources, and the 

Minister of Health, and the Minister of Labour, and the Minister of Municipal Affairs - they are the only 

Ministers I see in the House, Mr. Speaker, in their seats - these people along with other members of the 

Government, brought in requests for increased spending, the Provincial Treasurer told the House, $61 



 
March 28, 1968 

1571 

 

million more than estimated revenues if the taxes were not increased. This was a tremendous burden for 

a new Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). How did he react? Well he cut off some of the costs; he turned 

down some of the requests. He said he was able to reduce the requests from $61 million to $29 million, 

actually $35 million. He did a very good job, Mr. Speaker, except he didn‟t cut enough. He wasn‟t 

responsible enough. In the days from 1944 to 1964, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, the same problem was 

faced for 20 consecutive years by your predecessors. What did they do? Did they raise taxes 

tremendously when there were no new programs, did they? Oh, no, they didn‟t. In 1961, someone across 

the way mentioned there was a program, medicare, which the people had voted on. Now, what did you 

do, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, in place of cutting your cloth to fit the amount of money you had? You 

said well, I can‟t cut back the Minister of Agriculture too much, he would complain. Besides you 

wouldn‟t have enough money to go down to Ottawa to tell the people of Ottawa to get out and sell 

Saskatchewan wheat. He certainly couldn‟t cut back on the incentive programs which the Minister of 

Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) has been talking about all these years. After all somebody might 

come into the North who might be willing to finance a new mine this year or next year or ten years from 

now, maybe 20 years from now, but in the meantime his incentive program goes on; it has to go on. And 

you, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, had to find $35 million more and you certainly made a good effort at 

finding it. You put a two-cent tax on farm fuel and besides that you increased Education and Health tax 

from 4 to 5 per cent. You had promised that you were going to reduce it to 3, but wrong-way-Corrigan 

again in place of going down, you went up. You realize that, Mr. Minister, and then you not only raised 

it but extended the base. You are charging hotels now, motor hotels and motel rooms, commercial 

cabins. Somebody wants to speak, I see that, it‟s getting close to 10 o‟clock. Somebody‟s getting their 

courage up, probably the Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan). I very nearly said Minister, 

pardon me. The Member from Last Mountain probably wants to enter the debate on behalf of his 

farmers. And then again you extended the tax base by charges on meals, the restaurant business in 

Saskatchewan has to help pay this $35 million which you are left holding the bag with, Mr. Provincial 

Treasurer. And then, not only that, but you extend the base to charge on all forms of 

telecommunications. Every time a person makes a long-distance telephone call, sends a telegram, 

teletype, or private wire, he will pay a few cents to help you raise your $35 million, Mr. Provincial 

Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: On a point of order I wonder if this gasoline tax is on the telegraph, telephone and 

teletype and tele-everything else. I don‟t think the gasoline tax is on that. 

 

Mr. Willis: I know, Mr. Speaker, that the people opposite don‟t like to . . . 



 
March 28, 1968 

 

1572 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): I was just going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn‟t matter what 

subjects you talk on now, it‟s taxed readily. 

 

Mr. Speaker: Order, order! That‟s not a point of order. 

 

Mr. Willis: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I can see that the Member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) is very 

anxious to get into this debate and I‟ll try and leave him a minute. I think that is probably all he‟ll use in 

trying to tell us how this tax has affected his people in his constituency. 

 

And then besides we had the medicare tax, the Provincial Treasurer not only increased the tax on those 

least able to pay, but he increased the tax on those least able to protest the payment of taxes. I mentioned 

the Commonwealth cartoon earlier, Mr. Speaker, I see there are a few more Members in. We are going 

to adjourn very soon, so probably I should tell them again about the cartoon about the Provincial 

Treasurer standing by a bedside in a hospital room with his hand out asking a sick person for $2.50 

before he leaves the room. And then we had other increases in taxes, Mr. Speaker. We have the 

operator‟s licences up from $1 to $2. Now $1 isn‟t very much, Mr. Speaker, but if I remember correctly 

it only took a straw to break the camel‟s back. 

 

Mr. Gallagher: Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I think that the Member is completely out of order. 

We are dealing with the second reading of The Fuel Petroleum Products Act and not any other tax Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker: I agree that we are dealing with an Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act, and if 

I follow the line of argument correctly that the Member is trying to present, I think his line of reasoning 

is because these other taxes have been imposed this one is unnecessary. But I may be wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Willis: Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I thought I was doing very well until you 

mentioned I was trying to present an argument. Now, I have to go back over it now and make a better 

effort to convince these people that this fuel tax is only one of many which are bearing down heavily on 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Then we have car and school bus licences up $4 to $5, Mr. Speaker, farm truck licences up $4 to $6, and 

commercial vehicle licences up $5, and then for those people who smoke, tobacco taxes are up. Those 

people who play the races, pari-mutuel taxes 



 
March 28, 1968 

1573 

 

are up; insurance taxes are up, Mr. Speaker. All of these taxes, up because the Provincial Treasurer says 

that he is responsible. He has to see to it that the programs which he is unable to cut have all the millions 

of dollars which must be spent. After all even the people of Saskatchewan must believe that he is doing 

it for their benefit. He must do his duty and impose these extra taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Steuart: Mr. Speaker, before we adjourn we will assume that tomorrow by the number of Members 

that have hopped up with the same drivel, I mean the same debate, it will continue. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 

 


