



















































Hansard: March 25, 1968


1341 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Monday, March 25, 1968 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO VISITORS 

 

MR. J.J. CHARLEBOIS (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to draw to the 

attention of all Hon. Members to a fine group of students seated in the west gallery. They are boys and girls 

from the Wilson school which is situated in Saskatoon City Park-University constituency. They are here 

under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Balzer. I am sure that all Members wish to join with me in extending 

to them a very warm welcome to the Legislature of our province and we wish them a very safe journey 

home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. D.V. HEALD (Lumsden): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure this afternoon through you to extend a 

welcome of all Hon. Members, I am sure, to 28 students being the grade seven and eight classes from the 

Village of Pense, a thriving community in my constituency. They are accompanied here this afternoon by 

their teacher, Mr. Berger and by their fathers who have driven them in, Mr. Downs, Mr. Brunskill, Mr. 

Jensen, Rev. Miller, Mr. Straub and Mr. Seaberly. This is an annual event, Mr. Speaker, for the students 

from the Pense school. I know that you would want me to extend on your behalf and on behalf of all Hon. 

Members, our best wishes to them. They have had an enjoyable day so far, and I know that they are eagerly 

looking forward to this exercise in democracy which they are about to witness this afternoon. I know that 

you would want me to wish them a safe journey home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. H.H.P. BAKER (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce a group of fine 

young students from Douglas Park school, grade seven and eight. They are accompanied here by their 

teachers and their principal, Mr. Young. This school comes here regularly each year and I am sure it is 

because of the fine direction that they get from their principal. Douglas Park school is one of our newer 

schools and is in a very fine residential area. I hope that they will enjoy their stay here this afternoon and 

learn much from the deliberations here and that their coming here will be most fruitful in their activities in 

their various grades. With that, I add a warm welcome to them on behalf of the Legislature. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to introduce to all Members a fine group of students in the Speaker’s 

gallery from the town of Churchbridge, under the very able direction of their principal, 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1342 

Mr. Kania and with their bus drivers and others. I am sure that all Members wish to join with me in 

extending them a very sincere warm welcome to this Legislature in expressing their wish that their stay here 

will be enjoyable and educational and that they will have a safe trip home. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I do further draw your attention to a group of students, eight in number and two others, 

under the auspices of the Chamber of Commerce, in Ritchie, Montana. I am sure that all Members would 

wish also to extend to them a very warm welcome to the Legislature in the Province of Saskatchewan. We 

ask them to carry our best wishes back to the self-governing state of Montana. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

A MESSAGE FROM HIS HONOUR THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — The Lieutenant Governor transmits further Estimates of certain sums required for the 

service of the Province, for the 12 months ending March 31, 1969. And further supplementary Estimates of 

certain sums required for the service of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1968, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART: (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

Thatcher that: 

 

His Honour’s message and the further Estimates and the further supplementary Estimates be referred 

to the Committee of Supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNMENT OF THE HOUSE 

 

HON. W. R. THATCHER (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I give notice that on 

Wednesday next, I shall move a motion to provide for adjournment of the House on Tuesday, April 2nd at 10 

p.m. to the following Monday, 10 a.m. April 8th. The purpose of this motion of course is to permit certain 

Members on this side of the Legislature to attend the National Liberal Convention. The Leader of the 

Opposition has indicated, I think, that he would have no objection to such a motion. 

 

MR. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Is this trip necessary? 

 

MR. THATCHER: — And an even more pleasant motion, Mr. Speaker, I would move that on Wednesday 

next, a motion which will provide for morning sittings hopefully from Thursday, March 28th until the end of 

the session. This side of the House, or at least quite a number on this side of the House, would also be quite 

willing to sit Saturdays from now on. We are a bit concerned by the progress that we have been making so 

far. We still have passed 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1343 

no Estimates and we yet have two-thirds of the Bills to scrutinize. Mr. Speaker, we are hoping that the 

Committees which are left can complete their work by Wednesday. If they must sit beyond Wednesday 

possibly they might sit at the same time that the House is meeting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. L.P. Coderre that Bill No. 

13 — An Act to amend the Fire Prevention Act be now read a second time. 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few brief remarks to make with respect 

to this Bill. The amendments, first of all, appear to seek a more extensive authority than at present, to do 

those things that are necessary to bring about a more effective Fire Prevention Program in the province. No 

one on this side of the House will quarrel with that objective. 

 

Part of the Bill deals with the rights of members of fire departments or other authorized personnel to enter 

buildings where a fire is in progress or where one has occurred, in the language of the Act, or in buildings or 

land pertinent thereto. Now, Mr. Speaker, without doing more at this time than to refer to this phrase, I 

would personally like to have the Minister take another look at this part. Surely some reference should be 

included to confine the areas that are inspected to goals where the inspections are actually undertaken in 

nearby buildings and lands where the inspectors may reasonably suspect fire dangers. The words of 

"pertinent thereto" may mean what they say, which implies that the inspection would be made if thought 

necessary, only if the buildings were adjunct to that where a fire is taking place or has taken place. Mr. 

Speaker, it may also mean inspection of all buildings say in a residential block. I am not disagreeing with 

anything at this point. I would simply want to discover what powers are actually being given in this part of 

the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am troubled by that portion of the Bill which states that no action can be taken against either a 

municipality or an individual in his public or private capacity for a broad range of acts that are done in the 

course of fire fighting or in fire inspection. I think that I would be in general agreement that the individual 

should be protected from legal actions of all kinds which are taken against him by reason of things that were 

done in the reasonable and I underline that word, performance of his duties. I would like to know, Mr. 

Speaker, what is meant by private capacity and why is this reference included at all in the Bill. 

 

More serious perhaps is the prohibition against actions directed at municipalities. Does this mean that a 

private citizen has no recourse where there seems to be some valid reason for the exercise of this right? Why, 

Mr. Speaker, no action? After all the courts of the province should be competent to assess the worth or 

otherwise, of the citizen’s claim. I say, why rob the citizen of his rights in this connection? Mr. Speaker, 

these matters should be explained by the Minister when we vote on the Bill this afternoon, if indeed we do 

vote on it this afternoon. We certainly, and I repeat this, do not 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1344 

have objections to the aims of the Bill, but I believe that he should give us an explanation about the areas 

that I have raised here briefly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill also provides an additional regulatory power by the Cabinet. I would also like to know 

what precisely is intended by the extended powers. The powers would include the naming of a co-ordinator 

of Fire Emergency Services. Does this position have a relationship to the emergency Measures Organization 

or what does the Government intend in this whole regard. 

 

The powers of the Cabinet have also been extended to appoint a Fire Advisory Council and to the 

prescribing of their duties and powers. And I think that we need to know more about this as well, Mr. 

Speaker. As a general rule, I think the creation of any such council should be stipulated in a separate section, 

not off-handedly in regulations as it proposed to do here. It should say something explicit about the kind of 

council and about the duties of the council. Mr. Speaker, we are asked here this afternoon to give the Cabinet 

a blank cheque in the appointment of a most important provincial body, and I think that the Minister owes us 

this afternoon some further explanation here as well. 

 

Now actually, Mr. Speaker, we can go into more detailed examination and questions in Committee. I would 

think, though, at this point that some further elaboration by the Minister might well speed our work on the 

Bill when it does arrive in Committee. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I simply wanted to draw to the Minister’s 

attention the new Section 6A, subsection 2, and to indicate to him that when the Bill gets into Committee of 

the Whole, I will be asking some questions with respect to the principles contained in that section and their 

effect on insurance. As I read the Bill, if three houses were in a line and the house in the middle was burning, 

and the one on the south end didn’t have insurance the fire-fighters might break into the house on the south 

end in order to fight the fire in the middle house and the poor fellow who owned the house on the south end 

would perhaps not be able to collect from the insurers. His house is not on fire and apparently any cause of 

action, which he might have had against the insurers of the middle house, has been barred. Now logically the 

person to pay for the loss is the insurer of the middle house, the burning house, because he got all the benefit 

of the actions taken by the fire-fighters. I may not be reading the Bill correctly. I simply want to give the 

Minister notice of the fact that this sort of question will be raised in Committee of the Whole. 

 

HON. L.P. CODERRE (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in respect to the question of the proposed 

new Section 2, subsection A, in the absence of any particular by-law there are no statutory provisions 

authorizing firemen to enter buildings to extinguish fires except under common law. Where fires occur 

whereby the owner or the occupant may have wilfully set fire for fraudulent purposes or otherwise or being 

of unsound mind or some other reasons, and objects to or hinders 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1345 

a fireman from gaining entry to the burning building, there are no provisions for firemen to properly perform 

their duties. And our firemen have had situations like that at times. As for the latter question raised by the 

Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney), there are also cases where the buildings or the contents of 

the building are not insured or the building may be unoccupied and the alarm is turned in by a neighbor. 

Consequently the firemen are in doubt as to their legal rights and feel that they may be held liable for water 

damage. You can very well imagine a house unoccupied, or one with the contents not insured, and there is a 

fire in progress, so except under common law they have no right to enter it. In order to prevent the spread of 

the fire, they should enter that building in order to put it out. The fact that there is no insurance, it is 

conceivable that under the law that they could sue for damages for water damages although it might have 

been only a small fire. This is the purpose of this and the Fire Chiefs Association have requested this because 

they have encountered situations like that in the past. 

 

In regard to the last proposed section, I think that most of these matters can be best dealt with in Committee. 

This is an addition to the regulation-making authority of the Lieutenant Governor in Council and it provides 

for a co-ordinator who would co-ordinate provincial fire fighting facilities during a wide-spread 

conflagration. At the moment there are no fire plans. 

 

These matters, I think, can be dealt with much more clearly in Committee. I think that they are quite self-

explanatory in that respect. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. L.P. Coderre that Bill No. 

24 — An Act to amend The Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act be now read a second time. 

 

MR. W.G. DAVIES (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, as I read this Bill it intends to effect increases 

for certain pensioners of the Compensation Board, to raise the earning level on which the 75 per cent 

compensation payments are calculated, to extend the payment periods for dependants who are receiving 

education and to raise the minimum amount paid for permanent and total disability for those who are under 

Workmen’s Compensation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that these remedies are improvements, we on this side of the House are glad 

to support them. Without straying from the rule and discussing in detail each pertinent section, I must say, 

however, that we regret that the payment changes that are stated in the Bill are far, far, too meagre, that is, 

having regard particularly to the sharply increased living costs of recent years. As one simple example, 

upping the widow’s pension from $110 to $115 per month, that is by a paltry $5.00, is surely not beginning 

to recognize the escalating prices that have occurred since the last increases were made in these allowances, 

in 1962. I suggest to the Minister that they should be at least three times the amount of increase that he has 

shown in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill might also have raised the ceiling on income to at least $7,000 and the $600 figure, 

reflecting 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1346 

again six years of experience, is hardly enough having regard to all the realities. While we will be most 

happy to vote for any increase - and these are often small when they come from the Minister - I would like to 

ask the Minister to consider House amendments by which the general trend of allowance raises and the 

income ceiling are increased from those that are shown. 

 

Now the second main observation that I have to make this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is that the Government 

has been remiss in its responsibilities in overseeing the Compensation Act. The Act provides for a four-year 

review of the operations of the legislation and also its administration. That review - the last one took place in 

1963 - should have occurred in 1967. However, the Government is only acting now in the fifth year, to create 

the Committee of Review that should have been made last year. By the time the Committee that the Minister 

says he has constituted, has done its work and made its report, six years will have gone by and the 

Government will not have had the benefit of its advice until that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill to me has the hasty earmarks of the Government trying to take some very limited action 

to escape criticism for not having had a Committee of Review sit last year to elaborate proper 

recommendations, which then could have been the foundation on which the Government this year brought 

amendments to the Act before the House. Now, certainly, Mr. Speaker, if the Government had obeyed the 

requirements of the Compensation Act by instituting a Review in the fourth year, we should be in a much 

better position to discuss the Bill before us. I say that under the circumstances the Government must accept 

censure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it could also be assumed that the Government, in drafting the Bill in front of us, would have 

secured up-to-date information on pension matters as they pertained to the Compensation Board and its 

administration. However, in view of recent correspondence that has been referred to me, it must be doubted 

that the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) would have been provided with such information if he did indeed 

ask for it from the Board. Now I think that Members all over this House will agree that pension facts, 

compensation facts, would have helped us in our consideration of this Bill. Certainly it would have helped us 

in the consideration of the matters that are integral to the Bill. The Chairman of the Compensation Board, for 

example, has recently stated in writing that the Board was not in a position to answer queries regarding the 

year 1967 for legitimate requests for information on the following, and I am going to make reference to 

these, Mr. Speaker: (a) the number of persons permanently disabled who are receiving pensions 

(Compensation pensions); (b) the number of widows and dependants on pension in the province; (c) the 

number of pensions paid to permanently disabled persons (ranging from $500 to $3,500); (d) the average age 

of pensioners in these pension brackets; (e) the number of pensioners who received aid through 

rehabilitation, training, upgrading and the total cost for all of this work concerned; (f) the number of workers 

covered by Workmen’s Compensation in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I ask you to note this one, that the 

Board is not only unwilling, but unable, to provide the simple information on how many working people in 

Saskatchewan are covered by Workmen’s Compensation. (g) the number of workmen covered by 

Compensation in each of the assessed classes that the Board has to deal with; (h) the number of plant safety 

committees in Saskatchewan; (i) the number of such committees with employee representation appointed by 

employers 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1347 

and trade unions; (j) the figures showing the number involved in rehabilitation; (k) the number of those 

returning to pre-accident occupations who were placed in other employment in consequence; (l) who were 

found to be unemployable; (m) who received training on the job or through schools or cases which are still 

pending. Finally, the Board does not have information on the increase or the decrease in the accident rate in 

each assessed class under the Compensation Board. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that these are relevant facts which 

the Minister should have, which the Board should certainly have set out to get and which to my knowledge 

have been refused in writing by the present Chairman of the Compensation Board. 

 

So I ask, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon, how can the Minister, let alone the Members of this House, take a Bill 

of the kind before us for serious consideration when the bare facts on pensions are not available. I have 

complained about this before and I ask; when is the Minister going to take the steps that are plainly indicated 

to see that the Board undertakes the production of statistics and information beyond the very meagre and 

sparse facts that we get in the Board’s Annual Report? In an operation that last year spent $8,721,000, the 

failure to be able to supply the type of information requested is, I think, absolutely shocking. 

 

Now, to just briefly review my position here, Mr. Speaker. We will support the Bill. We would though like 

to see the Minister revise some of the payments in it, in an upward direction, for all of the reasons that I have 

suggested. We would hope that the whole question of Compensation Pensions should be reviewed on the 

basis of facts which the Board should be asked to produce just as soon as possible. And may I say before 

sitting down, Mr. Speaker, that the Committee of Review, we are told by the Minister, will be sitting 

sometime later this year. I would say that he has an excellent opportunity to convey this kind of request to it 

immediately. 

 

MR. CODERRE (Minister of Labour): — It is not ironic, Mr. Speaker, that every time that my Socialist 

friends across the floor get up and speak about legislation that they are going to support, they like to offer the 

moon. They’ve had 20 years to do some of the work that they now suggest we do, but they didn’t move. Now 

the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South has the audacity to ask for increases three times the amount that’s 

being offered. In three short years, rather four years, we have taken upon ourselves to nominate and establish 

a Committee of Review to review the legislation. Then they have the audacity to say that some of the 

information that they’re asking is not being made available. You over there had 20 years to make provisions 

in the Act whereby this information would have been available to the Legislature. You denied this 

information on every occasion that it was asked in the past, saying that the information of the Board was 

privileged. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Sir, can I ask the Hon. Minister a question? 

 

MR. CODERRE: — Yes, sure you can ask all the questions you want. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — May I ask the Minister why he did not set up a Committee of Review last year when the 

legislation called for it? 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1348 

MR. CODERRE: — We’ll get there in due course. I am saying that you denied the information while you 

were in the Government. Every time that questions were asked of the Board this information was not made 

available to this House, because the provisions of the Act are there as such that the Board has representation 

of labor, management and Government, it is an autonomous Board and is responsible to the Minister of 

Labour for changes in legislation only. You know that, so don’t try every time and fabricate . . . 

 

MR. DAVIES: — Would the Minister permit a question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — You had your opportunity a moment ago to speak. If you had all these ideas why 

didn’t you say them at that time. 

 

I’d like to draw the attention of this House, Mr. Speaker, that the rates that we’re offering now are higher 

than in the greater majority of the provinces in Canada and equal to some of them. They were very niggardly 

when they were the Government to look after the welfare of our widows. They have the audacity to say that a 

person who was entitled to a disability pension, a widow’s pension when her old age security allowance is 

due which is there by Federal statute, would have her pension reduced accordingly. Why didn’t you speak up 

at that time? No, they were niggardly, now they are ready to offer the moon. True to the Socialists every 

time. They do one thing while on this side of the House; they say the opposite on the other side. 

 

MR. DAVIES: — May I asked the Minister, Mr. Speaker, on what occasion outside of this Government 

term of office that information was refused on Compensation Board matters. 

 

MR. CODERRE: — You should know, you were in the Government at that time. Every question asked in 

the House had to be withdrawn or was turned down. You know yourself that there is no record in this House 

when a question has been denied. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of 

Municipal Affairs) that Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Local Improvement Districts Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

MR. E.I. WOOD (Swift Current): — I’m very sorry, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t realize that we were going to 

come to this one next, I thought we’d be coming down the line. 

 

In regard to The Local Improvement Districts Act, Mr. Speaker, what I have to say is of very little 

consequence at this time. I have looked at this Act and I do think that the sections of it can best be discussed 

in Committee of the Whole. I do not see anything in the principle of the Bill that I would care to speak on at 

this time. 

 

HON. C.L.B. ESTEY (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, as I pointed 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1349 

out on the second reading, the amendments to this Bill merely set up a system which we would hope will 

bring the rural municipality provisions applicable to the LIDS. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of 

Municipal Affairs) that Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Industrial Towns Act, be now read a second 

time. 

 

MR. WOOD: — Mr. Speaker, in regard to this Bill at this time, I wish to speak in opposition to the 

principle of the Bill. In so doing it may be necessary for me to make reference to several of the sections in 

the Bill, but I do not wish my remarks to be interpreted as a discussion of this Bill section by section, 

because you will plainly see, Mr. Speaker, my purpose is to direct attention to the principle of the Bill and 

not to the clauses. Section 2 of this Bill deals with subsections (3) and (6) of Section 9 of the old Act which 

we are asked to repeal. These sections, Mr. Speaker, have to do with the paying of assistance to Industrial 

Towns (that are termed as Industrial Towns) in regard to helping to pay for the salary of a town manager. 

The section as it is now in the Act says that the Minister must help pay the salary of a town manager if he 

appoints one. Subsection (6) of the same section says that he must help to pay the manager if such is 

appointed by the council. You go down to Section 4 of this Bill which says that subsection (3) of Section 16 

is repealed. Under this subsection (3) of the present Section 16 of the Act it says that the Minister may grant 

assistance to help pay for a plan that has been ordered by the Minister. Section 5 of this new Act says that 

"The Lieutenant Governor in council may by order, on the recommendation of the Minister and subject to 

such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order, make such grants, loans and advances and give 

such guarantee as are considered necessary or expedient for the purpose of providing for the implementation 

of any provisions of this Act or for assisting in the establishment or development of an existing or new 

industrial town." This takes the place of a section, Mr. Speaker, that said, subject to the regulations, the 

Minister may do such and such. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I do not approve of the principle that was set forward here. Under the old Act the 

Minister was acting in accordance with strictures that had been laid down in the legislation. It said that the 

Minister must do so and so and according to the legislation the Minister may do other things. This Bill we 

have before us takes this all away. Whereas in Section 25 of the old Act the Minister might do certain things 

according to regulations, this is now taken away and the Lieutenant Governor in Council may order so and 

so. Instead of the Minister doing certain things under the Act as set out by regulations it is now taken entirely 

into the hands of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. I am sure that he should be able to continue to do these 

things, especially if they are outlined by regulation. 

 

I feel, Mr. Speaker, that this House has a responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan. It is a fundamental 

fact in parliamentary democracy that the Legislature has control over the actions of the Government, that the 

Government be not given a free hand to do exactly as it wants with no controls whatsoever between sessions. 

I think it is a very sound principle that the 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1350 

legislation be written out by the Legislature to give guidance to the Lieutenant Governor in Council between 

sessions. I think it is very good that we have policies clearly defined to outline how the Minister or the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may conduct affairs of the Province between sessions. I think this is what 

we had in the earlier Act. We had sections here that said that the Minister or the Lieutenant Governor may do 

such things. But these are being repealed. The section that says that the Minister may do certain things 

subject to regulations is also being repealed. In the place of this we just have one section that says that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may by order do these things, practically anything it may wish to do in 

regard t this whole Act. I do not think this is the kind of legislation that should be passed by this House. I 

think, Mr. Speaker, we should have legislation that outlines, gives powers to the Executive Council, gives 

powers to the Minister to carry out the will and intent of the Legislature under certain lines and by certain 

policies that are laid down. If the policy cannot be contained in full exactitude in the legislation it should be 

set out in the regulations that the Lieutenant Governor in Council may use one policy, not one policy in one 

instance and another policy in another instance. I think these things should be laid clearly by legislation and 

regulation and the Government of this province should carry out along standard lines of one policy to fit 

every case. I don’t think we should have one type of policy in regard to one part of the province and at the 

whim of the Executive Council that they have another policy in regard to another part of the province. I am 

not saying that they may do this, but this is the type of legislation that is contained in this Bill before us. I 

think with these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will have to say that I will be opposing this legislation on 

second reading. 

 

MR. ESTEY: — I think on second reading I explained the purposes of the amendments to the legislation 

insofar as Section 25 is concerned which was referred to by the Hon. Members opposite. It was found in the 

opinion of the Government that the old Section 25 was too restrictive. We were of the opinion that we 

couldn’t make guarantees to Lanigan for instance, and Jan Lake. We were of the opinion that we couldn’t 

make grants for other than administrative purposes which we will obviously have to do in the case of the 

town near Jan Lake. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial 

Treasurer) that Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

MR. A.E. BLAKENEY (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned this debate I had already 

pointed out the difficulties which this Bill would bring to farmers, who for the first time are going to have 

the fuel used in their field equipment subjected to a fuel petroleum tax. I don’t think I need to repeat the 

arguments which I advanced at that time, except only to say once again that this is a particularly inopportune 

time to place taxes on the cost of producing farm products. I think all of us know that Saskatchewan 

agriculture is moving into a critical time. Informed opinion suggests that the critical year for farm income 

will be 1969. Export sales are uncertain; the future of the International Cereals Agreement is in doubt; the 

final payment on grain is 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1351 

likely to be small. In addition, farm product prices have declined in a number of other important areas 

besides cereal grains since mid-1967. We have already noted that the prices of wheat have declined some 21 

cents between May of 1967 and January of 1968. Since February of 1966, hog prices have dropped from 

around $42 to about $24.50 per hundredweight. The price of choice steers has dropped from $30 last 

September to about $26 per hundredweight now. In short, Mr. Speaker, this is a particularly inopportune 

time to place any additional burdens upon Saskatchewan agriculture. I won’t say more about this, because 

other Members on this side of the House will comment on this particular aspect of the Bill. I simply want to 

mention two other groups of people who will be particularly hard hit by this Bill and by the whole complex 

of taxes which are being levied by the Budget and the Bills following the Budget. 

 

One group I want to mention are the commercial travellers. If we consider what a commercial traveller does 

to earn his living we will see that the activities of the Government seem to have been cunningly designed to 

tax very nearly everything that a commercial traveller does in order to earn his living. A commercial traveller 

spends probably $1,000 a year on the capital cost of his car, and he’s going to have to pay an extra one per 

cent on that item. He will travel perhaps 35,000 miles a year burning perhaps 2,000 gallons of gasoline and 

this is going to cost him an additional $40. He may spend - and I am using some very conservative figures - 

$100 a month on hotel rooms, and on that amount of $1,200 a year he will pay an additional $60 because of 

the new tax on hotel rooms. He buys some meals on the road, some restaurant meals, and he may buy ten 

meals a month which exceed $2. That’s really a conservative estimate of the number of meals of $2 and over 

that he might buy. And this will cost him an additional $12 or $15 in tax. He or his employer must pay an 

additional amount to license his car, perhaps $5 or $6 there. He pays an additional dollar for his driver’s 

licence. The whole list of taxes adds up to perhaps $110, $120, $130 extra a year for the commercial 

traveller. I don’t include in this calculation any additional sales tax on oil or on tires or on the multitude of 

other things which one must buy in order to operate a vehicle and travel on the road. I think it will be seen 

that the complex of taxes which has been applied, and I haven’t mentioned any additional costs by way of his 

cigarettes or his alcohol or any other accoutrements of his trade. Travellers are an abstemious group of 

citizens I am advised by the Provincial Treasurer. This being the case probably we ought not to include 

liquor taxes in the calculation. I haven’t mentioned anything about additional cost of car insurance. In short, 

Mr. Speaker, almost everything that a commercial traveller is forced to spend money on has been increased 

by an additional tax. I wonder whether or not the Government might not see its way clear to relieve the 

burden in some particular respect on the commercial traveller. I don’t know whether the gasoline tax is the 

right place to pick, but it may be that the Government can find one of the many taxes which it has increased 

this year that it might relieve so far as commercial travellers are concerned. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1352 

The next group of people who are hard hit by this that I want to mention, Mr. Speaker, are the taxpayers in 

the urban centres. The city of Regina for example now uses in its Engineer’s Department some 85,000 

gallons of diesel fuel and some 300,000 gallons of gasoline, and in its Transit Department it uses 4,000 

gallons of gasoline and some 376,000 gallons of diesel fuel. The tax at two cents a gallon on all of this is 

going to run up to something over $15,000 a year. 

 

I simply want to point out that there is a substantial cost simply in the extra cost of petroleum fuel. There 

would also be additional expenses due to the increase in sales tax. I won’t mention that on this debate, Mr. 

Speaker. I simply want to make this one plea. In the past it has been the custom to grant a refund on 

petroleum fuel tax burned by city vehicles on city streets. This has applied where the gasoline or diesel fuel 

in question has been burned and the ordinary tax has been paid. The custom has been for the municipality to 

apply to the Provincial Treasurer and get a refund of all of the tax that has been paid. I want to ask the 

Provincial Treasurer that he continue this custom and that the refund not be confined to the 15 cents spread, 

but that the two cents additional tax be included in the refund as well so that all of the gasoline burned by the 

city of Regina, or the other cities, in their own equipment on their own streets be refunded in the way that it 

has been done in the past. If the Minister can see his way clear to ameliorate the harsh effects of this tax in 

the way I’ve suggested with respect to urban municipalities and in some way which his ingenuity will 

suggest to him in respect to commercial travellers, then I think that the effects of the tax will be lessened, 

except of course the deleterious effects on agriculture which will be the subject of further remarks by my 

colleagues. 

 

MR. J.A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, as one who has lived for some 47 years on a farm and has 

been actively engaged in farming activities during the whole period of my life thus far, I feel that it is not 

only my duty but it is also my strong desire to oppose this tax increase of two cents per gallon, especially on 

farm fuels, that might be used by any implement or motor requiring it on the farm today. This to my 

knowledge is the first time in Saskatchewan that any Government ever put a tax on the farm fuel to be used 

in producing our agricultural commodities. This is an added expense which when farm income is not gaining 

accordingly, is certainly going to be frowned on. It is definitely a step to curtail any profit that our farmers 

might be able to secure in their farming operations. The margin of profit and loss, Mr. Speaker, today in a 

farmer’s operation is so small or narrow that another tax such as this two cent raise in gas and diesel fuels 

can quite easily put him over on the red side of his balance sheet, thus putting him a greater depth in debt. 

 

When the Government, Mr. Speaker, made it possible for the farmer to use purple gas in his truck some two 

to three years ago it was accepted with mixed feelings. True enough it worked as a convenience for many 

farmers. I would say it was more of a convenience than what it actually saved the farmer in dollars and cents. 

But I would like to remind them now that our Liberal Government now seems to feel the necessity of placing 

a two cent per gallon provincial tax on farm gas and diesel fuel. This advantage if there was any of burning 

purple gas in the farm trucks has certainly been thrown out the window. Who says that 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1353 

this two cent increase is the first step only and will be the only step on a tax in this manner? This 

convenience is now going to be paid for because the two cents per gallon will certainly increase the price 

cost of farm operations in all motors that require it. Whether they are gas or diesel motors, tractors, 

combines, self-propelled swathers, motors that you require to run your grain elevators, these are all used for 

agricultural purposes, plus the extra two cents per gallon in all sizes of farm trucks, both gas and diesel and 

your two cents per gallon in the operating of your family car. This to me, Mr. Speaker, certainly shows the 

great concern that the Members opposite try to profess that they have in our farming people and the manner 

and extent in which they are helping our agricultural industry today. The Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

brag about the large amount set aside in the Budget for the building of highways and declare that this must 

be made possible by the increase in gas tax and that those using the highways must be prepared to pay for 

them in this increase in taxation. I am afraid that our farmers will not be happy by a tax being placed on their 

farm fuels, which will be used to supply power in working their implements that never even drive on these 

highways in order to finance the building of them today. Now there are a few Members sitting opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, farm Members, I must admit there are a few, but we have the Member from Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald), the Member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) and the Minister of Agriculture. I am anxiously 

waiting, Mr. Speaker, to see them rise in their seat and defend this Government for imposing this tax on their 

neighbors back home. It will be interesting to hear them explain the reason, when they meet their farmer 

friends back home, for placing this extra two cents per gallon burden on each one of them, who we all know 

are already burdened beyond what they can endure. This Government, Mr. Speaker, the same Government 

fought the election in 1964 and again in 1967 with the firm promise of tax reductions to our citizens 

especially our farmers. Now look at what it is doing. It has the audacity to place a new tax on farm 

agricultural fuels that have never been taxed before. Let’s take a look at some other Provinces and the 

manner in which they respect their agricultural industry and the farmers who work their soil. Let’s examine 

the gasoline taxation and its application to fuels used for agricultural purposes across Canada, in 1967. Take 

a look at Newfoundland. Its general rate increased from 19 cents to 20 cents a gallon on April 1, 1967. The 

exemptions include gasoline used in tractors, used for agricultural purposes. We have in Nova Scotia 

gasoline, 19 cents; diesel fuel, 27 cents, but exemption for farm services. Take a look at New Brunswick, 

gasoline, 18 cents; diesel fuel, 23 cents, exemption to farmers; Quebec, where their gasoline is 16 cents, their 

diesel fuel, 22 cents, refunds for tax and gasoline used in farm tractors; Ontario, getting closer to home, 

gasoline, 16 cents; diesel fuel, 22 cents, which was just raised recently, but the farmers receive full refund; 

our neighboring province of Manitoba, gasoline 17 cents; motor fuel, 20 cents, but exemptions for farm 

machinery and farm trucks; Alberta, your gasoline 12 cents, your diesel fuel, 14 cents, exemptions for 

agricultural purposes; British Columbia, gasoline, 13 cents, motor fuel 15 cents, but there’s a whole range of 

other uses including tractors for off-highway use and these are subject to a one cent tax. In our Province of 

Saskatchewan, if this Bill is passed, the tax will be raised, the gasoline from 15 to 17 cents, your diesel fuel 

from 18 to 20 cents, no exemptions for farm services including farm trucks in this imposition of this 2 cent 

levy. The exemption has been in the past and now when this 2 cent levy comes on April 1st it will affect all 

of the farm implements. 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1354 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our farmers in Saskatchewan are taking issue with the Government and are asking us as 

the Opposition to take a firm stand in opposing this Bill, that if it is passed will increase their expenses in 

operating their machines on their farms. And it will increase it in a magnitude beyond any reasonable figure. 

So I would like at this time, Mr. Speaker, to table a resolution that was sent to me from the Wheat Pool 

delegates of District 1 and I quote: 

 

Whereas we feel that we have made the case quite plain in the past that the farmer has been caught in 

the cost-price squeeze and whereas our gross farm income has decreased in the past year quite 

drastically, therefore be it resolved that we, the delegates of district 1 strenuously oppose the 2 cents 

per gallon tax on farm fuels levied by the Saskatchewan Government. 

 

So may I conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by urging all Members to reconsider this, what I say, unfair tax 

that would add extra cost to our farmers and extra expense to the production of our agricultural products if it 

is passed. It is unfair to penalize these people who are carrying on our main industry and who already are 

taxed now beyond what they can endure. I urge you to defeat this Bill and in so doing you will have provided 

a little incentive for our farmers to carry on this important industry of agriculture. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. MESSER (Kelsey): — I also rise to speak in opposition to Bill No. 43, in opposition to a Bill that is 

further going to tax petroleum products in the Province of Saskatchewan and in opposition particularly to the 

tax on farm petroleum products. This is a tax that has never before been levied against Saskatchewan farmers 

as my Hon. Colleague from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) has said. There is only one other province in the 

Dominion of Canada that taxes farm petroleum products and that Province is British Columbia, where the 

farming industry is relatively small compared to ours in Saskatchewan, and there it is only a one cent tax. 

But here in the Province of Saskatchewan we find that, if this Bill is passed, there will be a 2 cents per gallon 

tax and in some instances as high as a 10 per cent increase in the petroleum products used by the farmer in 

Saskatchewan. Conservatively this will apply to over 100 million gallons of purple gasoline and it will also 

apply to somewhat more than 80 million gallons of diesel fuel. This will again conservatively bring in an 

additional revenue to the Province of Saskatchewan some $3,750,000 in revenue. If you average it out by the 

average farm in Saskatchewan, the average farm will be paying somewhere in the neighborhood of $60 per 

farm. In order to do this, Mr. Speaker, it means that every time the farmer operates his tractor in the field he 

pays a tax toward highway construction. Every time he operates a self-propelled swather, a combine, a truck 

in the field, or an auger or any diesel or gasoline consuming motor on the farm, he pays a tax towards 

highway construction. To put that another way, Mr. Speaker, it means that for instance this spring, out of the 

82,285 farms that we have in Saskatchewan who will be operating approximately 120,000 tractors which 

will in all probability consume about an average of 4 gallons per hour, they’ll be paying the Government of 

Saskatchewan 8 cents per hour to operate those tractors. It means on an hourly basis that total farmers in the 

Province of Saskatchewan will be paying somewhere around between $9,000 and $10,000 in revenue 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1355 

to the Provincial Government. Now the farmer being rather an industrious worker in the province at that time 

of year in particular, he probably will have these tractors running somewhere between 10 and 12 hours a day, 

in a lot of instances longer than that. This means that the Government will extract from the farmer an 

additional revenue through taxes on farm petroleum products somewhere in excess of $100,000 per day. The 

farmer in this province cannot afford that particularly under the present agricultural economic situation that 

he is in. Now this will not only apply to the time when the farmer is doing his spring work or his seeding, it 

applies when he is summer fallowing; it applies when he is taking his crop off and during the harvesting 

season and the fall of the year. Now I could see some justification for a tax like this, if the farmer was doing 

all his work up and down the highways in the province, but in every one of these instances, his machinery is 

not even operating on highways. I’m not saying that a farmer shouldn’t contribute something to the 

construction and maintenance of highways in the Province of Saskatchewan, but it could certainly be on a 

more equitable basis than what this is. On top of that, as has been pointed out by other colleagues of mine on 

this side of the House, the timing is very, very bad for an additional tax, if a tax was justified. 

 

Economically, the position of farming in the Province of Saskatchewan is not good; it is not good in other 

areas of Canada, but other areas of Canada are not further burdening the farmer with farm petroleum taxes. 

We have small quotas in the province which have put the farmer in the position of being relatively short of 

cash. In other areas, due to poor crops, farmers do not have grain to deliver. They find that they are in the 

same position with relatively short assets in regard to cash. In the Province of Saskatchewan, the price for 

rapeseed has dropped some 50, 60 or 70 cents. The future for flax is not good, putting the farmer in a 

doubtful position in regard to what his prospects for an equitable income for next year will be. The world 

grain sales are half or less than half what they were a year ago. He doesn’t have an International Wheat 

Agreement and on top of that there are some agricultural experts making predictions that perhaps for the 

1968 crop year, unless we have better than average rainfall during the year, crop prospects may be poor. But 

regardless of whether they are poor or a bumper crop, the markets for the sale of his crop are not here and the 

prices are not desirable. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take the Provincial Treasurer’s word for it when he says that the increase of the 2 

cents or 10 per cent on farm gasoline will not completely override the saving that he has by burning purple 

gas in his farm truck. I think I’ll agree with him there. But we have to remember that this is an entirely new 

tax in an entirely new field. In comparison to the 17 cents or 20 cent tax that we pay on highway fuel now, 2 

cents is going to look relatively small in additional budgets. If tax increases are warranted, this is going to be 

a field where taxes are going to be applied and in the future we may find farmers paying 5, 10 or even higher 

cents of tax per gallon than what they are now. I know that there are many farmers in my own area of the 

province that cannot afford it, I know that most farmers in the entire province cannot afford such a tax. If it 

happens that these taxes are increased to preposterous sums as is very likely, I could only term this as 

another deterrent tax, a deterrent tax because the farmer cannot afford to pay the additional tax. He will curb 

his production, consequently deterring him from a reasonable economic 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1356 

living, and it will further be another addition to the worsening of the farming economy in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. Because of these points and points that my colleagues have pointed out and will be pointing 

out after me, I cannot support this Bill. I fail to see how the Members sitting opposite have any justification 

in supporting it for their agricultural members in the constituency, and I would close in urging them to vote 

against this Bill as we will on this side of the House. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F. MEAKES: — Mr. Speaker, I waited hoping that some of those Members across the way who 

represent farm constituencies might get up and protest too or give the reasons why they are prepared to 

support this Bill. I rise with strong feelings that I must not support it, knowing that if I didn’t it might well 

not be safe for me to go home. I know that on weekends that I have returned to my home since this first 

announcement of this increase was made in the Budget, that I’ve had people, farmers of all political beliefs, 

telling me to be sure and oppose that 2 cent increase in cost of farm production. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, 

that this Bill proves what I have said for many years that really the Liberal party has little sympathy for the 

farmer, that this Bill is just another piece of the callous disregard that this Government has for the farmer and 

its problems. It is a new tax, Mr. Speaker, and it is a new tax which I would oppose for this reason, if for no 

other. It is a new tax and as the previous speaker said, although it’s only 2 cents and I’ll deal with that 2 

cents in a moment or two, it is what may happen in the future. It is starting down another road of taxation. 

One of my friends the other day, who incidentally didn’t support me in the last election, when I returned 

home, pointed out to me what this tax would mean to him. He said, "I am just an average farmer. I burn 

about 10 tanks of fuel a year, both diesel and gas." He said, "This is $100, for a 500 gallon tank at 2 cents a 

gallon is $10 and 10 tanks is $100 extra." He said, "What does this mean to me?" He said, "I have been in 

the cost-price squeeze and I’ve been finding it terribly hard to make ends meet." He asked, "What does this 

extra $100 of tax mean to me? Well it means for one thing that I’m going to have $100 less to possibly buy 

children’s clothes. I had hoped next fall to buy a new swather. This means that it will be $100 less that I 

might have put towards that swather. For years I have been having trouble paying my municipal taxes on 

time." He says, "This again is $100 that might have gone towards taxes which I won’t be able to have. This 

coming year my son is going to university. Fees have already gone up and this is still $100 that might have 

gone to the University. Being a municipal councillor, (He went on to point out what it meant to the RMs), 

I’m convinced that this tax will mean that there are less taxes paid on time, less farmers will be able to pay 

their taxes on time. It will mean more interest that the municipalities will have to pay." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come back to where I stated what this Liberal party and this Liberal Government are doing to 

agriculture. And I ask myself the same question as I’ve asked two or three times in the House: where our 

Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) was when this Budget was being drawn up? I go back to some of 

the things that he used to say when he was in Opposition and I’m going to quote just a couple of them and 

not very long ones. On page 481, February 28, 1964, the Member for Qu’Appelle-Wolseley said in part and I 

quote: 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1357 

The budget speech says the government has been particularly concerned about the province’s smaller 

farmers. Well it’s about time they became concerned. After 20 years of CCF-NDP government, by 

the Minister of Agriculture’s own admission, 50,000 farmers have been driven off the land. The 

minister says it is because of the cost price squeeze. I suggest this government must take a full share 

of the blame for the added costs of production. They have allowed land taxes to go up by four times, 

increased the sales tax by two and a half times, increased the gasoline tax, in fact they have allowed 

increase in 600 items, plus finding 600 or more new ways of increasing cost of services. All of which 

have reflected on the lack of the ability of the smaller unit to continue under this pressure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that was the case in 1964, how about now? And incidentally there is around another 12,000 

farmers who have left the farms since 1964. Certainly this added cost on production will be bad and again I 

say on smaller farmers in particular. I have a lot of small farms in my constituency, especially in the north 

and eastern side. These farmers are already on the ropes and struggling to make both ends meet. This added 

tax is just going to be another added burden. Mr. Speaker, I would also like to put on the records a quotation 

of Senator MacDonald who was then the Member for Moosomin. And he said this on February 24, 1964: 

 

But there is a new definition for a dime in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It is that part of a dollar that 

is left after you have paid your provincial taxes. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, to this House there is a new definition for a penny. That is that last penny this 

Government will take from the people of Saskatchewan. I certainly cannot support this motion or this Bill. 

As the previous Member pointed out, not one other province with the exception of British Columbia has had 

any tax on farm fuel. I want to point out also that this 2 cents increase in fuel is not going to just mean 2 

cents; it is going to mean more than that because naturally the fuel that is being transported out to the farmer, 

out to the towns and villages and then to the farmer, is going to cost more because the person who drives that 

truck, as I’m sure the Hon. Member for Shaunavon will agree, will have to have more money for the 

operation of his truck. So it’s not going to be a 2 cent increase, it’s going to be more than this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much has been said about the cost-price squeeze on agriculture and I’m not going to go into 

this any deeper than to say this again, that this is just one more thing that this Government is adding to make 

it more impossible for the average farmer to make ends meet. I suggest that this is one more straw that is 

going to break the camel’s back, that is going to drive more of the small farmers off the farms. I think it’s a 

bad Bill, it’s a Bill that should be opposed by all Members of this House. I say again I’d like to hear some of 

the Members from across the way either explain why they are prepared to support it or I would hope that 

they would stand up and say they will oppose it. I certainly am going to oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1358 

HON. A.C. CAMERON (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I came from a rural 

constituency. I live in one of the, if you want to call it, lower assessed, and some refer to it as the depressed, 

areas of Saskatchewan. I am conscious of farm problems and farm needs but I think it is a strange 

performance we are witnessing now. I recall coming into the House moving resolutions to assist the farmers, 

one that the Government of the day remove the mineral tax on farm land. I said that they don’t know whether 

they have minerals or not. Whether there are or whether there are not minerals, they had to pay their mineral 

tax each and every year. If they didn’t pay it, the minerals which the farmer owned was forfeited to the 

Crown. We pointed out year after year that thousands of farmers in Saskatchewan had lost their mineral 

rights to the Crown because they were delinquent in their mineral tax. We pledged that one of the first acts 

we would do, would be to remove the mineral tax on farm land, not only to save the farmers the tax, but to 

assure them that from that day forward no farmer would forfeit his mineral rights to the Crown. We did that. 

 

We believe that farm trucks like farm tractors are a necessity in the farm operation. Thus we pledged to treat 

farm trucks the same as we treat farm tractors. Therefore we passed resolutions in the House or attempted to 

pass them, asking the same Opposition, when they were the Government to exempt farm trucks from the tax 

or in other words to permit farmers to use purple gas in their farm trucks. Like the opposition to the mineral 

tax, the Government of the day opposed this. They opposed granting the farmers the right to use tax-free gas 

in their trucks. Why, they ask, where is the money coming from? They said it would be abused, it would be 

granting farmers privileges which were not granted to other people, to carpenters, welders, electricians, to 

city people. They called it a hoax and a political bribe. They opposed the removal of 15 cents per gallon on 

every gallon of gas used in a farm truck. They were in opposition then. They opposed the mineral tax, they 

opposed the removal of 15 cents a gallon on the farmer’s truck and today they are still opposing. They are 

opposing the imposition of 2 cents per gallon farm fuel. I think there is some reason why we should look at 

an imposition of tax on farm fuel. No one likes to pay increased taxes; it runs against human nature. But I’m 

surprised that an official Opposition formerly a Government should have been so violently opposed to 

reduction in taxes when they were in the Government. 

 

Now the Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) had a great deal to say about small farmers. He said for 

one farmer it would cost him $100 more per year because of 2 cents a gallon on farm fuel. I think that is a 

pretty good-sized farmer when it would cost him that amount. But he neglected very conveniently to give on 

the same balance sheet the saving to a farmer of his 15 cents per gallon which he burns in his truck. If you 

take the estimated savings to the farmer, in his exemption of taxes on the gas he uses in his trucks, they 

totalled up to $4 - $5 million. The Government of the day at that time estimated $7 - $8 million. It is running 

$4 - $5 million. One of the Members said that the imposition of the 2 cents tax will get $3 3/4 million. Well 

then I would ask you to ask your farm friends if they would exchange their position today and go back to the 

NDP tax, when they’d have to pay 17 cents per gallon on gas in their farm trucks in order to be exempted of 

2 cents per gallon farm fuel. Someone made the statement that this is only the second Province in Canada 

that is taxing farm fuel. 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1359 

He said the other is British Columbia. I want to inform the Hon. Member that Alberta is putting on a 3 cent 

tax on all fuels used in farm trucks and farm machinery, farm tractors and farm combines. So in that regard 

we are not out of step with oil-rich Alberta. They conveniently forget to mention other tax concessions that 

were granted to the farm areas. 

 

I have in my constituency just two isolated instances that I could mention. I checked them just the other day. 

Last year we took in some rural roads, RM roads, into the highway system. One in one municipality, one in 

the other. The upgrading and gravelling and stock-piling on these roads this year will save one RM 8 mills 

and will save the other RM 10 mills. Formerly taxpayers would have to pay this. They forget to mention the 

ease on farm taxes when we moved to equalization grants which have relieved a great burden of building 

rural roads from the back of the rural farmer. They forget to mention the homeowners’ grant. They 

conveniently forget to mention these other matters which aided greatly in assisting the farmers in meeting 

their tax obligations. They neglect to show to farmers today that not only have municipal roads and grid 

roads been taken into the highway system, not only are equalization grants manifold increased, but likewise 

that the policy of maintaining and re-gravelling the grid roads, of snow removal, of constructing all-weather 

access roads to every occupied farm is a great tremendous advantage to farmers and is a program which they 

wanted. I don’t think that anyone should be led to believe that farmers as responsible citizens are not 

prepared to pay their share of the improvement in the rural parts in roads and municipal services. Therefore 

even with the imposition of this 2 cents a gallon tax on farm fuels they would not exchange in my opinion 

exemption of the 2 cents on tractors in turn to revert to the policy of paying the full gasoline tax on farm 

trucks. When we are looking at this we must look at the whole bundle of wax and not individual items. I 

would say again that is interesting now to consider when they were the Government, particularly the former 

Member for Elrose, who belonged to the Farmers’ Union organization. The Farmers’ Union presented a 

request asking that the Government of the day exempt farm trucks from the gasoline tax. He supported this 

resolution of the Farmers’ Union. He came down as one of their delegates. Shortly afterwards he was 

appointed Minister of Education and when we tried to get a resolution through the House, asking the 

Government to exempt the farm trucks from purple gas, where did he stand? Shoulder to shoulder with his 

colleagues who stood up, each and every one of them, and voted against it. This is the treatment they 

received in those days. 

 

MR. D.W. MICHAYLUK (Redberry): — Nonsense! 

 

MR. CAMERON: — The Member from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) talks about this as the last straw that 

breaks the camel’s back. I want to deal with that at a little later time, Mr. Speaker. I would now ask leave to 

adjourn the debate. 

 

MR. J. MESSER (Kelsey): — Would the Hon. Member answer a question? Sir, where do you see any 

justification in increasing the farm petroleum tax in Saskatchewan simply because Alberta is going to 

increase theirs on April 1st, when their tax is only 20 cents per gallon compared to 17 cents on ours on fuel? 

On diesel fuel it is only 14 cents in comparison to 20 cents in our province. What justification is there 

between the two provinces? 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1360 

MR. CAMERON: — May I answer the question? First, let me point it out clearly to this young Member 

that I didn’t try to justify Saskatchewan in what Alberta did. I was correcting an error which you made before 

when you stated that British Columbia was the only province which has a tax on farm fuel. Alberta is putting 

a tax on farm fuels. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

 SECOND READINGS 

 

HON. W.R. THATCHER moved second reading of Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Liquor Board 

Superannuation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill will be completely non-controversial. It compliments similar 

Bills which we passed last year. Somehow we neglected to look over The Liquor Board Superannuation Act. 

The proposed amendment will authorize the Liquor Board’s Superannuation Commission to purchase 

debentures issued by the World Bank, for the investment portfolio of the Liquor Board Superannuation 

Fund. Hon. Members may recall that last year the Federal Government as a matter of policy asked us if we 

would introduce this legislation. We did it for other boards and commissions, but somehow neglected this 

one. 

 

The World Bank makes loans to its member countries for developing projects such as electric power, 

transportation, irrigation, communications, education, and water supply. The Bank finances most of its loans 

by borrowing in the capital markets of the world. I would ask Hon. Members to note that the proposed 

amendment does not commit the Commission to purchase World Bank securities. The decision to invest in 

World Bank securities will depend upon its effective yield in relation to other high-grade securities on the 

market, diversification of the investment portfolio and other factors which are taken into account in the 

normal investment management of public funds. 

 

I commend this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to the attention of the House and I move second reading. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

MR. THATCHER moved second reading of Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Liquor Licensing Act 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill in essence provides housekeeping amendments to the present Liquor 

Licensing Act. Section 3 is required primarily because of the recent integration of the three Armed Forces. 

Really what it does is substitute the words ‘Canadian Armed Forces’ for some of the other designations that 

were there. Section 4 was requested by the Saskatchewan Hotel Association. Today, beer can only be sold 

when a customer is seated at a table. Some of the rural hotels came to us and asked for this amendment. We 

are proposing to allow for the sale of beer at a stand-up or sit-down counter immediately in front of the 

dispensing bar. In other words an individual or customer instead of having to sit at a table, will be able to go 

up to the bar where the beer is being dispensed. This is to assist the licensee in giving more efficient service 

during low-volume periods in the beverage room. We are informed that 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1361 

this provision will be of particular benefit, as I said, to the owners of small hotels in the villages and towns 

of the province. The provision will allow the licensee or his employee to efficiently serve his customers at 

the counter, rather than requiring him to walk across the room to serve them at the tables. This should be 

helpful, we are told, when there are only two or three customers in the establishment. 

 

As I say, we were asked by the Hotel Association for this amendment, and we can’t see anything wrong with 

it. Section 5 has also been requested by the Hotel Association. Today liquor can only be sold in dining rooms 

with entertainment after 9 p.m. if an equal amount of food is sold with the drinks. 

 

We have been informed that this does work some hardship on some of these establishments, or at least 

according to them, and this section modifies such a requirement. It proposes that dining room licensees who 

are providing programs of live entertainment may sell liquor with or without food in the evening hours when 

the demand for meals diminishes. The licensee will still be obliged to have food available upon request at all 

times. 

 

Section 6 under certain circumstances will allow a licensee upon receiving written permission from the 

Commission to serve liquor in an area adjacent to the premises. Again, we were asked to introduce this 

provision by the Hotel Association. I think that there are a few of the hotelmen who have in mind something 

similar to the beer gardens in Europe during summer months. In other words, they want to be able to serve 

liquor in a small room outside, adjoining their premises. We are informed that this provision was tried and 

used extensively at Expo 1967. Apparently they were well received by the public. 

 

In Section 8, we are proposing amendments to the Act, which will make it an offense for a person who has 

been requested to leave an outlet for any reason to re-enter the outlet on the same day. The reason for this 

amendment is to permit a licensee to bar an individual from his business establishment whom he knows to 

be a consistently heavy drinker or who has conducted himself in an offensive manner. 

 

The same amendments will provide that no person may remain in an outlet after being requested by the 

licensee to leave. There is nothing, of course, to prevent the customer from discussing his conduct with the 

licensee and undertaking to improve his manners before being allowed to re-enter the premises. 

 

Section 10 of this Act provides for an increase in certain fines under the Act. 

 

Now as I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, these amendments can be described as housekeeping provisions. They 

are introduced to improve the standards of our licensed outlets in our province and to improve the conduct of 

the individuals who patronize them. May I say that Saskatchewan can be proud of the standard of most of the 

licensed outlets in our province. Year by year they are being improved. One only needs to look at the 

facilities that are available in the city of Regina to realize that Saskatchewan has many outlets that are as 

good as, if not better than any place else in Canada. The standard of entertainment is excellent, and food 

served to the patrons is usually first-class. 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1362 

Mr. Speaker, I think most questions on the Act could probably be better answered in Committee and so I 

move second reading of this Bill. 

 

MR. F. MEAKES (Touchwood): — Could I ask the Premier a question before he sits down? He didn’t 

mention Section 9. Does this mean that cards can be played or can’t be played? I haven’t the legislation 

before me. 

 

MR. THATCHER: — Yes, they can be played. 

 

MR. F.A. DEWHURST (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill, once again, is in line with the other 

Bills we have seen in the past four years. It’s opening liquor outlets pretty wide and in many places, I think, 

too wide. I feel that when we put all these together and see that there are liquor stores being closed, giving 

the private outlets to drugstores or implement sheds or wherever have you, and then see the provisions in 

these Bills, I think that we are travelling pretty fast along the road of more liquor. We see our accidents 

going up in the province, and statistics show that a good many of the accidents are due to too much alcohol 

being consumed by the drivers. 

 

I think that we should have a little more care on a lot of these Bills. You know, when I see the way the 

Government has taken three years in bringing in these Bills, it reminds me very much of the story of the 

fellow who had the liquor outlet. One section here especially states that, if a person is asked to leave, he 

must leave, and it doesn’t say if the reasons have to be just and proper; as long as they are asked to leave 

they must. But one of these outlets had got a trained bear and they had this bear for a bouncer. An Indian 

fellow came in and the beer parlor vendor didn’t want him to have any more beer so he just pointed toward 

the Indian and this bear went to throw him out. A few minutes later the Indian came back in and kind of 

straightening himself up said, "That’s the trouble with these Liberals, give them a fur coat and a little bit of 

authority and they think they own the place." 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. DEWHURST: — I think that is the way it is here. Now that the Liberals have a little bit of authority, 

they are going wild on the liquor and I think we should be very cautious. I think that we should look at these 

clauses very closely in Committee. 

 

MR. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — If I can be out of order before you catch me, may I say 

how pleased those of us on this side of the House are to see sitting behind the rail in our House, the Member 

for Pelly, the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie). 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. LLOYD: — We extend to him our welcome back to the House and our best wishes. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1363 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

HON. C.P. MacDONALD (Minister of Welfare) moved second reading of Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend 

The Child Welfare Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving second reading of the amendments to the Child Welfare Act, I would 

like to bring to the attention of the House that there are three essential areas where amendments are being 

proposed. I would like to dwell very briefly on the first, because I think it is one that is of interest to most 

Members of the House as well as to the people of Saskatchewan. It is the amendments in relation to religion. 

 

First of all I would like to point out that Child Welfare Services incorporate the principle that a child’s 

religious affiliation is determined by its natural parents. Some Provinces, for example British Columbia, do 

not mention religion in adoption legislation, but in practice respect the principle in the selection of homes for 

children. Other Provinces, and Saskatchewan is among them, have always had legislation dealing with 

religion in child placement, believing that it is the function of law to protect human rights of both parents 

and the child. Some parents have a very strong religious faith and this is something very positive that they 

wish to give their child. In our Child Welfare Services we have a dual role, first to reflect the concern of 

parents, and second to protect primarily the rights of children. Due respect must be given to the expressed 

religious designation of the parent, but when every effort has been made to match the religious faith 

designated for the child, then we move to the next stage and try to achieve the child’s right to a good home 

with loving parents. In other words we subscribe to the conviction that religion be not a sole barrier in the 

adoption of children, all other factors being equal. In 1966, the Province of Alberta enacted legislation which 

in effect says that the placement of children is no longer governed by religious faith designated by the parent, 

after one year of trying to match religions. The time factor is questionable and an arbitrary and artificial limit 

in that often exhausting efforts to match religion might involve more than a year in some cases, and less in 

others. Historically in this province in May, 1966, the religion of a child was determined by the faith of the 

parent, the father in the cases of legitimate children, the mother in the cases of illegitimate children. The 

amendment in 1966 clarified the parent’s right to two choices, either to designate a religious faith to the 

child, Roman Catholic or Protestant, or to state that the parent did not wish to designate a faith. This 

legislation restricts too rigidly the rights of some children to a permanent home. More flexibility is required 

in order to fulfil our dual obligation to natural parents and to adopted children. 

 

In moving second reading of these amendments I feel it is important to explain very briefly the principles 

involved and the changes proposed. First, the basic position of this amendment is that the child shall not be 

deprived of an adoption home because of a difference of religion only. This means that, when there is no 

home of the child’s faith available and there is a home available of a faith other than that of the child, then 

this child could be placed for adoption even though the religion of the child and the home is different. 

Second, the legislation is worded in such a way that the judge does not change the religion of the child, but 

that he waives the requirements of that 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1364 

section of the Act dealing with the placement of a child as pertains to religion. This permits the parents to 

raise the child in a faith dictated by their conscience and the welfare of the child. I think this is an important 

element of the legislation. Third, it is also important to recognize that the original intent of the legislation 

remain. This changes not merely the opening up of the adoption legislation to permit indiscriminate placing 

of children without regard to the child’s faith. Instead it is attempting to alleviate the situation where an 

adoption home would be denied a child because of the religious requirement of the Act. To ensure this 

principle the revised legislation makes mention of the fact that the child can be placed for adoption in a 

home of different faith, only after reasonable effort has been made to find the child a home of his own 

religion. The last basic principle, I think, involved in the Act is the fact that the legislation also states that 

this decision be left in the hands of an experienced and responsible person. This person is designated in the 

Act as the Director of Child Welfare. 

 

This amendment I believe will assist in solving some of the dilemmas which child placement agencies now 

face. Perhaps two concrete examples might enlighten the House. First when the above conditions have been 

satisfied, a child, living in a foster home whose religion differs from that of the foster parent, could now be 

adopted by these foster parents. Second, agencies sometimes have children in foster homes that are not being 

placed for adoption because there is no home available for them. I think of children particularly that are 

beyond the age of seven or perhaps multi-family children that are looking for an adoption home. Once again 

after the conditions of the Act have been met, the child could then be placed in a home that is available, 

regardless of the religious differences. I want to stress that these changes are remedial in their intent. It is 

intended to provide for these children who are not covered by the present legislation. The legislation is 

guaranteeing the right of religious groups and at the same time enacting legislation to protect the child from 

being denied a home solely on religious grounds. 

 

The second amendment of The Child Welfare Act is I think a basic and important principle. It relates to the 

appeal process after adoption proceedings have begun, refinement and clarification of the appeal process 

after a child has been committed to the Minister of Welfare. The proposed amendment will allow the natural 

mother the right to reconsider and possibly reverse her decision to give the child up for adoption within a 

reasonable time limit. In proposing this amendment we are taking into consideration the fact that perhaps 

after a mother of an illegitimate child has been relieved of the stress of pregnancy and has already had the 

child, she may wish to change her decision. This proposal will also protect the rights and good faith of 

prospective adopting parents after the child has been placed with them, after this reasonable period of time 

has occurred. 

 

The third amendment relates to group homes and is merely housekeeping in order. Group homes have been 

developed in Saskatchewan over the last few years and are being used effectively for a variety of functions, 

although only one home serves only one function. Various group homes provide the following services, 

receiving home, holding or detention, care of infants, retarded children, generalized group treatment of 

teenagers, or 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1365 

intensive treatment in a small unit. Since development of this type of resource is very recent. The Child 

Welfare Act does not provide adequately for the licensing or development of regulations for group homes. 

Present regulations are in effect under The Welfare Act but only apply to the children placed by the Director 

of Child Welfare. This should be extended to group homes, so that they can be licensed as group homes 

irrespective of who develops them. I would urge all members to support this Bill. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I want at the outset to make it clear that I 

am speaking from my own personal convictions and my own personal views on this matter. To put my 

position quite clearly on the record, I want to commend the Minister and the Government for what I consider 

to be a very good and very progressive piece of legislation. I think the remarks made by the Minister (Mr. 

MacDonald) on the question of religion are very appropriate and I agree with him that this can only serve to 

advance the unfortunate plight of many of the young children that are now put up for adoption. There are, 

however, in speaking on second reading of this Bill, two matters that I would like to draw to the attention of 

the Hon. Minister and the Government and the Members of this House. 

 

Firstly, the matter that the Minister refers to as group homes, and the matter of being a housekeeping 

amendment. I want to say again that I think the development of group homes, as the Minister has indicated, 

although a new process, is a very acceptable and a highly desirable feature of the Child Welfare legislation. I 

assume that when the Minister speaks of a group home, really what we want to be doing here in 

Saskatchewan is moving toward increased development of such places as Warrendale and the like in 

Ontario, that all of us know about. And I think it is proper and a very enlightened approach by the 

Government to set up homes that will allow the children, who are put up for child welfare or for emotional 

and various other problems that they are brought under this Act, opportunity to move freely or as freely as 

possible in the society, in the community at large. I think it is important that they be given the facilities and 

the opportunity to receive the maximum professional care on a very intimate personal basis. 

 

I think the group-home concept is a very good concept in that regard. What I am concerned about though - 

and I don’t mean this is any partisan way - is the question that group homes ought to be more than just a 

matter of a housekeeping amendment. I would have hoped the Hon. Minister (Mr. MacDonald) would have 

elaborated somewhat on exactly what the policy and the future course of this Government are going to be 

with respect to the increased development of groups homes. For my part, I would liked to have seen, and I 

hope perhaps later on in closing debate he will correct me or perhaps make a clarification of this point, I 

would like to have seen the Government announce some brand new active program for the development of 

these group homes. Something like Warrendale. Let’s see if we can get something of this nature going in 

Saskatchewan, particularly in the case of juvenile delinquents under 16 years of age, Mr. Speaker, in cases 

where the judge, having found a person, a juvenile delinquent, has nowhere to place that juvenile 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1366 

delinquent and has to either incarcerate them in adult court after due procedure or move them to another 

province. Now what I would really like is that the Government take active consideration of this proposal and 

perhaps, in summing up in second reading, the Hon. Minister might give us some clarification of the 

Government’s intention in this regard. I want to repeat that it is my view that the utmost of importance be 

placed on children under 16 years of age who find themselves in this very unfortunate situation. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about the appeal process that the Minister (Mr. MacDonald) has 

introduced in this legislation. I appreciate that it is basically a decision of the government and I suppose one 

each Member of this House has to make individually, on choosing between the rights of the states, or, if you 

will, the Minister and the Government, as opposed to the rights of the mother and the individual. There is 

always that very fine line, Mr. Speaker, where you have to draw judicially the interest of the state, that is to 

say, make sure that the adoption procedure goes through, then, once the decision has been finally made, that 

there is no alienation or no upsetting of that particular decision. I can see the problem and the dilemma of the 

Minister and the Government in that regard. At the same time there is the interest of the mother. Frankly, I 

am concerned that the 30-day appeal is just insufficient time. I think the Minister has attempted to 

incorporate the very admirable feature of giving a mother of an illegitimate child, or any mother who has any 

interest in this area, a 30-day period to really reconsider her own position. Her financial position may have 

changed. Her social position may have changed. Her emotional outlook may have changed. An although I 

don’t pretend to be any expert in this matter, it seems to me that 30 days as between these two choices - the 

interest of the state and the interest of the individual - is coming down in favor of the interest of the state. I 

am not sure on this, I stand to be corrected by the Minister or the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) but my 

brief perusal of various other statutes indicates, for example in Alberta, that the waiting period is something 

as much as three months. In fact it may even be six months. I don’t know where that line is to be drawn but I 

do know that as far as I am concerned, Mr. Speaker, 30 days is just simply not enough. After all, we are 

dealing here - I am sure all Members will agree - with that very delicate, emotional, that very personal 

decision of the mother, a decision also that will affect for probably all of life’s time the adopted child. And I 

don’t think that a 30-day appeal period is just sufficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the two comments that I wanted to specifically draw to the attention of the Minister 

(Mr. MacDonald). I now wish to conclude by saying that the Bill is a positive and progressive one. There are 

some other matters that I think I should like to speak on. Since they tell me that practice makes perfect, I 

would now beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART (Provincial Treasurer) moved second reading of Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend 

The Industrial and Cost Accountants Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the purpose 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1367 

of this amendment is to change the name of The Society of The Industrial and Cost Accountants of 

Saskatchewan to The Society of Industrial Accounts of Saskatchewan. A resolution passed by the Society of 

The Industrial and Cost Accountants of Saskatchewan authorized the changing of the Society’s name, and 

the Society requested the Government to amend The Society’s Incorporation Act and the Government agreed 

to propose this amendment to this session of the Legislature. It is the opinion of the Society that reference to 

its memberships as Cost Accountants was not representative of the knowledge and qualifications of its 

members. It was felt by the Society that the words "and Cost" should be deleted from the name in order that 

the general public and industry may not be misled by the rather limited meaning of the phrase "Cost 

Accountant." The Act is also being amended to reflect the change in the name of the national body. The old 

name was The Canadian Society of Cost Accountants and Industrial Engineers. This name has been changed 

by federal statute and the new name of the national body is The Society of Industrial and Cost Accountants 

of Canada. 

 

With this brief explanation I move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 

 

HON. W.S. LLOYD (Leader of the Opposition): — Before we adjourn the House may I rise on a question 

of privilege. My question of privilege has to do with the rather considerable handicap which Members are 

experiencing because of the work going on in the halls along which our offices are situated. My colleague 

from Moose Jaw made reference to it awhile ago. I don’t know what the situation is right now, but when I 

came from my office earlier this evening, it was necessary to crawl under and through two sets of 

scaffolding. I understand that the hazard is even worse at this time because they are plastering up above. This 

has been going on for some time. One evening last week I left my office and I had to try three difference 

doors before I could find one that wasn’t barricaded. I would like to, Mr. Speaker, ask you, Sir, on behalf of 

the Members, to investigate whether or not in your opinion this is compatible with the proper functioning of 

the Members. I am particularly concerned that the Library, this evening for example, is completely 

inaccessible. If Members had wanted anything out of it, it just wouldn’t be there. I think it should be 

checked. 

 

HON. A.R. GUY (Minister of Public Works): — In reply to the question I think the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition recognizes that this work to be done is going to cause some inconvenience. It is being done 

during the evening so that there will be less inconvenience to the least number of people. During the day, 

when people are coming from down town on business and your full staff are here, we have tried to 

accommodate them as well as possible. We do recognize that there will be some inconvenience. I’ll look into 

the matter and we will try and cause just as little inconvenience as possible. 

 

MR. LLOYD: — My point remains, as I was asking you, Sir, I realize and we are quite prepared to put up 

with some inconvenience, 



 

March 25, 1968 

 

 

1368 

although I think tonight it has reached the point where it is completely intolerable. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Well I think it is possible to take this matter up with the correct authorities with a view 

to seeing what can be done in connection therewith. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 o’clock p.m. 


