



















































Hansard: March 12, 1968


LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

First Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

19th Day 

 

Tuesday March 12, 1968 

 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. F. Larochelle: (Shaunavon) — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to draw to the attention of all Hon. 

Members, a fine group of grade 11 and. 12 students seated in the third row of the Speaker‟s gallery. 

They are boys and girls from the Frontier school district. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. 

Peeling and their chaperone, Mrs. Erickson, and the bus driver, Mr. Buckley. I‟m sure that all Members 

will join with me in extending to them a very warm welcome to this Legislature and in wishing that their 

long journey here would prove educational. We also wish them a safe journey back home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. MacLennan: (Last Mountain) — Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker‟s gallery, there is a group of 

students I would like to introduce to this House through you. They are from the community of Nokomis 

and they are accompanied by Mr. Pirie, their teacher and I know all Members of this House wish them a 

most interesting time of it here today and a safe return trip home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek: (Regina North East) — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

introduce a group of 29 grade seven and eight students from the M.J. Coldwell school, who are here 

accompanied by their principal, Mr. Janz and the bus driver, Mr. Nigabour. Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure that 

all of us here know that this school is named after an outstanding citizen of this country, M.J. Coldwell, 

an educator, former alderman of this city, parliamentarian, leader of the political party that I am 

associated with. Not only do we pay tribute to him, but to the school that is here with us. I‟m sure that 

the group that is here is going to have an enjoyable session this afternoon and an educational one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald: (Lumsden) — I would like to associate myself with the remarks made by the Hon. 

Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) in respect of the grade seven and eight classes from M.J. 

Coldwell school. A good many of these students come from my constituency in the area immediately 

northeast of Regina North East and I would like to associate myself with his remarks to welcome the 

students here, and the teacher and the driver and to wish them a safe journey home. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

837 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall: (Souris-Estevan) — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce to you this afternoon, 

two groups of students, one from Sacred Heart school in Estevan brought here by their teacher, Mrs. 

Arlene Anderson and their chaperones, Mrs. N. Morsky, Mr. K. Anderson, Mr. L. Lafrentz, Mrs. 

Lafrentz and Mr. Don Johnson. And we hit the jackpot today because we have two groups, we have also 

one from the Macoun school seated in the east and the west galleries; they had to split them. They came 

by bus and they are brought here today by their teacher, Mr. Schindel and we wish them all an enjoyable 

afternoon in this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank: (Saskatoon Mayfair) — Mr. Speaker, I have the honor of introducing a group 

of grade eight students from Mayfair school in Saskatoon Mayfair constituency. There are about 42 

students, they are situated in the east gallery and I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that they will find this 

afternoon‟s proceedings in this Legislative Chamber of interest and educational as well. I am sure that 

all Members join with me in wishing them a safe trip back to Saskatoon Mayfair at the end of this day in 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Qu’Appelle Wolseley) — Mr. Speaker, I notice a group of good-looking 

students from the very progressive community of Indian Head in the west gallery this afternoon. I am 

only sorry that I didn‟t have the opportunity to meet with them before the House went into session. 

Many of them have been here on previous occasions and some I recognize as having taken a part on that 

very popular program, “Reach for the Top,” and having done very well in past years. I just want to wish 

them a very happy afternoon, a good journey home and I hope they enjoy their stay with us in the 

galleries this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith: (Elrose) — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to draw the attention of all Hon. Members of the 

Legislature to a fine group of students seated in the west gallery. They are from the Elrose school, they 

are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Housen and the bus driver, Mr. Fullerton. I want to take this 

opportunity of welcoming them here and wishing them a good afternoon in the gallery, lots of 

knowledge and a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. McIvor: (Arm River) — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to the 

other Hon. Members of the Assembly, a group of 15 students from Loreburn seated in the Speaker‟s 

gallery. These students are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Anderson and several members of their 

families. I‟m sure all Members will join with me in extending to them a very warm welcome to the 

Legislature of our Province, and we wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

838 

Mr. G.T. Snyder: (Moose Jaw North) — Before the Orders of the Day are proceeded with, I‟d like to 

introduce a group of students in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. They are a group of students from the 

Riverview collegiate in Moose Jaw. I think I can refer to them as a mature and intelligent group of 

students that belong to the New Democratic Youth in the city of Moose Jaw. I‟d like to take this 

opportunity of welcoming them on behalf of both my colleague from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) 

and myself on this occasion. I‟m sure that they will find the proceedings very interesting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

MELVILLE COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOL 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk: (Melville) — Before the Orders of the Day, I would like to submit a question to the 

Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac). When can the people of Melville and surrounding districts 

expect at the earliest possible date to go ahead on the Melville comprehensive school? It is urgently 

needed. In fact Estevan, North Battleford and Prince Albert . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — . . . Anyway I‟d like an answer as to when. The people of Melville and districts are 

very concerned. 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac: (Minister of Education) — I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that we‟ll have an answer 

for the Hon. Member within a month or so. As he well knows we are having discussions and 

negotiations with Ottawa on this very question, but certainly we hope to be able to answer him before 

very long. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT — RESIGNATION OF HON. WALTER GORDON 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I‟d like to direct a 

question to the Premier. In view of the announcement that the Hon. Walter Gordon had resigned from 

the Federal Cabinet, I wonder if the Premier had given any consideration to obtaining his valuable 

services in some capacity in the Provincial sphere? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart: (Provincial Treasurer) — We‟ve got too many Socialists now. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Steuart (Provincial 

Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair, and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. 

Blakeney (Regina Centre). 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

839 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd: (Leader of the Opposition) — Mr. Speaker, may I join with others who have 

already extended a welcome to our visitors in the galleries today. As so many of us have said on so 

many different occasions, it is good to have this increasing number of visitors from the schools of 

Saskatchewan here in the Legislature from time to time. 

 

When I adjourned the debate last evening, Mr. Speaker, I had taken time to make some suggestions 

which I hope the Government will take heed of. Some of these had to do with the field of young people, 

some had to do with the field of developing a total environment for living in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I had also made some comment with respect to remarks which Ministers had made 

earlier in the debate. 

 

This afternoon I want to turn more directly to the Budget Speech itself. The Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) when he was speaking gave us something of a picture of how the Budget Speech was prepared. 

He referred to the soul-searching of the Provincial Treasurer while preparing the Budget. May I submit, 

Mr. Speaker, that our Saskatchewan Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) searching his soul provides a 

subject for a grade „B‟ movie at least. You know he may have searched. his soul, but I‟m afraid by force 

of habit he found his cash register. I gather that he failed to notice any difference between the two. I 

could have hoped and the people of Saskatchewan, I‟m sure, will join me in the hope, that he had 

stopped his searching with his soul, that he had stopped searching there before he‟d got his hands in the 

pockets of sick people, old people, poor people, young people, to replenish his cash register. I‟m sure 

that you and the other Members of the Legislature, Mr. Speaker, would want to join with me in 

extending to him the hope that his soul recovers from the battering it must have had before he prepares 

another Budget. I say that because his soul is going to need strength to fight back before there is a return 

engagement. His soul might be rough enough to take it but the people of Saskatchewan, I‟m sure, can‟t. 

 

There are some conclusions, some generalizations which can be drawn from the Budget. First I suggest 

that it demonstrates the deceit which the Saskatchewan Liberal party has practised on the people of 

Saskatchewan. No effort has been too great, no technique of publicity left unused in order to conceal the 

facts from the public and to distort the real situation. 

 

Secondly, this Budget demonstrates in a very obvious way the past poor management of the 

Saskatchewan Liberal Government. Why else other than poor management, Mr. Speaker, should we 

have in one year an increase in taxation of approximately $35 per person in this province: When I say 

almost $35 per person I‟m accepting the estimate of the Provincial Treasurer, I suggest that the actual 

increase is more likely to be $40 per person than $35 per person. 

 

Thirdly, this Budget demonstrates the upside-down nature of the values of the Saskatchewan Liberal 

party. Why else do we have these added taxes bearing so heavily on the leanest of the lean people in the 

land? 

 

Fourthly, it demonstrates why the Government lacked the courage to face the truth of another Budget 

before calling the election. Why else an election after three years instead of the usual four? Mr. Speaker, 

this is a Budget that practises 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

840 

deceit. It promotes inefficiency. It provides for inefficiency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — May I elaborate a bit on that which I have called deceit — truth concealed or distorted if 

you will. The story of the extent to which this was practised before the election has been well 

documented. It is now, I submit, accepted by nearly everybody in the Province of Saskatchewan. The 

deceit of the Liberal Government is now on the lips of people in every part of Saskatchewan. Even the 

Government‟s own supporters are saying: “It was not for this that we voted Liberal in October of last 

year.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Strange and almost impossible as it may seem, the creditability gap between the 

Government and the people has increased. This is a creditability gap probably exceeded only in a 

country like Vietnam. 

 

The Treasurer in the Budget Speech assured us that: “We enjoy the greatest prosperity in our history.” 

He went on to say, however, that in his words, “there are weak spots.” The question is raised as to who 

is to blame for these weak spots. In the Budget in his usual modest way, he blames these weak spots on 

the failure of Federal Governments and secondly, on excessive demands of the people. But as to his own 

Government, he says: “We have conducted our financial affairs in a most responsible manner.” “But 

after all” he add, “we are only a small part of the nation and we find ourselves faced with the 

consequences of other people‟s actions. “Mr. Speaker, in this great sea of economic sin, inside 

Saskatchewan and outside Saskatchewan, according to him only the Saskatchewan Liberals remain pure 

and virginal. This is deceit compounded with a large measure of conceit as well. 

 

The Treasurer in his address continued to try to deceive with respect to the contribution of the Federal 

Government to post-secondary education. He accused me in his speech of, and I quote, “deliberately 

misleading the public” or “of being incapable of understanding.” He continues to claim in other words 

that Federal money is not meant for university or other post-secondary education in the millions that it 

is. Let me call some four witnesses briefly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First, the Faculty Association of the Regina campus in material circulated to all Members of the 

Legislature quotes Mr. Sharp in the House of Commons saying: “Since the priority of expenditures for 

higher education is now well recognized, the Federal Government undertook to ask Parliament to abate 

or reduce the Federal income by four additional percentage points of person income tax and one 

additional percentage point of corporation profits.” It goes on to say that the Federal offer to the 

Provinces “to help finance the rising costs of post-secondary education goes beyond this tax transfer.” 

That witness supports my position and the position of the Regina Faculty Association and many others 

that these millions were meant for education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Secondly, the President of the University, Dr. Spinks in the annual report of the University, tells of the 

Federal-Provincial meeting on university financing at Ottawa. He quotes 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

841 

the Prime Minister of Canada who stated that the Federal Government was prepared to help alleviate the 

extra burden of higher education by transfer of tax revenues and by other means. That witness 

substantiates what I have said and contradicts the interpretation of the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

The Dominion Bureau of Statistics in its Daily Bulletin for February 9 says that, “The financing of 

education in 1967 underwent a marked change brought about by the massive transfers of Federal 

financial resources to the Provincial Governments for the purpose of providing funds for post-secondary 

education.” That‟s a good witness on behalf of the statement that I made and the Provincial Treasurer 

attempts to dispute. I know the Treasurer doesn‟t make use of Dominion Bureau of Statistics unless he 

can help it. 

 

And the fourth witness, the Canadian Association for Adult Education in a recent publication speaks of 

the The Fiscal Arrangements Act and said, “It bears on the total amount of revenue available for 

educational purposes. The Provinces will receive more money from the Federal Government for 

education than they did before.” And the same bulletin adds this worthwhile note of warning, “We urge 

the citizenry to keep a sharper eye on the level of grants made by Provincial Governments to the 

universities from year to year.” To that I say, “Hear, hear,” and particularly in Saskatchewan. And with 

those references Mr. Speaker, I leave to the people to judge who it is that is deliberately misleading the 

public and why. 

 

He tries also to confuse people with respect to the cost of health programs. I admit these involve a lot of 

money, a tremendous lot of money. They do so because people believe that health is important and 

health services are expensive. In his Budget Speech he says that, “Some of this money comes from 

Ottawa. The taxpayers of our Province are paying almost the total costs.” Mr. Speaker, if there were no 

public plans such as SHSP and Medical Care Insurance, Saskatchewan people would then pay all of this 

cost. May I submit that we probably wouldn‟t have such plans as these had it not been for the previous 

CCF Government in this Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — But the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) seems to infer in his Budget Speech that he 

would prefer an absence of these plans because then presumably it would cost less money. The question 

which he and others who argue that way need to answer is; if there were no plans, who would pay them 

and how much? The Treasurer infers that the cost to be paid by Saskatchewan people would then be 

less. If there were no public plans, there would be some savings if you define savings according to 

Saskatchewan Liberal philosophy. There would be savings because the people would be unable to get 

medical or hospital service because of inability to pay. Payments by the same people, if there were no 

public plans, would be the situation, Mr. Speaker. But those who would be sick more often and longer 

would pay more. The impact of the Treasurer‟s remarks is that this would be better if people paid more 

because they were sick longer or more often. 

 

He suggests, secondly, that the future costs of these plans are ruinous. How does he propose to make 

these costs less ruinous? Well his suggestion is and I quote: “That the amount 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

842 

people pay should be related to the use they make of those services.” Translated into plain English, Mr. 

Speaker, this means that the longer you are sick, the more you pay. The oftener you‟re sick, the more 

you pay. Nobody has explained yet any measurable savings as a result of the application of such 

philosophy. It would be true only if fewer people get services or if they get poor-quality services. This 

policy, Mr. Speaker, I submit is the policy of one or the policy of a group who believe that people are 

basically dishonest. This is the policy of people who believe that you cure sick people by punishing 

them not by treating them, you punish them by charging them more. You fine people for being sick, 

that‟s the proposal in the present Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — This is the policy of the Saskatchewan Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker. The Liberals 

are a bunch of economic witch doctors plying their ·trade on sick people in the middle of the 20th 

century. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Those who oppose public services will always, while opposing the service itself, try to 

make their point by attacking these services on the basis of alleged ruinous costs. So ran the argument 

for many years of those who opposed old age pensions, unemployment insurance and family allowances. 

So ran the arguments of the Liberal party after proposing Medicare Insurance in 1919 and delaying its 

implementation until 1968. So still runs the arguments of many Liberals today in 1968. They may still 

continue that argument, Mr. Speaker, and apply its meaning, if the wrong person happens to be elected 

Leader of the Federal-Liberal party in a few weeks‟ time. We may still be called back into this House in 

special session to raise the $10 million the Budget is planning as a Federal contribution to medicare in 

Saskatchewan. And I have to add that, if there is a June election and the Tories are elected, then almost 

certainly we‟ll be back here trying to get another $10 million out of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, public plans of this nature represent a shift of power from the few to the many. Public 

plans represent a redistribution of wealth. The opposition to public plans is usually on the basis of costs 

even though the costs of the services, paid for individually, would be as high in total and higher for 

many individuals. Yet there are people who try to prejudice public plans by talking about the costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an inefficient Budget. Deterrent charges of $7.4 million are to be paid by 

Saskatchewan sick people. The return to the Treasury is going to be only about $5 million. There is a 

shrinkage, a loss, an erosion of $2.4 million, almost one-half of the net gain, the highest collection costs 

in history. Add to this the collection costs and the uncollectible debt cost of all hospitals and doctors, as 

they collect this in dribs and drabs of $1, or $1.50, or $2 a case. It is an inefficient Budget. 

 

This Budget also deceives, as I said earlier, as to the amount to be collected. The Budget suggests the 

increase will be about $35 per capita. For a man and his wife and a family 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

843 

of three that‟s $175 per capita. That‟s about three and one-half times the homeowner grant for those 

families who get homeowner grants. If one of the family happens to be at university, you can add 

another $85. That‟s an increase in living costs of $260 for that family this year. That‟s bad enough, but I 

suggest again that the actual increase is not about $35. It is closer to $40 per capita. 

 

Why are we being overtaxed in 1968? This, I suggest, is a pay-now-vote-later plan. We are being 

overtaxed now for two reasons, first, so that at some future date the Government will be able to reduce 

taxes. At that point Santa Claus will emerge from the right and enter into the centre of the stage. We are 

being overtaxed now so that there will be a surplus and at the appropriate time, then Mr. Steuart will 

become a jolly little elf, the helper of Santa Claus and distribute those surpluses as alleged gifts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even before the Legislature met the Government was busy increasing charges to add to its 

revenue. It increased the charge for liquor, it increased the licence fees for liquor outlets, it increased 

Provincial park fees. The Board of Governors increased University fees. The Local Government Board 

increased its fees for local governments. Probably $2-3 million in these alone, and this was just 

preliminary to the main bout of March 1. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we realize the Government needs money for important services. But we had been led to 

believe that the growth of resource development in this Province was such that the added yield of the 

present taxes at the present levels would meet those needs. We had been led to believe, the people of 

Saskatchewan had been led to believe, that the growth of resources was such that taxes at the present 

levels would give us more than we needed and enough to make taxation cuts possible. Rather interesting 

to note that the Treasurer in his Budget says that the receipts from mineral resources this year will 

represent a decline of $1.4 million over the current year, after all the talk about mineral development and 

the revenue from that. 

 

Secondly, while realizing that the Government needs additional revenue, we must object to the unfair, 

the inefficient and the cruel method chosen by this Government to raise revenue. It has put a direct tax 

on agricultural production, already handicapped by a lot of things plus Liberal Governments. It reverses 

the ability to pay principal with other taxes. I submit that deterrent fees in particular are not just methods 

of raising money. These are an attempt to destroy and to discredit important health and educational 

services. 

 

This Budget provides new taxes, a wider base for old taxes, a higher rate for old taxes and it adds up to 

some $35 per person. The cruelest and unfair among these, the deterrent fee on medicare, most cruel and 

most unfair, the hospitalization deterrent fees. 

 

The end wasn‟t with the Budget. The next day the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), the Minister in 

charge of Government Insurance, got into the act and as an encore he added some increases in 

automobile accident insurance premiums. 

 

And the end is not even yet, Members will have noted that the increase for school grants, according to 

the Treasurer, 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

844 

is limited to some $2.7 million. This is woefully inadequate to share the increased costs of our school 

districts. We must look forward to a large and wholesale increase in property taxes as we had last year 

and the year before. The Government for some time has been trying to claim that they are providing 50 

per cent of the cost of education through their grants, never a very reliably established figure. But I feel 

confident in saying that the percentage this year is going to be closer to 40 per cent than to 50 per cent. 

We are going backwards in this respect too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — All of this, Mr. Speaker, in a year in which we have for the first time $10 millions and 

more of dollars to share the cost of Medical Insurance in Saskatchewan. All of this in a year in which the 

total amount of money from Ottawa is greater than ever before in our history. This Budget shows that 

there is $100 million and more in various forms for various purposes which come not out of Provincial 

levy of taxes but out of Federal sources. 

 

Let me turn to the deterrent tees more specifically. Mr. Speaker, these fees are a tax. They are a tax on 

the sick. The Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) in the Budget Speech said this: “Our Government believes that the 

amount people pay for some services should be related to the use they make of these services.” And 

there he nailed the Liberal colors to the masthead. In other words, the sicker you are, the more you pay. 

That‟s the Liberal guideline for taxation. The longer you are sick, the more you pay. That‟s another 

Liberal guideline. The older you are, the more likely you are to have to pay more. The young people 

raising a family are more certain to have to pay more. 

 

We need to raise the question: have the people been led to believe that something different would have 

happened? I refer to you a statement of the Premier quoted in the Leader-Post July 28, 1965. He talked 

about when we would get Federal assistance for medicare. At that time he said that “it might be possible 

to include dental care or prepaid drugs.” He went on to say at that time “an alternative to expansion 

would be lowering medical care premiums.” This he said “would depend on the wishes of the 

Saskatchewan people.” We haven‟t got the possible extension of drugs or dental care, or anything else. 

There is no alternative with regard to lowering premiums. The action is in contradiction, I submit, of the 

wishes of the people of Saskatchewan. You have another one of these clear pictures of Liberal promise 

versus Liberal performance. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) yesterday attempted to 

justify these measures on the basis of curbing costs. I read again, a statement from the Leader-Post of 

September 5th, 1964 and I quote: 

 

Studies to date show the deterrent fees failed to provide an effective means of curbing costs. 

 

Who said it, Mr. Speaker? The then Minister of Health, the present Provincial Treasurer, the Member for 

Prince Albert West said that in 1964. Have there been new studies, we ask him. Why have there been 

different conclusions? The Government refuses to make available to us the public studies they have in 

respect to Swift Current. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

845 

The Provincial Treasurer, the then Minister of Health, went on to say in 1964 that the Swift Current 

Medical Insurance Plan has indicated that “deterrent fees, if they are to be high enough to be true 

deterrents, work a hardship on people who should be helped by the plan.” And in his Budget Speech he 

indicated that the Government was in his own words, prepared to “work a hardship on people who 

should be helped.” Mr. Speaker, I refer this House to reading sometime the statement of Chief Justice 

Hall, former Chief Justice, speaking as Chairman of the Royal Commission on Health Services. He is 

reported in our newspapers on October 16, 1964, as saying this: 

 

There is no greater challenge than to provide health services without hindrance. 

 

We failed in that challenge. He says of deterrent fees, “the administration costs are out of proportion.” 

He says that “they have a deterring effect only on the poor.” With respect to saving money, he points out 

that they have deterrent fees on hospitalization in Alberta and I quote: 

 

The length of stay in Alberta is higher than in Saskatchewan. 

 

How are we going to save money that way? He adds that the result of the deterrent fees is “to permit 

those who have the money to be preferred in hospitals over those who lacked it.” He said that they are “a 

tax on the poor.” In other words he refutes every argument that the Provincial Treasurer or the Minister 

of Health had put forth in support of this measure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, we have been denied information as to how these are going to apply. I want 

to appeal to the Government and the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) in particular, to clear this up for 

some of these people, and I am thinking particularly of those people in geriatric centres. Surely it is not 

too much to ask the Government not to delay any longer in saying whether they are going to pay $2.50 a 

day and also for their doctor calls or not. Surely it is cruel and callous of the Government not to say 

specifically, “You are not going to be charged in that way.” As far as doctor services are concerned for 

these people, in the most cases the doctor is called by a third party, usually the nurse. A patient has no 

control over that. 

 

The hospital deterrent is one which must be objected to most emphatically among emphatic rejections. 

The doctor has to open the door before the patient can get into the hospital. The doctor has to open the 

door before the patient can get out of the hospital. What abuses of which the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Grant) and the Provincial Treasurer have spoken do they expect to cure by putting a deterrent on the 

patient under such circumstances? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the aim of this plan, I submit, is only partly money. Part of the aim is to 

make the financial risk high enough that private insurance companies can sell a policy. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

846 

This is part of the New Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Come to Saskatchewan and you can fatten even on the bones of the very sick, says the 

Provincial Treasurer. The Liberals are now doing by taxation what they were unable to do by kicking at 

the door of the Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Frazier Report showed that the Government was right in removing the previous 

Minister of Health. The imposition of the deterrent fees shows that the present Minister of Health (Mr. 

Grant) ought to be removed. The Budget with all the financial difficulties it describes shows that the 

Government was right in disposing of the previous Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Thatcher). The method 

chosen to increase taxes in this Budget shows that the present Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) ought 

to be discarded also. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, we have sometimes heard that this province has now become a “have” 

province. Well there are some “haves” for us. We have a Government which has proven its ability to 

deceive the people. We have a Government which conceals more information from the public than any 

other Government in Canada or history. We have the cruelest tax increase in our history this year. We 

have a Budget which discriminates against the poor and against those most in need of services. We will 

have, Mr. Speaker, the honor of the highest deterrent fees for hospitalization of any Province or people 

in the entire Dominion of Canada. The Budget Speech says we now enjoy the greatest prosperity in our 

history. It could have added, this won‟t be true tomorrow if you are sick too long or if you are sick too 

often. It reminds me of “A Tale of Two Cities”, the introductory paragraph. “It was the best of times, it 

was the worst of times.” That‟s sort of the story which the Budget completes here. This is the “Tale of 

Two Parties” — the Liberal party before the election and the Liberal party after the election. And any 

similarity is purely incidental. Mr. Speaker, in the end of this Government lies the beginning of hope for 

Saskatchewan people, it can‟t come too soon. I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. MacLennan: (Last Mountain) — Mr. Speaker, as this is the first time that I have 

participated in debate in this session of the Legislature, let me extend my congratulations to you on your 

re-election to the high office you occupy. 

 

I welcome, Mr. Speaker, all new Members of this House and congratulate them on their election. The 

same congratulations, Mr. Speaker, are extended to all the other Members who won re-election in their 

respective constituencies. The same welcome in some cases, Mr. Speaker, is somewhat less than 

enthusiastic. 

 

I would like to take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to thank the people of Last Mountain constituency for 

once again giving me the opportunity to represent them in this Assembly. The people of the Last 

Mountain constituency, Mr. Speaker, had the highest voter turn-out on election day in the entire 

province. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

847 

More than 86 per cent of those eligible to vote cast their ballots on October 11. This, Mr. Speaker, 

shows the keen interest the people of my constituency have in the affairs of our province. It shows also, 

Mr. Speaker, the enthusiasm the supporters of all three candidates had for their respective parties. I 

commend my own supporters as well as the supporters of my two opponents for the work they did in 

obtaining this distinction for the constituency of Last Mountain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to comment on some of the speeches that I have heard in this debate. In 

this Budget debate the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) was at his rabble-rousing best or 

worst, I don‟t know. He got so enamoured of his efforts that at times he cancelled himself out. He 

attacked the hospital and medicare utilization fees as taxes on the poor. Yet he said it is people with 

higher than average incomes who make most use of the services of doctors. Such housewives, he said, 

do not work. They have cars. It is easy for them to take their children to the doctor. If what he says is 

true, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that it is reasonable and just that the richer people should pay a 

little more of the costs of these services that he says they use so frequently. He said, “No Government 

has ever increased taxes so recklessly, so deceitfully and so unfairly.” I do not believe his memory is so 

short that he cannot remember the record-breaking tax increases imposed by the Socialist Government. 

They followed each election held while they were in office with a number of stiff tax increases. They 

increased the retail sales tax twice, each time soon and shortly after an election. The end result was a 

rate increase from 2 per cent to 5 per cent and an increase in the tax collected from $2 1/2 million to $44 

million. The gasoline tax was increased five times, each time just after an election. The rate was 

increased from 7 cents to 14 cents a gallon and the total collected in a year from $3 1/4 million to $29 

3/4 million. Motor licence fees were increased after each election and the total per year increased from 

$2 1/3 million to nearly $9 million. Regularly, after each election the hospitalization premium was 

increased by our friends opposite. What about the deceit, which according to the Hon. Member, is 

making tax increases without announcing them during an election? The Hon. Member may search the 

election speeches of himself and of all his colleagues in vain for any indication of the Government‟s 

intention to increase taxes when the election was over when they were in power. The most nefarious 

piece of deception was practised in the 1960 election. Just before that election the hospitalization tax 

was reduced from $45 to $35 for a family. Just as soon as possible after the election, it was raised, and 

raised, not to $45, but to $48. I should remind the Hon. Member again of Sessional Paper No. 2 of the 

second session of 1961. This set forth the fees, licences, dues, royalties, etc. charged in 1944 and 1961. 

The return showed that about 600 exactions of one kind and another had been increased and 600 new 

ones had been imposed by the former Socialist Government. 

 

Last week, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) made one of the most 

ridiculous speeches ever given in this House. He had next to nothing to say on the Budget itself. He read 

a lot of old newspaper clippings going back to the 1940s and early 50s and then he did the most amazing 

thing of all. He then appointed himself as the spokesman of people with Ukrainian ancestry. He tried, 

Mr. Speaker to insinuate that the Liberal party discriminated against people of his ethnic background. 

This, Mr. Speaker, is setting a new low in this 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

848 

Legislature. In all the years that I have followed the debates of this House I have never heard such a 

charge or insinuation levelled against any party by any Member. For the most part he based his charges 

on the fact that not a single Member of this side of the House is of Ukrainian ancestry. This may be true, 

Mr. Speaker, and I am sure that it is regrettable. In the last election, however, several outstanding men 

of. Ukrainian background won Liberal nominations. They were nominated at contested nominating 

conventions; they were nominated not because of their heritage but because they happened to be the best 

men in the eyes of the people who nominated them. The Liberal party, Mr. Speaker, tried to help these 

men to be elected not because of their nationality but because they were outstanding members of the 

Liberal party. One of these men came within 12 votes of defeating the Member from Redberry (Mr. 

Michayluk) and I am sure that that man will be successful in providing this service to the people of 

Saskatchewan in the next election. Mr. Speaker, many people of Ukrainian background have served the 

people of Saskatchewan in this Assembly as Liberal MLAs and I may add with great distinction. In 

recent years on the Liberal side of the House, we have had Mary Batten and Bernard Korchinski, both of 

whom brought great honor and distinction to the Ukrainian people as MLAs, and who, Mr. Speaker, 

continue to do so in the high offices they now hold. Mr. Speaker, as you well know, both these people 

are serving their country as judges and were appointed to their positions by the Federal Liberal 

Government in Ottawa, another Government that he accused just a few nights ago of discriminating 

against the Ukrainian people. Mr. Speaker, the Liberal party and this Government took pride in the fact 

that we were fortunate enough a few years ago to have sitting amongst us a Liberal MLA, the late Sam 

Asbell. Mr. Asbell, as everyone knew, was the first Member and the only Member of the Jewish faith 

ever to be elected to this House. We did not then, Mr. Speaker, or do we now because the NDP have 

never elected a member of that faith, accuse or insinuate that they might be anti-Semitic. Mr. Speaker, 

the Hon. Member from Redberry in his speech the other night brought no distinction to himself, to the 

people he represents, or to the Ukrainian people of this province. To his colleagues of Ukrainian 

descent, he must be a tremendous embarrassment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all last week we had heard NDP Member after NDP Member attack the Government for 

increasing taxes. Only one NDP Member, Mr. Speaker, attacked the Provincial Treasurer for balancing 

the Budget. We must presume, Mr. Speaker, that the Members opposite agree with the Members on this 

side of the House that as far as Saskatchewan is concerned, the Budget brought down by the Member 

from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) should be a balanced one. This he did and in this we all seem to 

agree. Not a single NDP Member, Mr. Speaker, suggested that the total amount to be spent in the 1968-

69 Budget should be less than the amount budgeted for by the Provincial Treasurer. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

each and every NDP Member criticized the Provincial Treasurer‟s projected revenues and suggested 

greater expenditures. In effect, Mr. Speaker, we have heard the NDP say this: (1) Balance the budget; 

(2) Do not spend less than $338,400,000; (3) Spend more money on most programs and (4) Do not raise 

taxes. This, Mr. Speaker, is childish talk, irresponsible talk, and impossible talk, but Mr. Speaker, that is 

NDP-type talk. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

849 

Mr. MacLennan: — An NDP budget; Heaven forbid, such a monstrosity would have many changes I 

am sure. According to what they have said, the first people that would suffer would be the people that 

live in rural Saskatchewan. The first items to be slashed by an NDPer would be municipal equalization 

grants, then they would cut off grants paid for maintenance of grid roads, then the snow removal grants, 

all programs instituted by the present Liberal Government. This would save an NDP Provincial 

Treasurer $3.7 million. This would, of course, Mr. Speaker, send the mill rate in our rural municipalities 

soaring. Would they care about that, Mr. Speaker? No, of course not, they did not care about the RMs in 

the 20 years they were on this side of the House, so why should they change. The next item they would 

slash would be the use of purple gas in farm trucks. They would do this at the suggestion of the 

Members from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) and Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney). This would cost the farmers 

of Saskatchewan more than $4 million. 

 

The next item that would be slashed would be the grants to the homeowners, that would save them 

$8,600,000. They would realize though that this would hurt the people in the rural areas far more than it 

would the people who live in the cities. Why do I say that it would hurt the rural people more than those 

in the cities? I say it for two reasons: One, in the rural areas where there are virtually no apartment 

blocks, a far greater percentage of people live in their own homes and qualify for the grant and, 

secondly, there are thousands of people especially elderly retired people living in small, very modest 

homes in the towns and villages of Saskatchewan that the homeowner grant pays half of their yearly 

taxes. These people can ill-afford to lose this grant, but the people opposite, Mr. Speaker, would have no 

hesitation in taking this money away from them. 

 

The next program, Mr. Speaker, they would abolish would be the Indian and Métis Branch. This would 

save them only $430,000, but it was a Liberal program so they would get rid of it. I would suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP would be as considerate of these people as they were when the CCF were in 

power. They did nothing for our Indian and Métis people then, and would do nothing again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next item the NDP would slash and eliminate would be the Provincial Youth Agency. 

They would eliminate it because it was a program again introduced by a Liberal Government. But 

cutting out this program, 390 schools in 260 communities would close their doors to over 30,000 young 

people for various out-of-school activities. It would mean the cancellation of 1,350 community junior 

development projects involving 27,000 young people in 211 communities. An NDP Government would 

deny thousands of our young people job counselling and career guidance by eliminating and suspending 

the activities of the Opportunity Caravan sponsored by the Provincial Youth Agency. Yes, Mr. Speaker, 

by attacking programs set up by this Liberal Government that were designed for our people of Indian 

ancestry and for our young people an NDP Government would save over $1 million, $617,000 On our 

Youth Agency and over $400,000 on our Indian and Métis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I am sure you are aware these two agencies of our Government were especially 

designed to help people who, 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

850 

by and large, do not enjoy facilities that exist in our cities. Once again, the people of rural Saskatchewan 

would suffer at the hands of a labor-dominated and city-influenced Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the big cut an NDP Government would make on a Liberal program would be on the 

highway program. As everyone in this House knows the present highway program is to cost $58.5 

million. The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) pointed out in his Budget Speech that this amount will 

exceed the $24.2 million spent in 1963-64, the last year of the CCF Government by more than 140 per 

cent. Listening to the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, I am sure they would cut this program by at least 

$15 million. The Member for Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk) suggested $20 million. 

 

What would this mean if they cut $15 million off the highway budget? It would mean for 1968-69, 

instead of paving 365 miles of highway as we propose to do, they would pave only 274 miles. Instead of 

oiling and grading 785 miles of highway, they would grade only 375 miles. And, Mr. Speaker, a quarter 

of the amount of money we spend on the upkeep of our highway system would not be spent under an 

NPP Government, causing our existing highway system to deteriorate. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, have every right to drive on safe dust-free roads and a Liberal Government will do everything 

in its power to see that their demands are met, not 10 or 20 years in the future, but now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — The success of the Liberal highway program during the past four years is evident 

in the constituency of Last Mountain. During the past four years of Liberal Government, more miles of 

highway have been oiled and paved in my constituency than in the 20 long years of NDP Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members opposite are making much of the alleged difference between the general 

attitude of the Government and the Liberal party before and after the recent election. They say that 

before the election we depicted a land flowing with milk and honey, and after the election we are 

plunged into austerity. The word, austerity is, perhaps, too extreme to describe recent Government 

policies. It suggests conditions similar to those under the Socialist Government in England and nothing 

could be much further from the facts than here in Saskatchewan. Economizing might have been a term 

better describing what is taking place in this Province. The Government is concerned to eliminate 

unnecessary expenditures and to reduce expenditures on less essential things, so that more money may 

be available for increased expenditures on essential services and at the same time the Budget may be 

balanced. This is essentially just a continuation of the policies of good business administration this 

Government has practised since it took office in 1964. The economic conditions in this Province remain 

substantially the same as existed before the election, and as described by the Liberals during the 

election. There is a continued high level of industrial expansion. There is virtually full employment, the 

lowest rate of unemployment of any province in Canada. There is the highest level of private and public 

capital investment in our history, and again higher than the national level. There is just one significant 

difference, the smaller crop harvested in the fall of 1967. This will result in reduced form, net income 

and is bound to have some effect on our whole economy. Hon. Members opposite will undoubtedly try 

to blame the Government for this. Admittedly, the tax increases represent a change 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

851 

in policy for this Government. The taxes are increased to pay increases in Civil Service salaries, 

increased school grants, pay larger grants to the University and larger expenditures on health and social 

welfare. 

 

Will Hon. Members opposite, if they criticize, be honest enough to object to any of these increased 

expenditures? The Socialists should be the very last people to criticize tax increases. During their term 

of office, they increased the rates of virtually all existing taxes, some of them several times. The new 

taxes, fees and increases totalled more than 600. Year by year they drove their tax-picking fingers 

deeper and deeper into the pockets of the people of this Province. When one looks over the list, he is 

amazed at the ingenuity they displayed in devising newer and more devious means of diverting more of 

the people‟s money into their own pockets. It became the business of this Liberal Government to repeal 

and abolish a large number of the tax exactions devised and imposed by the Socialists. 

 

There will be much Socialist moaning over the utilization fees to be charged for hospital and medical 

services. The Socialists, as they watched the rapidly mounting costs of hospitalization, would have liked 

to impose deterrent fees, but they lacked the courage. They permitted costs to mount year by year and 

increased the general hospital premium tax after each election. Instead of now making an increase in the 

general level, this Government has decided that a little more of the cost will be paid by the users and the 

abusers of the services. The change will be welcomed by the people as an overdue effort to correct an 

evil which seemed to be developing to alarming proportions. Mr. Speaker, I will oppose the amendment 

and support: the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald: (Minister of Welfare) — Mr. Speaker, first of all as I rise to take part in this 

debate, I wish to discuss some of the comments that have been made during the debate by Members of 

the Opposition, second to discuss the Budget and some of the policies annunciated by that Budget itself. 

 

My reason, Mr. Speaker, is that after listening to the Opposition for one week, one message that requires 

a reply has permeated every speech, a message that by now must be obvious to every man and woman in 

Saskatchewan. It states in no uncertain terms that the NDP in Saskatchewan and in Canada have proved 

beyond a shadow of a doubt that they are unworthy to govern the Province of Saskatchewan. They are a 

party unworthy to seek the responsibilities of government. The Socialists have one by one stood on their 

feet and demanded the resignation of the Liberal Government. 

 

First, because we raised taxes and second because we announced the implementation of utilization fees. 

They have also accused us of deceit and dishonesty by implying that the tax increases refute the Liberal 

party claim of a booming Saskatchewan and a New Saskatchewan, free from the strangling grip of 

Socialism. Let me quote, Mr. Speaker, the financial critic, the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney): 

 

Many of us knew the picture of a prosperous Saskatchewan 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

852 

held out by the Liberal Leader‟s campaign a few months ago was transparently false. We know the 

facts were being misrepresented, but we didn‟t know how gross were those falsehoods. 

 

We also listened, Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition on his feet this afternoon attempting to 

substantiate those same charges. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, let me tell the Socialists that we have no intention of resigning. We have just been 

given a mandate by the people of Saskatchewan to govern our Province and we intend to do so. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, the Member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk), has no manners but I would remind 

him of the old adage, “It‟s better to close his mouth and appear ignorant, than open it and remove all 

doubt.” Mr. Speaker, we have also been given a mandate for a responsible Government, and we also 

intend to carry out that obligation. But responsible Government, Mr. Speaker, does not mean that the 

responsibility of Government resides only with the Government, it also implies responsibility on the 

party of the official Opposition. If ever in the history of Canada a political party has betrayed that trust 

for cheap political gain, it is the NDP opposite. Never in the history of Saskatchewan, have a group of 

politicians been as irresponsible, dishonest, misleading, as completely out of step with the needs and 

demands of our Provincial and national responsibilities. In not one single speech, Mr. Speaker, have that 

party of political expediency opposite even recognized the financial problems besetting Saskatchewan, 

Canada and the world at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problems of Government revenues are not related to the Province of Saskatchewan, but 

are the problems of every Province, of our national Government and of every country in the world. For 

two weeks now we have listened to Members of the Opposition trying to insinuate that these problems 

reside only in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let me point out some of these problems as they relate to other of our sister Provinces in Canada. Let 

me start with the Province of Alberta, neighbor to the west, and perhaps the richest Province in Canada. 

Let me quote from the Calgary Herald of a few days ago. Here is the headline, “Deficit to Kill Cash 

Reserve.” Let me quote a few paragraphs from the story: 

 

Alberta may tax sales. Unveiling record expenditures of $893 million in its third consecutive deficit 

budget, the government signed a death warrant Friday night for its liquid cash reserves and opened the 

door to a sales tax. Higher gasoline taxes and automobile licence fees failed to stave off a gloomy 

prediction from Provincial Treasurer, Andres Calborg, that Alberta this year will borrow money on the 

open market for the first time since 1935 and that a sales tax has top priority in consideration of new 

revenue sources. Mr. Calborg‟s Budget calls for a 7 per cent increase in revenues and expenditures for 

the 1968-69 fiscal year, but this will leave an overall deficit of $70,458,000 predicted for the 

upcoming months. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, from the wealthiest Province in Canada, a Province that a few years ago had a cash 

reserve in the hundreds of millions of dollars. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

853 

Let me go now to central Canada and another of our rich sisters, the Province of Ontario and quote from 

the Toronto Globe and Mail. 

 

Ontario deficit $61 million forecast. Ontario‟s fiscal troubles were clearly revealed yesterday in 

Treasury Department‟s figures that forecast a $60 million deficit to March 31st, 1968. Last year there 

was a surplus of $53 million. A revenue spending deficit of $222 million . . . 

 

and I repeat, Mr. Speaker, a revenue spending deficit of $222 million . . . “is estimated before Federal 

funds, interest on loans and other non-budgetary items come to the rescue.” 

 

The shift from the black to the red, a $114 million change, is regarded by fiscal experts as a serious 

omen. There has been a desperate budget-cutting scramble leading up to Provincial Treasurer, Charles 

MacNaughton‟s Budget address in the Legislature next Tuesday. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, from another of the richest Provinces in Canada. 

 

Now let me turn to the Maritimes to the far eastern coast and to the tiny Province of Prince Edward 

Island. Here I quote from the Leader-Post: 

 

Prince Edward Island‟s Legislature was warned Friday that the Province is in serious trouble unless it 

shows financial responsibility. 

 

Provincial Treasurer T. Earle Hickey said Friday during debate on the Speech from the Throne that the 

Province is in a bad way financially and is encountering difficulties borrowing money. Measures will 

have to be taken which not everyone will like, but will have to be done, the Treasurer said. The 

Government‟s Budget will not be brought down until later in the session. 

 

All of us are also aware, Mr. Speaker, that Quebec has had deficits in the hundreds of millions of 

dollars, in the last few years, that Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec and New Brunswick have all made 

huge tax increases in the last few years to try and attempt to solve their problems. We have all witnessed 

the fiscal problems of our national Government in attempting to raise revenues needed to pay for 

Government programs. We have also witnessed the actions of the United States, the wealthiest nation in 

the world, in its attempt to solve its fiscal problems. It has curbed foreign investment and travel in order 

to put its house in order. 

 

England is the most glaring example of the financial chaos encountered by governments at some levels. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s problems are infinitely smaller than those of any other Province. Canada today is in the 

midst of a serious fiscal and economic crisis. Problems of inflation, deflation, tight money and high 

interest rates have threatened the very future of our nation. The most startling feature of this crisis is that 

it has occurred not in a period of deflation, not in a period of economic depression, but in a period of 

unprecedented expansion over the past few years. Economists at every level have warned Canadians that 

our problem is not growth but continued growth, not expansion but steady expansion. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

854 

One of the major causes of this problem has been Governments at all levels spending beyond their 

means. Government revenues have increased, but Government expenditures have galloped beyond these 

revenues, until they are now at the point where they threaten the very existence of many programs. They 

have forced Governments to borrow on the money markets. They have driven interest rates to the point 

where ordinary people can no longer borrow money to build houses, expand their businesses or farming 

operations. But even more important, they have deprived the private sector of the capital needed to 

expand and develop our resources. Today every responsible Government in Canada is attempting to use 

restraint. Every Government in Canada is now being forced to examine· their spending and assess their 

programs. 

 

The Liberal Government in Saskatchewan has led the way, Mr. Speaker. We have in our four years of 

office balanced our Budget on every occasion. We urged restraint and also put into effect the measures 

that were necessary. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan can well be proud of the fiscal policy of this Government, of our former 

Provincial Treasurer, and of course of our present one. 

 

Let me make it emphatically clear, Mr. Speaker, that the economy of the Province of Saskatchewan is 

sound and its future prospects excellent. Let us look at a few of the facts. First, our last year‟s Budget 

had a $3 million surplus despite a very light crop. Expansion and diversification kept Government 

revenues at an all-time high. Investment was 7.7 per cent higher than 1966, an increase double that made 

in the rest of Canada. Unemployment during the winter months was the lowest in Canada. Non-

agricultural production in Saskatchewan exceeded the increases nationally, and labor income was also 

higher than the increases nationally. Government revenues over the next fiscal year before tax increases 

will continue to expand to new record heights. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the best indicator of continued 

prosperity and growth in Saskatchewan are figures released by the Saskatchewan Retail Association. 

The estimated retail sales in Saskatchewan are to reach $79,508,000 in the month of February, as 

compared to $78,822,000 a year ago, this, Mr. Speaker, despite a light crop. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the Member from Regina Centre‟s (Mr. Blakeney) comments on hard rock 

mining are the most humorous of all. In his remarks, he tried to substantiate his claims concerning the 

New Saskatchewan. What outright deceit, Mr. Speaker! The Member referred to the fall in metal 

production from hard rock mining. For comparison purposes he used the figures for 1962 to 1967 with 

1967. He also used the table of the Annual Report of the Department of Mineral Resources, but this 

table also gives the figures from the years 1958 to 1967 inclusive. Why did he not use these years? Was 

it because 1962 sounds a little closer to the period of Liberal Government than 1958? The decline in 

metal production commenced in the year 1944-45 the first year of a Socialist Government. The decline 

has continued persistently since then. During the Socialist period from 1944 to 1964, copper production 

declined 32.7 per cent, zinc 33:7, gold 63.3 and silver 73.9. 

 

During this period the Province of Manitoba was levying a royalty of 8 per cent on net profits for this 

type of mining. The Socialists levied a tax of 12 1/2 per cent. As should have been expected 

development in metal mining moved to the Province 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

855 

of Manitoba. Not one single additional metal mine went into production in the province under the, 

Socialists and there was very little prospecting or exploration activity. In Manitoba there was the exact 

opposite, spectacular exploration and spectacular development. All of us. Mr. Speaker, are aware of the 

developments in Thompson and Lynn Lake. 

 

Several times the Hon. Member asserted we should tax the users of our resources more heavily. That is a 

short-sighted policy. This is a very sensitive type of industry. Huge amounts of capital are required. The 

risks are very great. Competition is very keen. It is a case where the law of diminishing returns may 

readily be brought into operation. By raising rates of royalty production may diminish and total revenues 

may be reduced. The policy of this Government has been designed to recover some of the ground we 

lost during those 20 sterile years of Socialism. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the way in which the Opposition have made their case for Socialist development. 

Once again, hypocrisy and deceit. These facts. Mr. Speaker, give a lie to the Socialists‟ claim against the 

New Saskatchewan. Parliamentarians from one end of Canada to the other, from the Atlantic provinces 

to the Pacific, of every political party have joined the voices of the economists, the President of the Bank 

of Canada, and urged Governments to balance their budgets and trim their expenditures, as have 

parliamentarians of every political party, Mr. Speaker, except the Socialist. The NDP party have thrown 

their responsibility to Saskatchewan and to Canada out the window for cheap political gain and 

expediency. Surely. Mr. Speaker, the Socialists have at least one Member opposite that has the guts to 

stand on his feet and tell the people of Saskatchewan the truth. 

 

It is too much to expect surely of the fuzzy-headed Socialists in the front benches to assume that 

responsibility, but is there not even one new Member that has enough courage to break away from the 

doctrinaire, outdated, antiquated philosophy of the NDP to add his voice to the call for responsibility 

from our elected representatives? Never before in Saskatchewan has there been a greater need for 

leadership from our politicians. The public of Saskatchewan and of Canada must be educated to the fact 

that there are no free programs, no give-aways, no free promises. Mr. Speaker, I believe they are 

learning the hard way that all Government programs and services cost money and that they must pay for 

them through taxation. But they are also learning that we have reached a saturation point and that 

Governments have a responsibility to use restraint. 

 

But what did the Socialists have to offer? Not one single Member, beginning with the financial critic, to 

the lowest back bencher has mentioned the word restraint or fiscal responsibility. Each speaker has tried 

to outbid his seatmate in attempting to bribe the voters of Saskatchewan. Their only answer to 

Saskatchewan‟s problems has been more Government spending, offers of new free services, demands 

for expanded programs. Never before have the true colors of the NDP Socialists been more apparent 

than in the last week. Never before has Socialism proved its inability to solve the problems of the 20th 

century. Never before has Socialism demonstrated that it can distribute our wealth, but has no way to 

create that wealth. Never before, Mr. Speaker, has the inherent dishonesty and political expediency of 

the Socialists been more obvious. Never before has a 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

856 

political party in Saskatchewan proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that they are unworthy of the 

confidence of the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker. What are the responsibilities of Governments today? First, 

Governments must live within their own means. Budgets must be balanced. There are many essential 

services which people of today ought to have and can afford to have. But at the same time, there has 

been a disposition on the part of Governments to go too fast and too far in providing them. Individual 

citizens have to live within their incomes or face dire consequences. Governments should do the same 

because it is the individual citizens who provide them with their money. 

 

Second, Governments at all levels must attempt to control expenditures. A realistic assessment must be 

made of all Government programs. Only those that are of a real priority must be expanded. If we fail to 

do this, we will jeopardize all essential programs and services. Difficult decisions must be made in order 

to prevent the disintegration of basic services. 

 

Third, more revenues must be spent to encourage development and expansion and less spent on costly 

welfare services. Canada in the last few years has initiated many new and costly welfare programs. 

Many of them good programs. We must now shift our emphasis to increase productivity in. order to pay 

for programs that have been initiated. 

 

Fourth, and perhaps the most important, Mr. Speaker, is that we must be selective in new services and 

programs. We can no longer afford to look after the people in our society who can well afford to look 

after themselves. If we fail to take this step, we will no longer be able to look after those people who 

really need our help. 

 

Many problems of poverty remain unsolved. Our native people, emotional disturbance, retardation, 

urbanization, retraining, are only a few that will not only tax our dollars, but our ingenuity in the future. 

This, Mr. Speaker, is our responsibility in the years ahead. These are the principles we have adhered to 

in this Budget, Mr. Speaker, we are proud to accept these responsibilities. 

 

What about our Socialist friends opposite? Have they suggested alternatives? Have they recommended 

restraint? Have they established priorities? Have they done anything to recognize their responsibilities? 

They have not, Mr. Speaker. All they have done since they entered this House is demand something for 

nothing, pie in the sky, bribes for the electorate. 

 

I am sure; Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan share my dismay and disgust at their valiant 

efforts to outbid one another for the right to play Santa Claus with other people‟s money. Let me start 

with the financial critic. Last Tuesday he started this parade of give-aways. Here, Mr. Speaker, is the 

cure the Member of Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) recommended for the people of Saskatchewan in this 

time of financial problems. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

857 

(1) Increased grants for arterial streets; (2) increased grants for urban policing; (3) increased Nursing 

Home facilities; (4) low rental housing to be increased; (5) increased pension benefits; (6) chiropractic 

care to be included in medicare; (7) free drug program; (8) day centres for children; (9) higher education 

grants; (10) more money for the base hospital; (11) increased health grants; (12) increased expenditures 

on mental health; (13) free university education. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, he was only the first speaker. Every single Member opposite had his own little bag of 

free goodies to hand out. The Mayor of Regina (Mr. Baker) as usual, he won the prize, he promised the 

most, the best and biggest. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the sense of responsibility demonstrated. And they, Mr. Speaker, have the gall to 

describe the tax raise as vicious and savage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to the other aspects of the Budget and the Opposition remarks concerning 

them. And the most important is the issue of tax increases. To start with, I want to say like all tax-

payers, I object to increased taxes. Taxation in Canada and in Saskatchewan is fast reaching the 

saturation point. However, Mr. Speaker, I am also a realist and I recognize that if the public demand 

services from Governments, they must also expect to pay for them. The task of government is to ensure 

that taxes are related to essential programs and that every reasonable effort is made to reduce 

expenditures to legitimate needs. We have listened in this debate to some violent criticism from the 

Socialists opposite on our tax proposals. Of all the political parties, Mr. Speaker, in Canada, to object to 

tax increases, the Socialists should be the last. Their record is a record that is unparalleled in the history 

of Canada for high taxes and foolish spending. Here are some of the remarks from the Member from 

Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) He charged that the Liberal party hid the facts before the election and 

then raised taxes. Let me quote: 

 

The Government kept the true facts hidden. The party practised wholesale deceit on the voters. They 

pretended things were rosy when they knew they weren‟t rosy. 

 

What unmitigated hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker. If the Member from Regina Centre wants to talk about the 

great tax robbery, he should look at his seatmate, the Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) and at himself, 

when they were Provincial Treasurers. No Government in the history of Canada raised taxes to the 

height they did after their last election in 1960. Let‟s review some of those tax increases. In the general 

election of 1960, the CCF slogan was “Support the CCF for more abundant living.” As soon as the 

election was over, the Socialists commenced to increase taxes as fast as they could pry the taxpayer‟s 

wallet. Some of their increases were made by Executive Order, some in the regular session of 1961 and 

some in the second session of the Legislature in 1961. 

 

Let‟s look at this hypocrisy that occurred after the election in 1960, this from a party that suggests that 

political deceit is now being in use. Let me enumerate these facts: (1) Hospital tax. Individual rates from 

$17.50 to $24, family rates from $35 to $48, amount of increase $3.5 million. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

858 

(2) Telephone charges, effective November 6, 1960, urban residents increased 10 to 25 cents a month; 

business rates 25 cents to $1; pay stations 5 to 10 cents; long distance rates 10 cents from station to 

station and 35 cents for person to person, amount of increase $1.6 million. (3) Liquor prices, effective 

April 3, 1961, approximately 13 per cent on the price of spirits and wine, amount of increase, $1 million. 

(4) Gasoline and diesel fuel, effective April 1, 1961, gasoline tax increased 12 to 14 cents and diesel fuel 

from 14 to 17 cents, amount of increase $3.8 million. (5) Education and health tax, effective January 1, 

1962, increase from 3 to 5 per cent, amount of increase $14 million. (6) Individual income tax, effective 

January 1, 1962, increase 6 per cent, amount of increase $3.6 million. (7) Corporation tax, effective 

January 1, 1962, increase 1 per cent, amount of increase $1 million. (8) Medical insurance tax, effective 

November 1, 1962, $12 per person, $24 per family amount of increase $6 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they taxed the poor, the sick, the old, the lean and the down-trodden. Without including the 

increase in court fees, the total increase per year was about $34.5 million. This; Mr. Speaker, was more 

than the entire Provincial Budget in 1944. And Mr. Speaker, what is the relation of these unbelievable 

tax increases to the Budget of the time? The total budget was $147,414,930 in 1961. These tax increases 

represented approximately 25 per cent of the entire Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — It was the greatest example of deceit and hypocrisy ever perpetrated on the people 

of Saskatchewan. More abundant living was the comedy of the year, Mr. Speaker. And now they talk 

about savage tax increases. 

 

What do the tax increases of 1968 mean in relation to this Budget? The tax increases of $32.4 million 

out of a total Budget of $338,418,360 represent 9.6 per cent of the total expenditures. A far cry from the 

25 per cent in 1961. Mr. Speaker, what were the comments of the Member from Regina Centre at the 

time to justify these astronomical increases. I quote from the Budget Speech of 1962: 

 

The plain truth, Mr. Speaker, is that those who oppose taxes do so for one of two reasons. Either they 

oppose the public programs which are being financed by such taxes and do not have the courage to say 

so, or they seek to mislead the public into believing that the services can be provided without being 

paid for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Who is misleading who now, Mr. Speaker? And who lacks the guts to justify his 

position? Let me quote another of our respected sources from the Socialists opposite, the old warhorse 

from Kelsey, old Brock himself, and I quote: 

 

The Liberals didn‟t have the money that is true, but they didn‟t try to get it either. You can‟t give good 

government unless you have the courage to raise taxes. 

 

Let me now review for all the Members opposite, particularly some of those new Members, the effect of 

some of this tax theft 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

859 

immediately following the 1960 election, the effect of the Socialist tax increases on the people of 

Saskatchewan. Let‟s start with the sales tax, Mr. Speaker. By raising it from 3 to 5 per cent, it gave the 

Province of Saskatchewan the highest sales tax in the Dominion of Canada. In one fell swoop, every 

man, woman and child had to pay more for Socialist inefficiency than anywhere else in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we just reduced in 1964 the sales tax from 5 to 4 per cent and with the increase, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s still among the lowest in the Dominion of Canada. Now let‟s look at the income tax. By 

raising it to 6 per cent it also gave the Province of Saskatchewan the highest personal income tax of any 

Province in Canada. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Good old Socialists. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — By this second blow, our people had to pay more out of their earnings than any 

other man or woman in Canada. Let‟s look at the corporation tax. By increasing it 1 per cent we were 

again paying the highest corporation tax in Canada, with the exception of Ontario. By this third blow, 

the business community in Saskatchewan was paying more than their counterparts in the rest of Canada. 

The Member for Regina Centre asked the Provincial Treasurer why he didn‟t raise taxes on the personal 

income or corporation taxes. Well, Mr. Speaker, the answer is obvious. The Socialists raised them so 

darn high that it is impossible for anyone else to tax them any more and still remain competitive in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — What is their record in regard to the gasoline tax? This is another sordid tale of 

persecution and staggering increases. What is their record? In 1945 an increase of 7 to 8 cents per 

gallon; 1947, 8 to 10 cents per gallon; 1953, 10 to 11 cents per gallon; 1957, increased from 11 to 12 

cents per gallon; 1961, from 12 to 14 cents per gallon. A total increase of 7 to 14 cents or 100 per cent. 

The revenue derived from this tax increased from $3,272,000 in 1943-44 to $29,672,000 in 1960-6l. 

This is the party, Mr. Speaker, that stands on its feet and cries shame for tax increases in 1968. The 

Socialists after the election in 1960 made us look like Sunday School teachers when it came to raising 

taxes. Their record is a living proof of their own deceit and hypocrisy. 

 

Let me turn to some other of their cheap and inconsistent arguments. They talk about Budget reduction, 

Mr. Speaker. The Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) in typical Socialist fashion attacked 

several civil servants as a method of cutting costs. Mr. Speaker, he got up in this House where they have 

not the opportunity to defend themselves and where he has immunity and named some of the most 

respected members in this province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The Socialist system. How ridiculous can it get. And it is especially ridiculous, Mr. 

Speaker, coming from him. He is a living example of how the Socialists brought in every 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

860 

doctrinaire Marxist, from all over the world to take jobs away from Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — He like others was attracted to the red flag and came from Nova Scotia to attempt 

or to accept a high civil service position. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney: (Regina Centre) — I was here before McIsaac, I‟ll tell you that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — The only difference is he wasn‟t brought in by the Socialists for a civil service job. 

Mr. Speaker, my only comment is what was Saskatchewan‟s loss was Nova Scotia‟s gain. 

 

Let‟s talk about the Highway budget. Let me look for a moment at the criticisms of the Socialists when 

it comes to the Highway budget. First, Mr. Speaker, is it no wonder they have a guilty conscience, when 

they were the Government they spent less per capita, less per vehicle, less per mile on highways than 

any other Government in the Dominion of Canada, including tiny Prince Edward Island. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when we as a Government have to attempt to catch up on 20 

years of‟ Socialist inactivity, they scream and resort to all kinds of cheap and false allegations. The 

Member for Regina Centre told the people of Saskatchewan that this Government was renting highway 

equipment to its friends. A falsehood, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) emphatically 

pointed out that no highway equipment is being rented. Then, Mr. Speaker, each Member opposite 

stands on his feet and requests a reduction in the spending estimates on highways. In the next breath, out 

of the other side of their face, they ask for more roads and more money to be spent on their individual 

constituencies. Like all Socialists, they promise the moon, deceive the people, and bribe the electorate. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the greatest hypocrisy comes in their election platform. Here they promised all-

weather roads to every farmer, oiled grid roads, more and better highways and now they ask for a 

reduced budget. How gullible do they think the people of Saskatchewan are? Is it any wonder the voters 

defeated them on October 11? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on utilization fees. We listened to the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd) stand on his feet today and cry for the sick, the down-trodden and the poor and so forth, the 

way we have ever since he has come into this House. Mr. Speaker, never in my experience in this House 

have I witnessed such an emotional barrage from the Socialists opposite. They have called utilization a 

tax on the sick, they have screamed in agony. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, did they call utilization fees in the 

Swift Current Health Region a tax on the sick when they were the Government? Do they call utilization 

fees in Alberta and British Columbia a tax on the sick? Do they call utilization fees in Australia and 

New Zealand a tax on the sick? Do they call utilization fees in Norway, Sweden 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

861 

and France a tax on the sick? And the most interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is that these are the Socialists 

in those countries. These Governments have been forced to charge utilization fees. These Governments 

had been forced to charge a utilization fee for one reason and one- reason alone, to protect health plans 

in their respective countries from becoming completely destroyed by rising costs. What is the situation 

here in Saskatchewan? Our two health plans next year will cost Saskatchewan $105 million, but the 

sobering fact, Mr. Speaker, is that by 1975 they will cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers over $200 million. 

We can all say, Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) did this afternoon that 

Saskatchewan can afford to look after its sick. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this may well be true, but can we also 

afford to look after education, the University, our senior citizens, our municipalities, if these costs 

continue to rise. Look at England. The health plan now is in a state of complete disintegration. Benefits 

are reduced, programs are eliminated and for one reason, the people of England cannot afford to sustain 

the ever-increasing rising costs. 

 

What is the problem in Saskatchewan? Here in Saskatchewan, we have the highest number of patient 

days in our hospitals of any province in Canada. Our patient days in Saskatchewan are 30 per cent above 

the national average. The Canadian average per 1,000 is 1,526. The Saskatchewan average per 1,000 is 

2,067. Our Medical Care Plan will cost $31.2 million this year. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the two 

plans have an increased cost to the Saskatchewan taxpayer this year of $16.8 million. The truth is that 

the people of Saskatchewan cannot afford to pay this increased cost year after year after year or it will 

strangle every other program we operate. Our responsibility is to maintain the services provided by these 

two programs. To attempt to do this, we must control the cost to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. Some 

method must be determined to level the upward spiral of increasing costs. And, Mr. Speaker, if we fail 

to find a solution to these rising costs, we may strangle every other program in Saskatchewan. We may 

also strangle progress and development of our resources because we don‟t have the revenue to direct to 

them. This, Mr. Speaker, is what the Government is attempting to do in charging utilization fees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ask the people of Saskatchewan to go into this with open minds. If it is successful, it 

may well protect health services in the years ahead. If it fails to do the task, we will look elsewhere. I 

also ask the people of Saskatchewan to remember that the total cost of these utilization fees is a small 

portion of the total cost of medicare and hospitalization. It will have cost approximately $7 per capita 

average. The daily cost is $2.50 and after 30 days, a $1.50 in the hospitals, which is little more than they 

would have to pay for their own room and board in their own homes. We recognize that this is a difficult 

decision, and a difficult decision it must be. We are convinced that it will not cause undue hardship to 

any individual and could well be the salvation in the years ahead of our health programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, talking about health, I also want to talk a little bit more about this business of raising taxes 

before and after an election. Mr. Speaker, the Socialists were professionals and particularly when it 

came to the health and medicare tax. Let‟s just take a look. As soon as the election in 1952 was over, 

they raised it from $15 to $40, from $10 to $30. In 1959, just before the election, Mr. Speaker, they 

reduced it to $17.50 and $35. Immediately after the election, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

862 

they raised it from $36 and $72. Then, Mr. Speaker, in 1964 again, just before the election, they reduced 

it again to $26 and $52. This kind of deceit and hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, will not come from this side of 

the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to carry on and say a few more words, but I know that there 

are many other speakers who wish to speak. I would presume, Mr. Speaker, from the comments that I 

have made, I will not support the amendment and I will support the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla: (Canora) — Mr. Speaker, last Friday, March 1, known as Black Friday in our 

records, the Liberal Government, who so convincingly promised a New Saskatchewan, shocked the 

Legislature and the people of the Province of Saskatchewan when the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

presented his Budget. A black curtain was drawn shutting off the so-called New Saskatchewan and 

revealed a Saskatchewan with an old look of some 30 years ago, portraying a dim future, Mr. Speaker, a 

Saskatchewan reminding us of the old Liberal days when times were tough. Even the Liberal 

backbenchers expressed shock. Apparently, they knew very little of what was in the Budget. It was kept 

a military secret. 

 

The Government Members are finding themselves in a most difficult and uncomfortable position trying 

to defend the Budget and the tax increases. In listening to their debate, Mr. Speaker, one would think 

that the House is still replying to the Throne Speech. They are deliberately avoiding the Budget! Instead 

they continue to repeat the same old line of condemning Socialism and giving themselves credit for what 

the CCF Government accomplished for Saskatchewan when in office. In their own conscience, if they 

have one, Mr. Speaker, they are guilty of misrepresentation and shame. Their heads hang low when the 

Opposition Members speak, reminding the Government of how they betrayed the people of 

Saskatchewan. This applies to the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) who spoke just before me. In 

his remarks he swam in a lake of half truths. He didn‟t say that the 1961 increases in the sales tax, 

income tax and corporation tax were for the purpose of financing the Medical Care Plan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — . . . a program that the Hon. Members to the right fought tooth and nail with their 

Leader (Mr. Thatcher) kicking the door of the Legislature. The Minister lacks the decency and the guts 

to say that these taxes relieve the people of paying some of the money for these services. 

 

I would like to remind this House and the people of Saskatchewan of the financial position, as it was in 

1964 when the present Liberal Government took office. The former CCF Government in its 20 years of 

office, Mr. Speaker, developed Saskatchewan from a have-not province to a have province. 

Saskatchewan was recognized as a leader in many progressive programs, particularly in the field of 

health and welfare and insurance. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

863 

The former CCF Government brought the Province to a strong financial position leaving a surplus of 

about $33 million. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, there were surpluses set up in three special funds. The Medical Insurance Fund 

had a surplus of $10 million; the Student Aid Fund had a surplus of $5 million and the Public 

Administration Fund had a surplus of $1 million. 

 

To carry out the purpose of building the image of the Liberal party during the first term of office, the 

Premier dipped his sticky fingers into these surpluses to transfer funds into the General Treasury for 

easy use. His first attack was at the Student Aid Fund where he netted $2 million. The Public 

Administration Fund was held up for $1 million. This wasn‟t enough, so he placed his wicked eye on the 

attractive Medical Care Insurance Fund. There he got away with $5.5 million. The Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation was hit for $3 million. 

 

This wasn‟t all, Sir, the Premier and his planners applied the magic tax shift. Some taxes were reduced, 

others increased, and new ones created, all this in an attempt to confuse and brainwash the 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

With the Treasury box now filled with extra funds, the Premier and his Government went into 

extravagant spending for their political advantage. Concessions were given to industries and large 

contractors. There is a suspicion that they will in return provide juicy funds for the Liberal political 

machine. 

 

Things were going along fine just for the first couple of years while the surpluses held out. The financial 

picture has become shadowed and dark. The Premier saw the writing on the wall. It said, “If an early 

election is not held, the Liberal party in Saskatchewan will be doomed.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — What I want to impress, Mr. Speaker, is that the present financial crisis did not come 

upon Saskatchewan suddenly, it was here about a year or so ago after the Liberals took office. 

 

The situation could have been kept to the minimum if it was handled carefully and with honest 

administrative practices. There is virtually no reason why there should be austerity at a time of 

prosperity. This austerity was created by Thatcher and his Liberal Government and no one else. The 

present Administration is incompetent and irresponsible. Its only objective is political power and not 

meeting the needs of the people. 

 

The Liberal Government was elected in 1964 on the promise to reduce taxes. It has completely ignored 

the trust of the people. During the past three and one-half years, Sir, we experienced both, some tax 

reductions and some tax increases. The result, as many of you know, was a net increase. On October 11, 

the people of the province re-elected the Thatcher Liberal Government with the hope that there would be 

further tax reductions. They fell for the belief that all is well in Saskatchewan and there actually was the 

so-called economic boom through industrial development. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan have been fooled and betrayed. A couple of days after the election the 

people began seeing that 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

864 

New Saskatchewan but not as promised, but as one in a grim financial condition as if a tragedy had 

occurred. Daddy Thatcher started to cry with guilty tears, pleading to every sector of the economy to 

hold on and help in the recovery of the victimized Saskatchewan, yes, Mr. Speaker, a victim of an 

irresponsible Government and the parasitic corporate enterprise. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan will remember this Government when they go to the polls next. They will 

not forget the deceitfulness and betrayal of the Government. 

 

The Budget brought down, Sir, is documentary evidence that the present Liberal Government is 

deceitful and dishonest. There was strong belief among our Liberal friends that the revenues of the 

Province from industrial development were rapidly increasing, and hence would lead to the promised tax 

reductions and added services. But, after October 11, the Government made an about-turn and almost 

immediately announced that our Province was in financial trouble, and strongly indicated that there 

would have to be a curtailment of services and increase in taxes. 

 

Now let us take a look at the Budget, Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at the tax increases that are facing 

the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the first and most vicious and cruellest of all the tax increases, Mr. Speaker, is the deterrent fees 

for hospital and medical services. 

 

Prior to October 11, we in the New Democratic party warned the voting public about this tax. We 

expressed our concern on the imposition of this tax as a step towards the erosion of the Hospital and 

Medical Plan to the point of giving it up to the private insurance companies, who are standing by 

waiting to take over the field and make a good thing out of it for themselves. We expressed concern that 

the imposition of this tax would be against the principle upon which the plan was originally established, 

that is, to provide a measure for equality of opportunity to all citizens of Saskatchewan in the field of 

health. We believe that every citizen in Saskatchewan should be entitled to health and medical services, 

and such services should be available within easy financial reach. 

 

The introduction of deterrent fees or utilization fees. as the Government calls them, is obviously 

contrary to the principle of the plan. It is a tax imposed on the sick, and those least able to pay. People, 

in the minds and hearts of the Liberal Government, are the least concern. It is dollars they are interested 

in. How fairly they extract the dollars from our resources is of little importance. This tax on the sick is 

the most degenerating and inhuman tax on the people of Saskatchewan. It will hit the unfortunate who 

find themselves in a position over which they have no control, the weak and the sick, the young and the 

old, the unemployed and the poor. In other words, the new tax will affect the greatest number of our 

population, the population that is least able to pay. 

 

Let us examine this tax on the sick that the Government is imposing on the people of this province. First 

the hospital services. Now what could deterrent fees mean on the basis of the average length of time a 

patient spends in the hospital. In 1966 the average days of stay was 9.5 days in accordance with the 

Annual Report on Public Health. Taking 9.5 days at $2.50 per day would mean an extra $23.75 over and 

above the annual 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

865 

premium. Secondly, the medical services. In 1966, the average number of visits per beneficiary were 4.3 

This at a $1.50 per visit would amount to $6.45 over and above the annual premium. Let us now add up 

the average costs. A sum of $24 for hospital premium; $23.75 new tax, the deterrent fee; $12 for 

medical premium; $6.45 new tax, the deterrent fee, a total of $66.20 per person. Or, in other words, the 

deterrent fees will increase the hospital and medical tax by an average of $30.20 to those using the 

services. 

 

I would like to repeat, Mr. speaker, the $30.20 per person is an average at 9.5 days in the hospital and 

4.3 visits to the doctor‟s office. But to those who are sick, in many cases the length of stay may be a 

month or more, and it may mean perhaps about a dozen calls to the doctor‟s office. It is in these cases 

that the extra cost for deterrent fees may easily get as high as $100 and over. And let us not forget, Mr. 

Speaker, that it is in these cases that the earning power of the unfortunate person stops. In other words, 

he is hit twice, first, by deterrent fees for visiting the doctor and being admitted into the hospital; 

secondly, by not being able to work and earn his wages to help pay for the extra health costs. 

 

This tax is truly a tax on the sick. It is a tax that will be paid mainly by people least able to pay. Statistics 

show that it is people in the lower income bracket that use the medical and hospital services most. These 

are senior citizens and the young boys and girls. 

 

It is a tax that may keep people. from visiting the doctor and from being admitted to the hospital. If it 

does this, then, Mr. Speaker, the Health Plan of today has been ruined, and it will no longer be in 

keeping with the principle of health being a right; it will become a privilege. It is very sad that the health 

of a nation should become a privilege, and as such become available to the few fortunate only. 

 

This tax is discriminatory and unfair; it is vicious and cruel. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

will remember this tax. At the next election they will make their votes count to sweep out the untrusted 

and dishonest Liberal Government and re-elect a New Democratic Government to again responsibly 

conduct the affairs of our Province. 

 

The second major tax increase imposed upon the citizens of Saskatchewan is the l per cent increase in 

the education and health tax, from 4 per cent to 5 per cent. I agree that this is a fairer tax with which to 

obtain revenues for services. Nevertheless, it is a tax by a Government that has promised to reduce taxes. 

 

This tax, Mr. Speaker, will affect all the citizens of Saskatchewan from the youngest to the oldest. Its 

effect will be greater than ever since the tax base has been extended to cover motel and motel rooms as 

well as commercial cabins and cottages. It is the first time that Saskatchewan will have a sales tax on 

meals, telephone calls and telegrams. Calculations indicate, Sir, that the sales tax increase will amount to 

about $12.77 for every man, woman and child. 

 

Another major tax increase that will greatly affect the people of the Province of Saskatchewan is the 2 

cents per gallon tax. This is already in effect. On April 1, the two cents per gallon tax will be extended to 

all fuel petroleum products except heating 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

866 

fuel. I might say, Sir, that this day was a good choice made by the Provincial Treasurer, April Fool‟s 

Day, and didn‟t he fool the people of Saskatchewan? What a betrayal and what a sham! 

 

The tax will apply to all farm fuels, including purple gas. This tax, Mr. Speaker, will greatly affect the 

farmer, since the tax applies to all fuels used in the car, truck, tractor, combine and other farm 

machinery. What does this tax mean in terms of dollars and cents to the farmer? This tax, Sir, will only 

add to the high cost of farm operations and increase the grip of the cost-price squeeze that the farmer 

finds himself in today. It is very obvious that the present Liberal Government has failed to adequately 

deal with the problem of the farmer. It is obvious that agriculture is not receiving priority with the 

present Government. The Government failed to recognize agriculture as our primary industry. It would 

rather grant concessions to large corporations. What will the gas tax mean to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan? This tax will mean a tax increase of $8.29 for every man, woman and child. 

 

The farmers and the people of Saskatchewan will remember this attitude by the present Government. 

They will remember that the Liberal Government is not the friend of the farmer nor is it a friend of the 

people of Saskatchewan. The voters of Saskatchewan will give this Government an unquestionable 

answer four years from now. 

 

Another tax, Mr. Speaker, that will affect the majority of the people in this province is the increase in 

fees for operator‟s licences, vehicle registrations, school buses, and farm trucks. You will note that it 

covers nearly everything on wheels. The farmers are included here and again under attack. How will this 

tax affect the people of Saskatchewan? The vehicle registrations for cars and school buses were 

increased from 30 to 40 per cent. Farm truck registrations, Sir, increased by about 40 per cent. 

 

To those people who enjoy the use of tobacco, cigarettes and cigars, the Thatcher Liberal Government 

has already invaded this tax field. While you puff your cigarette or cigar you are contributing to the 

Government an additional 3 cents per package of cigarettes and from 1 cent to 10 cents per cigar, 

depending on the price of the cigar, and an additional 1 cent for each half ounce of tobacco products. 

The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will remember that they cannot trust the Liberal Government 

to run the affairs of this Province. 

 

In addition to the already mentioned taxes, the Government increased two more taxes of lesser 

importance. However, they will add over $l 1/2 million to the Treasury. The Government increased the 

pari-mutuel or horse racing tax by 100 per cent. The 2 per cent insurance premium tax exemptions of the 

Automobile Accident Insurance Fund will be removed. 

 

The Provincial Treasurer, Mr. Speaker, estimates that the tax increases should yield $32,360,000. After 

making a careful examination and calculation of the figures, I am convinced, Sir, that the Estimates have 

deliberately been kept low in order to show the public that all the-taxes are necessary to balance the 

Budget. 

 

My revised Estimates indicate the tax increases to yield $38,060,000, a difference of $5,700,000 more. 

Now using the revised tax increase figures, Sir, it would mean that every man, 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

867 

woman and child will now pay more taxes in the amount of $39.69. Now if we take a family of five, it 

would mean five times $39.69 or $198.55 more Provincial taxes to be paid in 1968. 

 

The tricky Liberal Government‟s plan, Mr, Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Would the non, Member permit a question. I just wonder on what he based his 

calculation of the tax base, I wonder if he could give me his base . . . 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst: (Wadena) — Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member wishes to permit a question he 

would take his seat and he doesn‟t indicate . . . 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — The tricky Liberal Government plan, Mr. Speaker, is to tax the people higher than 

necessary, build a surplus and then just before the next election come up with a bag of goodies as a 

hand-out to bribe the voters of Saskatchewan. It has used these tactics before and it will try to do it 

again, but the people of Saskatchewan will not again be tricked by their own money. Mr. Speaker, more 

and more people of Saskatchewan are losing faith in this Liberal Government. 

 

The Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey), Sir, yesterday spoke very freely and proudly about 

the success of the grid road program with the hope of garnering credit for the program, I am sorry that 

he is not in his seat here this afternoon. May I remind the Hon. Minister that the credit for the institution 

of this program wholly belongs to the former CCF Government. 

 

The Liberals in Opposition at that time cried that the plan will not work, and the municipalities cannot 

afford it. They opposed it strenuously. And now they are patting themselves on the back looking for 

credit. Now let‟s be honest and give credit where it is due. 

 

In keeping with what I have just stated, Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the Government for the 

increase of equalization grant and making it unconditional, for initiating the payment of maintenance 

and snow removal grants. These grants are being well accepted by the municipalities, but might I 

suggest, Sir, that the Government review the structure of these grants periodically to ensure their 

effectiveness in view of the rapidly rising costs of operation. 

 

The Hon. Minister stated, Sir, that it is expected there will not be any reduction in grid road and farm 

access construction mileage. This Mr. Speaker, I cannot comprehend. There must be something wrong 

with the communication between the Minister and the Municipal Road Assistance Authority. Let me 

review this with the Hon. Minister. Originally municipalities were allowed annual grid construction 

mileage based on 10 per cent of the total grid mileage. With the advent of the present Liberal 

Government this allotment has been reduced to 9 per cent. Now for 1968, I note that the annual 

construction mileage is again reduced, but this time very drastically by 33 to 40 per cent, and yet the 

Hon. Minister yesterday wholly stated that he expects n? reduction in mileage. 

 

Now, what does this mean? It means at least two things; (a) it means that there will be a cut-back in the 

municipal grid road program and of course less grants will be paid; (b) it 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

868 

means that the Government‟s estimates in the Budget have been overestimated, likely for the deliberate 

purpose of creating a surplus in the account to be used three years hence. 

 

A resolution passed by the 1967 SARM Convention, Mr. Speaker, urged that the Government 

immediately consider increasing the unit grid road construction price for work done by municipal 

equipment, and that the price be reviewed annually. This, in my opinion, Sir, was a reasonable request. 

It certainly was one area that required revision. The present 19 cents per cubic yard has been in effect for 

about 10 years. The Government, however, refused to make any adjustment here. The argument used, 

Sir, is that since the average contract price during the past year submitted by private contractors was 

about 21 cents per cubic yard, the price of 19 cents to the municipality is adequate and sufficient. 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk: (Redberry) — What about highways, Dave? 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — In other words, the Government has taken the attitude that it is alright for private 

contractors to do work at 21 cents per cubic yard and higher and the Government will not object to the 

payment of the grant, but in the case of the municipality, the basis of 19 cents per cubic yard is the limit, 

unless they place themselves competitively against the private contractor, and bid on their own job. I 

ask, Sir, is the Government losing trust and faith in the municipality and the municipal council by asking 

that they place themselves on an auction bidding block? Or is it that the Government is directing its aim 

to force municipalities out of construction equipment in order to give the private contractors a free hand 

in their bidding? 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk: — Ah, that‟s it! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — There is danger, Mr. Speaker, that with the disposition of municipally owned 

construction equipment, as it was the case with the Department of Highways, there will be no control of 

price. You can expect, Sir, that the contract-bid prices for road construction will automatically rise. And 

this, Mr. Speaker, may I remind the Hon. Members to your right is another reason why our taxes are 

rising. 

 

Before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal with another area of municipal administration, that 

of municipal assessment.· The Hon. Member of Municipal Affairs. (Mr. Estey) yesterday stated that the 

Municipal Assessment Branch has had a difficult time coping with the work or re-assessment due to lack 

of staff. I ask, Sir, when did this shortage come about? Was it created when the present Liberal 

Government took office? Was it due to the freeze on hiring civil servants, and was it due to the 

discriminatory practices by the Government to force resignation or dismiss members of the staff? These 

questions, Sir, if answered honestly may provide the reason for the staff shortage. 

 

The municipality of which I am the secretary-treasurer asked for a re-assessment in 1966 for use in 

1967. We were informed that arrangements would be made to fulfil the request. Nothing was done in 

1966, nor in 1967, nor will be in 1968 and maybe in 1969 or 1970. It is very obvious, Mr. Speaker, that 

this Branch of the Department of Municipal Affairs has been lax 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

869 

in its responsibilities. The Assessment Branch is not adequately performing its function of carrying out 

reassessment when required. There has been undue delay and carelessness in making re-inspections 

when requested. Might I suggest, Sir, that the Government spend less time and money creating new and 

unnecessary jobs for defeated Cabinet Ministers, and put forth more worthwhile effort in filling 

positions important to the responsible and efficient functions of a Provincial Government. Mr. Speaker, 

through you, Sir, I urge the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs and the Government to take urgent 

positive steps in employing adequate staff in the Assessment Branch in order that, when requested by 

municipalities, re-assessments are conducted without unreasonable delay. I am sure, that the Minister is 

aware that equitable assessment and taxation is very important, if our municipal governments are to 

remain strong and to maintain the confidence of the local people. 

 

My remarks this afternoon directed towards the Department of Municipal Affairs, Mr. Speaker, are not 

all thorny; there are some roses too. Through you Sir, I would like to commend the Hon. Minister for 

taking steps in streamlining the work of handling assessment rolls in municipal offices, through the use 

of the computer. I firmly believe, Sir, that this is a stride forward in modernizing municipal 

bookkeeping. I am sure that this will be welcomed by both the secretary-treasurers and the councils. 

May I take this occasion, Sir, to ask the Minister to include my municipal office in this project. 

 

I tried, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks this afternoon to point out to this House and the people of 

Saskatchewan the inequities of the current Budget, and the inadequacies of some Government policies 

related to municipal administration. 

 

The Budget being an outright betrayal of the people of Saskatchewan, I will not support the main 

motion, but I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac: (Minister of Education) — Before I deal with the Estimates insofar as they relate 

to my Department, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to make a few comments about by constituency. Most members 

I think have a habit of extolling the virtues of their home constituency, which is certainly as it should 

because after all I think we all rightfully do feel that each of us has the best constituency in the Province. 

 

Now the Wilkie constituency contains two major towns, the towns of Unity and Wilkie, and there are 

certainly a number of other good towns as well, Luseland, Macklin, Landis and Scott to mention a few 

of them. Since this Government has taken office, Mr. Speaker, most of these points are now enjoying 

services that were not available to them under the former Government. All of these centres for example, 

except Wilkie, which has Highway 29 going through the main street; have taken advantage of the paving 

and oiling programs for their main streets and approaches. The towns of Macklin, Luseland, Salvador 

and Denzil will be receiving natural gas service within a year or so under the new policies of the SPC 

that were initiated by this Government. Scott and Landis already enjoy natural gas. Tramping Lake, 

Primate and Salvador are this year enjoying water 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

870 

systems under and expanded policies adopted since we have taken office. The town of Scott has a 

connecting road to Highway 14 under a new policy brought in by the Municipal Road Assistance 

Authority, policies, Mr. Speaker, which certainly give service to people a top priority. 

 

I am pleased to see the level of spending on the Water Assistance Programs increased in this Budget this 

year, so that before too long all of the communities in the province desiring water and sewer programs 

will have the opportunity to have them. I was surprised at the Leader of the Opposition‟s (Mr. Lloyd) 

remarks last evening that some of his communities have apparently not yet heard of this program or 

been able to partake of them. I hope that with time to come and continued funds in this program, that 

they will be able to do so. 

 

My constituency, Mr. Speaker, is on the whole a mixed farming area, with good quality grain land, 

mixed in with cattle country and good grazing land. Last year in that general area we were particularly 

fortunate, I think, with crop yields on the average well above that of the provincial level. My 

constituents up there have many ethnic backgrounds. I think primarily we could say that, south of 

Highway 14 which runs through the centre of the seat, they are primarily of German origin and of 

British origin to the north of that road. In the election of last fall, they again saw fit to support me with a 

good majority, for which I want to express my very sincere thanks. 

 

I made them only one promise in 1964 and again in 1967, which I intend to carry out, namely to do 

whatever I could at any time to help any of the people in that constituency. 

 

The local NDP organization, in the course of last fall‟s election Mr. Speaker, did put on a very strong 

campaign and I must say generally speaking, a clean campaign as ·far as that goes. They made the odd 

mistake, however, and one certainly was bringing in the Member from The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) to 

speak at a meeting they held in the town of Wilkie. 

 

Hon. A.R. GUY: (Athabasca) — He‟s a mistake anytime! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Now some of my friends went to hear the auctioneer from The Battlefords, I am sorry 

he is not here, the saviour of the mentally ill, and the sage of the north-west. Up to that time some of my 

good supporters in that area were not too deeply concerned about the election. But certainly that was all 

it took in that particular area. After hearing this auctioneer, garbage salesman from Battleford spout his 

wares, they really went to work and I had no more problems in that area. Well, I want him to know that 

I‟ll be glad to have him back any time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was dismayed by some of the remarks made by the Hon, Member from The Battlefords in his debate. 

He said, or implied at least, that he didn‟t want the highway work that was carried on by this 

Government in modernizing the highway network in and around the city of North Battleford and 

Battleford. I want him to know that I‟m proud of the work that this Government has done in and around 

the city of North Battleford. Many of the people of my constituency travel to North Battleford regularly. 

As far as we are concerned, North Battleford is the regional centre of that area. We are happy to see 

Highway 29 being rebuilt to a decent standard, and the contract for this incidentally, Mr. Speaker, as I 

recall was awarded for something like 18 cents a 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

871 

yard, one of the lowest last year so that I want to urge the Minister of Highways to complete the 

construction and the dust-proofing of that road just as rapidly as he can, because certainly I want to see 

North Battleford and that whole northwest area develop along with the rest of the province, Mr. Speaker, 

even if their own Member doesn‟t. 

 

I want to congratulate the Member from Prince Albert West the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) on 

his Budget. It is a responsible Budget, a courageous Budget, and one certainly that reflects and 

recognizes the economic facts of life in this province. Facts, incidentally which up to now our friends 

opposite have shown no real sign of recognizing. In this regard, I think the remarks of the Member from 

Regina South East (Mr. Baker) are fairly typical of what, we‟ve heard from Members opposite. He 

decried the tax increases in the first case, and he criticized the implementation of co-insurance fees on 

our Medicare and Hospitalization Plans, a move, which Mr. Speaker, is intended primarily to ensure the 

future long term financial stability of those two schemes, which Saskatchewan people enjoy. And in the 

same breath, he asks for free denticare and free grants for roads and streets, to mention only a couple of 

his eleven-point program. 

 

This Budget, Mr. Speaker, calls for a total net expenditure in the field of education of almost $112 

million, $111.9 to be exact. This figure represents an increase over last year of $19.1 million and it‟s 

also a new high for this Province. Operating grants for schools, thinking here of the general formula 

grant for units and cities, and the non-formula for the independent system, are increased from $50.2 

million to $53.4 million which is an increase of something over $3 million and slightly over 6 per cent. I 

want to point out also, Mr. Speaker, that our enrolment in the elementary and secondary school systems 

has levelled off with enrolment next fall expected to be very slightly above the present enrolment in our 

school system. 

 

The Opposition critic (Mr. Blakeney) in his reply to the Budget Speech pointed out that this year‟s 

Budget could well result in higher local mill rates and he said that this was obviously part of this 

Government‟s scheme to undermine the public view of education. He went on to another chapter in his 

speech, as I recall, to point out that he anticipated a poorer and poorer educational system emerging in 

the future. Now, Mr. Speaker, 1 don‟t think that such comments are worthy of any Member of this 

Legislature, even one of those Members opposite. And surely they will be considered repugnant by all 

responsible Members on both sides. And I particularly resent the implication that any Members would 

set out to undermine education or work towards lowering standards. 

 

The total Provincial grant for operating and building this year, exclusive of the comprehensive schools, 

is $248 per pupil, estimated. Last year it was $237 per pupil, again an estimate. In 1963-64 the last year 

of the Government of my friends opposite, it was $166 per pupil. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House are satisfied that we are making all possible effort to 

support and improve education in the light of the many other legitimate demands on the Treasury, and in 

the light of our total available Provincial resources, and consistent with the economic well-being of this 

Province. We would like to be able to progress more rapidly in the broad area of education, because 

there is seemingly no 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

872 

limit to the broad general demands in this overall field of education. But this Government, as well as any 

other, whether it is local or provincial is forced to view education in the framework of economics. Mind 

you we are just as well aware of the aspects other than economics, the cultural development for the 

individual and for society as a whole and for learning how to solve our non-economic problems of 

working and living together. I made reference in the Throne debate to legislative plans which will permit 

greater use of French language in some of our schools of the province. 

 

The Department is also working with Federal Indian Affairs officials with a view to greater Provincial 

involvement in the education of Saskatchewan Indians. Legislation to facilitate such a development will 

be introduced during this session. These are only two illustrations. 

 

There are two angles from which any Government must look at the economics of education: first of all, 

the actual financial burden imposed on the economy by spending in education; and secondly, the 

financial and economic return which society will obtain from a more highly educated group of people 

and a more highly productive work force. And certainly the Economic Council of Canada, and most 

economists in fact, recognize education as one of the major contributors to the economic growth that has 

been experienced on this continent. In other words when education spending is viewed from the 

standpoint of an investment, it is a sound investment. Mind you, there are obvious limits as to how far 

one can argue in this direction, because it can also be argued that a high level of economic development 

results in higher levels of education. But this Government this year will be devoting almost one third of 

every Provincial tax dollar spent to the field of education, 32.8 per cent of our Budget, when one adds in 

the capital expenditure that‟s under the Department of Public Works. 

 

In the last year of office of Members opposite their budgeted educational expenditures were only 26.5 

per cent of their overall Provincial Budget, 26.5 as compared to 32.8. Their total expenditure in that year 

was $49.7 million. 

 

This year, I would remind you again that we are proposing to spend almost $112 million, more than 

double the tax dollars available for education under this Budget than was available four years ago. 

 

Is it any wonder when you look at these figures that I have been quoting that we have asked everyone 

directly involved in education to take a close look at the cost involved? The Provincial Treasurer in his 

Budget address dealt with some of the obvious reasons for such a scrutiny, basically I suppose the chief 

reason being the increasing millions of tax dollars that are being invested in education. Yes, we have 

asked school boards, teachers and the University to do the best they could to hold the line on costs, 

because, Mr. Speaker, I am sure every Member here is well aware that it does not necessarily follow that 

the quality of education improves just because more tax dollars are being spent. 

 

I listened to the remarks of my Hon. Friend from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) a few nights ago on this 

debate, as he gave what I thought perhaps was one of the better speeches from Members opposite, but I 

was amazed to hear him criticize this Government for lack of action on driver-training programs. A 

driver 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

873 

education program was introduced rather as an integrated part of the high school curriculum in the fall 

of 1967. A Canadian first, so I am told, Mr. Speaker, which has had nothing short of a tremendous 

reception. Now the Provincial Government support of this program consists of costs of administration 

with a supervisor having been hired something over a year ago, underwriting the costs of training the 

driver instructors necessary, with a $100 bursary being given to each instructor who successfully 

completes the course, and a grant of $25 per pupil to the school board for each student enrolled in a 

driver education program. As of last month, 131 instructors have been trained. One year ago, it was 

estimated that this year we would be giving training through this program to about 6,000 students. 

Recent figures given to me by the Department staff indicate that it will be closer to 9,000 students before 

this year is over. At this rate, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious next year‟s cost of this program will exceed a 

quarter of a million dollars, a program initiated by this Government as one means we hope of achieving 

greater highway safety. Yet my Hon. Friend from Kinistino criticized us for lack of action in this 

specific field. 

 

Now in 1966 a band incentive program was initiated by this Government. Funds are provided in this 

year‟s Budget for the continuing support of this program. 36 school bands have been formed in the 

province since the inception of this policy, the value of which certainly far exceeds the dollar costs 

involved. 

 

Another new program introduced by this Government, Mr. Speaker, will again be extended this year. 

This is the Liberal policy of free texts to high school students. This Budget we have before us will 

enable that plan to include grade XI texts in the fall of 1968. 

 

Two years ago the Department of Education implemented a School Work Training Program, in co-

operation with the Saskatchewan Association for Retarded Children. This program certainly has served 

to fill a need to help, particularly, those students who are unable to take full advantage of the regular 

school program. In the fall of 1967, the Department took over the responsibility of this program and 

appointed a Supervisor of Special Education to assure its continued development. 27 different schools, 

with a total of some 160 students have so far been included. The Estimates before us again provide for 

the continued support and expansion of this worthwhile program. 

 

Another somewhat similar program has been the training for the disabled and handicapped. Two years 

ago, 79 persons completed courses in a domestic service program and occupational service. This year‟s 

Estimates, I am pleased to point out, Mr. Speaker, provide for over $3/4 million for the training of 

disabled and handicapped people, some of whom were formerly involved under the old Program Five of 

Manpower. This is shareable on a 50-50 basis with the Federal Government under an agreement with the 

Department of Welfare. Tuition fees, living allowances and transportation costs of almost 500 students 

will be provided-under this vote. I am sure that Members on both sides of the House will be pleased to 

hear of the continued development and expansion of these various, programs. 

 

This Budget also provides for the completion of the extension to the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Arts and Sciences at Saskatoon. As well as the new facilities to accommodate a total of 500 diploma 

nurses this next fall, a number of other courses will be made available along with the expansion 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

874 

of a number of existing ones. Now completion of this facility, Mr. Speaker, marks one more step 

towards picking up the backlog of the lack of such facilities that existed when this Government took 

office. The Institute of Saskatoon, at Saskatoon, is now functioning on a l2-month basis in order that it 

may turn out a greater number of skilled technicians and tradesmen to meet today‟s demands. At present 

a number of evening school programs are also being offered to better utilize these facilities. 

 

I would like to turn for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to the question of comprehensive schools. This 

Budget provides for $12.5 million for construction grants to various comprehensive schools. While $7.5 

million of this will be recoverable from Ottawa, the fact is that $5 million will be from Provincial tax 

sources. In this respect, this represents an increase of $2 million in the Provincial share over last year. 

 

Schools in Lloydminster, two collegiates in Saskatoon, as well as the vocational agricultural and 

commercial extensions to schools at Kindersley and Moosomin will be ready for classes in September of 

this year. Construction at Swift Current, of course, will be carried on. This will be provided for. Schools 

at North Battleford, Estevan, Prince Albert and an extension at Campbell collegiate in Regina have 

received full approval from the Department, and all indications point to construction beginning this year. 

 

I should like to make a comment or two, Mr. Speaker, on the costs of these facilities, and the scrutiny 

which is given to the construction plans by the Department for the various facilities. Plans for these 

facilities have been and do receive very careful scrutiny by the Department. All of these projects 

certainly are expensive and costly facilities, and for the areas involved I suggest they would probably 

represent a one-in-a-lifetime investment. I have not personally seen all of the buildings or all of the 

plans, however, I do have some comparative cost figures with similar facilities that are built in our 

neighboring provinces, which I am sure the Members might like to hear. Square-foot costs for such 

facilities in this province work out to date, Mr: Speaker, to an average of $16.50 per square foot. The 

Province of Manitoba, according to my information, is running around $20 per square foot cost of 

construction. In the Province of Alberta such facilities I am told have cost in the neighborhood of $28 

per square foot. Another yardstick I suppose would be the capital cost per student enrolled in these 

various facilities. To date, the cost per student place in these buildings in Saskatchewan runs from 

$2,600 to $3,000. In Manitoba $4,000 roughly, or so I am informed, and in Alberta $4,800. Now this 

does not mean, of course, that adequate facilities could not have been built here in this province for less 

money per student. Our economies I am told are attributable mainly to better efficiency in making use of 

the space, but it certainly has not been done at the expense of quality construction or of facilities 

provided. I suggest to Members that there is no doubt that school facilities being built today are a good 

deal more expensive, or more elaborate if you will, than those attended by almost anyone of us in this 

House, no matter where he may have gone to school. Personally, I believe that school boards and the 

Department and the public at large must ensure that such facilities are utilized to the fullest extent 

possible. In this way, we can be assured of receiving full value for the tax dollar invested in facilities. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

875 

The question of operating costs of these comprehensive schools is also receiving study. Not only, Mr. 

Speaker, are we investing in more extensive facilities for school buildings, I suggest to you that the same 

is certainly true of other public facilities, for example, the Department of Highway spending. Now a 

project such as the freeway being constructed through the city of Swift Current, while a good, sound 

investment and a move to ensure greater highway traffic safety, is a far-cry I suggest from the type of 

facility that may have been built by the Highway Department some years ago. I want to suggest that 

there may be a number of people who would consider such a project at Swift Current perhaps more of a 

frill than a comprehensive school also being built in that city. 

 

I want to assure all Members and my Hon. Friend from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) that the school boards and 

the Department will continue to do everything possible to ensure that public funds are being spent to 

maximum advantage in the construction of new school facilities. Perhaps I should make it clear that I am 

also satisfied that we are getting full value for our highway tax dollar in this province. 

 

I mentioned that the cost of operating costs of these schools is one that I feel we have not yet given 

adequate consideration to. We realize that these schools must be staffed with the qualified specialized 

teachers required. In this respect, special grants were made available last year to the school boards to 

provide assistance to persons undertaking specialized teacher training required to teach the classes in 

those schools, such courses as guidance counselling, vocational, technical, and school librarians. We 

intend to continue this program of assistance for this year also. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I have 

asked the Advisory Committee of Dr. Gathercole and Mr. Nicks to examine other aspects of the 

comprehensive schools: greater use of this equipment which is being placed in these schools; and as I 

mentioned, greater use of the specialized staff that are being trained and hired for these schools; and the 

point raised by the Hon. Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) last night, involving the question of servicing 

the rural areas within a reasonable proximity of our cities and major points. In brief, Mr. Speaker, we 

have asked our school boards to take a good hard look at their building programs, at their transportation 

costs and at their teacher-pupil ratio in an effort to hold the line on instructional costs. I make no 

apology whatever for the fact we have asked for a closer examination of all educational spending. We 

suggest that we not only have every right to scrutinize these dollars, but certainly it is our responsibility 

to do so. Not only are millions of dollars going toward education today, but we know that in years to 

come we must continue to devote more tax dollars and a greater share of our tax dollar to education. Mr. 

Speaker, despite the irresponsible lessons in economics we have heard from Members opposite in the 

course of this debate, this Government realizes that we must first collect those taxes in order to provide 

these services. Therefore, I will be supporting the motion of the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and 

not the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky: (Prince Albert East-Cumberland) — Mr. Speaker, before I proceed with the 

discussion of the Budget I should like to say a few words about this and that. I would like to point out to 

the Hon. Member for Last 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

876 

Mountain (Mr. MacLennan), who criticized the Member for Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) concerning a 

recent appointment to the Senate, actually Senator Sparrow. He was, of course, a prominent Liberal and 

a good man and I personally have nothing against his appointment. It is certainly up to the Liberal party 

to decide who they want. But the Member for Redberry certainly was justified in making the 

presentation he did; in fact he didn‟t do it on his own, he did it on behalf of a great number of Liberals 

who are very much upset. So for the benefit of the Hon. Member who criticized the Member for 

Redberry, may I say that I too must make reference to this appointment from the same point of view. I 

say so not because I am so much concerned, but only to point out that the behavior of the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, in making the recommendation for someone who should have replaced Senator 

Hnatyshyn was bad politics for the Liberal party. The people who are now bitterly complaining, of 

course, are the old veteran Ukrainian Liberals who had every hope to believe that one of them would 

replace the late Senator Hnatyshyn. Rumor had it that the Premier was approached by the party stalwarts 

and that the political patriots were led to believe that one of them would get the appointment, but 

apparently the Premier spoke with a forked tongue and betrayed all these people‟s hopes. Now I want to 

repeat what the Ukrainian Voice, which is a prominent Liberal paper from Winnipeg, a weekly, said, 

just one paragraph. The title of it was “How to Lose Friends”: 

 

To bypass the Ukrainians in this instance where there was a Ukrainian Senator before will not gain the 

Liberals support among the Ukrainians of Western Canada. 

 

Now the birds are coming home to roost. After all people of ethnic origins here in Canada have the right 

to be recognized, be they German, Ukrainian, French whoever they may be. Since the Conservatives 

recognized us I think it is only right the Liberals should have done so also. They betrayed us, the 

Liberals are saying. We are not saying so, we are just telling you what they have said. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald: (Cannington) — Did you vote Conservative? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: At least they played fair, they didn‟t have a forked tongue like your Premier had. 

 

Now, we have heard in this debate that certain countries are back-tracking on these programs because of 

lack of funds, particularly Great Britain. I would like to answer these critics with a couple of paragraphs 

from the Western Producer written by A.P. Waldron, February 22nd entitled “Money Squeeze in 

Canada.” I would like the Hon. Members opposite to read the whole article, just find the issue of the 

22nd of the month of February and read it for yourself. Now Mr. Waldron is not known to be a supporter 

of the CCF or NDP, I don‟t know what his politics are but occasionally he comes out with some very 

good information. He is a student of political science. Here is what he says in that article: 

 

The provincial government in their own fields left no doubt that they too have heard and heeded the 

admonition to tighten belts. Everyone has heard of the moves to control costs of education and the 

outbursts of protests they elicited. There have been similar efforts to cut expenditures all around and 

there are broad hints of increases of taxation. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

877 

He prophesied exactly what this Government is now doing. He goes on to say in another paragraph 

towards the end of his article and this will edify some of the Hon. Members opposite who always refer 

to England, Sweden and other countries and try to leave the impression that these are Socialist failings. 

Listen to this and here is where the real truth is and I challenge anyone to say it is different: 

 

Well anyway if it is any comfort, we don‟t have devaluation not yet. The money power hasn‟t stepped 

in as openly as it has done in Britain. But make no mistake we are ruled by finance and are being 

slowly and subtly conditioned to an era of inflation and deflation with all that that implies, because 

that is what the money barons want and so far they have always had their way. Certainly no 

government — nor any opposition party in parliament — has so far shown any disposition to 

challenge them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this explains why this Government has put on a squeeze and has brought in threats of 

compulsion and high taxes. It has no choice, it has got to dance to the tune that the barons play. 

 

Now I want to point out also, Mr. Speaker, that I consider that this Government has been irresponsible. 

You hear the Members talk about industry and what great benefits we have had from industry, but they 

dare not tell us about the little people who are being mistreated all across the province, and how they are 

being exploited by some of the corporations in this province. For example in my own constituency in 

1966, this Government forced the Creighton community to sign an agreement. The Premier said at the 

time, “If you don‟t sign we‟ll sign it for you.” And what kind of agreement was it? Well let me just read 

to you from a letter I received a day or two ago. This is from the mayor of the town of Creighton. I am 

not going to read it all, just a paragraph or two: 

 

In 1965 under the previous agreement our mill rate for school and municipal was 56. In 1966 under 

the present agreement our mill rate jumped to 84 for school and municipal and was held at 84 mills in 

1967. However, it appears in 1968 our mill rate will jump to 95 mills, and it would appear to me now, 

as it did when we signed the agreement (under protest), that this trend must continue. What with 

additional Provincial taxes means that, instead of our town progressing as it did prior to 1965, the 

reverse will be the case. 

 

In particular I am pointing out this paragraph to the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) 

because this is a mining town with all the problems of a mining town. But of course it is not the fault of 

the people there, but the fault of this Government as to the kind of agreement that it forced upon the 

people of that town which they had to accept from the company. The letter says further it has reference 

to studies that are planned by that community. And this is another point I would like to make concerning 

this Government‟s failure. Letters are written to the Premier and they are not being answered. I don‟t 

know about the other Ministers, I hope that they are doing better and that they do answer their mail. It 

says: 

 

We have had no word from the Department of Municipal Affairs since Mr. Walter‟s letter of 

November 25th, 1966, 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

878 

as to the progress of the feasibility study. We would appreciate very much if you could find anything 

in this regard for us. 

 

That is the purpose of the letter. These people are trying to find how they can pay less taxes because 

they can‟t pay the amount that they are forced to pay now. And I could read you more paragraphs from 

this letter, Mr. Speaker, which indicates the way these people have been treated. It is a disgrace and a 

shame. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . quoted from. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I need this letter because I have to take up certain matters with the 

Minister concerned, but I am quite prepared to table it, I will get it copied. But before I do that I will 

read just one more paragraph for the edification of the Hon. Members opposite, so they will see the kind 

of Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) they have got: 

 

The Department of Natural Resources verbally promised to ask for the study, although the Hon. Mr. 

Steuart took exception to our signing this agreement under protest. 

 

He was just another Minister in collusion with the Premier and he told my people that they had to sign 

the agreement and when they protested he took exception. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have heard in this debate someone trying to defend the Premier, when we were 

discussing Quebec, Canada and the flag. Oh well, they said the Premier never thought or never 

considered us joining the United States. Maybe he never intimated so, but I see in the Minot Daily News 

an article about his visit there. You should read it all. Yes, you Members on the Government side, you 

Liberals, should read this and see whether you agree with what the Premier has said in that particular 

part of this continent. This is the last paragraph, I quote: 

 

Puffing on his fifth cigar, Premier Thatcher contemplated our next question. If Quebec seceded would 

the West be the first to peel off and join up with the United States? I doubt it, of course, personally I 

am very pro-American, 

 

This is what the Premier says. 

 

but due to our geographic position, Canada‟s trade and commerce runs vertically. It‟s only natural that 

we should look to the United States for support. Why should we have to wait 50 years for Canada‟s 

growth when we could get it here right now. 

 

You decide for yourself what he was thinking at that time. However I am not interested in that so much. 

I don‟t know whether you have the flag decided upon, whether you plan for an emblem of the United 

States in the top corner. That‟s up to this House. But I want to read something else about the kind of 

leader and the kind of Premier you people have in this House. I quote: 

 

Since I was elected and got rid of those darn Communists, oh, I mean, Socialists, 

 

He corrected himself. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

879 

American capital has been pouring into my Province. The trouble is that we don‟t get enough of it. 

Before that time United States investors were frightened, just as they are about Quebec today. 

 

This is the kind of malarkey we hear from the Premier. All this capital has come in and more would 

come in but they are still frightened. Of little Saskatchewan he says. What nonsense! I am telling you, 

Mr. Speaker, that you produce resources in this province and you will have these money barons coming 

in here killing each other just to get at these resources, and they are doing it right now. 

 

I can only point out that right now when you look at the Budget, at that little bit of pie, you have to think 

of the small amount we are getting from resources. We could have had much, much more and it 

wouldn‟t have hurt some of these American corporations. They are now cutting their throats by 25 per 

cent reduction in the price of potash, a part of which we could have had in order to keep our taxes down 

and provide the services for our people here in Saskatchewan. They could still cut their prices down 

much more and still make a tremendous amount of profit. May I point out that in one hard rock mine in 

my constituency over the years, and I think I am safe in saying that the company which is an American 

company, controlled by American interests, took out of this province anywhere from $15 to $20 million 

a year. They took these profits to New York, and then we poor farmers have had to work to produce 

more wealth, so that we could produce more dollars to get that money back into Canada so as to keep 

the 92 cent; level. And this is the kind of fight that ·farmers have to put up all the time. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . Walter Gordon. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow: (Saskatoon Riversdale) — Work for deterrent . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well, if you were Walter Gordon I would pat you on the back because he has a lot 

more common sense that you‟ve got. He‟s a darn sight better patriot than you are, because he respects 

the Canadian people and he respects the resources that belong to the Canadian people. At least he has 

the courage to stand up and resign from a Government that doesn‟t understand the Canadian people. 

He‟s not going to sell the Canadian people; that‟s for sure but you will. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — He‟s as confused as you are, Bill! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Oh yah! Mr. Speaker, there nave been various studies by different organizations 

about poverty in Canada, and you wouldn‟t have studies of poverty, if there was no poverty in Canada. 

The farmers today, as has been pointed and I have said so before, are in a position where they are not 

liquid anymore. Yet you people are ready to tax them in order to completely wipe them out. As I said 

before you will be a very, very sorry bunch indeed when that happens. However, we still have some 

hopes that there will be good crops, we still have hopes that we may have markets, and we have hopes 

that some way or other we will get decent prices for our products and be able to carry on. We‟re not 

easily pushed off the map, maybe because we love the land too much. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

880 

However, I have a point or two that I would like to bring up at this time and it is in connection with our 

economy. I think it is time that we in Western Canada took a good and realistic look at the current trends 

affecting our western economy. We see trouble in Quebec, we talk about it, and we don‟t know what is 

going to happen to Quebec. Of course, what happens there we are told is none of our business because it 

mainly concerns the French in Quebec. Now I concede this partly, because what happens there will also 

affect the rest of us in Canada, so we must be concerned somewhat. There have been all kinds of 

alternatives suggested as to what may happen with this Quebec problem. But there is a danger that, with 

the separatist movement there, we may have a different kind of French Quebec than we have been used 

to, not the kind that we had or thought we had under the late Governor General Vanier, who was 

respected in all parts of the country and whom we loved. And so we must now think about where we 

trade and how we trade and how we transport our goods. So far as Western Canada is concerned where 

we live, we have an economic and trade problem as well as a constitutional problem. We‟re now facing 

declining European markets, but I will say this, there is a growing market in Africa in the new 

developing countries, and also in the East, in underdeveloped areas. Old nations as well as such as India 

and China really desire to trade with Canada. They want our primary produce, wheat or whatever it may 

be. I think this is generally accepted and known and reciprocated by Western Canadians. 

 

Now in view of the Quebec situation and for our own security, I think we should be considering the 

shifting of trade to the North through the Hudson Bay route and West to Vancouver, which is a western 

route, through Bella Coola and via Vancouver and other places, in order that we can ship out our 

primary products. So what I am suggesting is that this Government should do some research and take a 

good look at what the future trade possibilities may be and the future ways of transportation that we may 

need. Maybe while doing that we should take a good look at some of the aviation bases that we have in 

Western Canada such as at Winnipeg, Calgary and Regina. I just heard the other day that France sold 

some wheat to China. It made me think that after all France may be supplying some countries through 

the Suez. But we may not be able to use the same transportation route, we may not be able to use 

Panama, and. so in time to come I think it would be wise for us to consider developing different trade 

routes and have friendly relations with other countries. In that way we might save western agriculture 

and the western primary produces. I think there is a danger that the time may come — I hope it doesn‟t 

come — when we may not be able to ship through Montreal as easily as we are doing today. So we must 

consider these matters very seriously now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard about CCF platforms from Members opposite. I have here Liberal platforms 

and I could go for two hours and point out to the Hon. Members opposite all the promises that they 

made which they did not keep. One of them certainly was lower taxes. They promised to reduce hydro 

power and natural gas rates but they have forgotten about both of these. They promised to work to 

improve and expand the medical health insurance program. That‟s been talked about, they haven‟t kept 

that one and I think it is very important. They promised a drug insurance program to care for immediate 

drug costs. They promised to increase school grants, to provide more scholarships for deserving students 

going to university, and advanced technical courses, to make available authorized textbooks, yet they 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

881 

haven‟t made it easier for young people to go to school and get a good education. They promised all 

kinds of things but didn‟t keep these promises. Where you have erred in your Budget is that you forgot 

the areas of taxation that you should have used in obtaining the necessary money. One of those areas is 

of course the area of resources. When I look at your pie, I see that some $9 million is coming in from 

natural resources, for example, and I see that you are spending $2 or $3 million more than that. Now you 

can‟t keep that kind of thing up. In other words it is out of balance. Resources should be able to pay for 

themselves, you cannot give concessions to industry, to mines and then ask us to pay taxes to subsidize 

these industries. I think this is very, very important, and I am going to illustrate to you what is happening 

in my area. 

 

This Government has put up a pulp mill, and we have been told not to talk about the pulp mill, because 

if we do we‟re sabotaging it. That‟s what you hear from Prince Albert West, (Mr. Steuart) all the time. 

I‟ve tried to co-operate, I have tried to help them out, but apparently we can‟t come out in the open and 

discuss the pulp mill. But this pulp mill isn‟t going to cost, as we have been told, $50 million; this pulp 

mill is now going to cost $125 million. Wait four years from now and you‟ll find out whether I am not 

right. You have already bought shares in the pulp mill, some $10 million, according to the Financial 

News. You know how much more you have taken I don‟t, because you won‟t tell us what you have 

done. But you have invested millions of dollars. And where are you getting this money from? From the 

taxpayer that‟s where you are getting it! You set up Saskatchewan Pulpwood Limited, and you bought 

machinery. You bought equipment, you put up camps, you are building highways, running into tens of 

millions. You refuse to answer our questions. How can we explain to the people, if people ask us, why 

are taxes going up? People see you spending all these millions of dollars. We don‟t know how much you 

are spending, but you are spending public tax money and asking the people to pay higher taxes, high 

interest, waste, other costs and subsidies, as I said last year in this House, I was right, but I should have 

said more. I said then you would be losing $4 to $5 a cord on every cord that you delivered to the pulp 

mill, and you are going to lose a lot more the way it looks now. And where does it all come from? From 

the pockets of the taxpayers. This is where your Budget is wrong. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Haven‟t put a nickel in the pulp mill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) said the other day, “Any Member that 

tells me that he doesn‟t want a highway let him tell me.” Well I am telling him now about one highway I 

don‟t need and my people don‟t want and that is the highway from the mill to Spruce Home. Where is it 

planned? It goes from the mill out into the wilderness, not an access road, but a four-lane highway that is 

going to cost according to his own figures, $2 million. Mr. Speaker, This Government is spending at 

least $7 million in my constituency . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Will you sit down. If you want to ask any questions later I‟ll answer you. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

882 

Hon. D. Boldt: (Minister of Highways) — On a point of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! The Minister of Highways on a point of order. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I did not say that there was going to be a four-lane highway . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, that is not a point of order. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — . . . from the pulp mill to Spruce Home. I did not say that in my speech. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is that this Minister and this Government is taking 

tax money, building highways for the pulp mill and for the potash companies and for everybody else, 

and it wants the people of Saskatchewan to subsidize these industries. That is one of the worst kinds of 

subsidization. That is the big cost. They are taking it from the children and the sick and from the old to 

do just that. The Minister need not smile or laugh, as he knows that it is true. I would say to the Minister, 

had he considered the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, he would have borrowed the money for 

these pulp highways and then waited until he got all the profits that he has been talking about that he is 

going to get. As a matter of fact he said they have made all kinds of profits and so I have been 

wondering where the money has all gone to. But he could have taken all these future profits into 

consideration and he could have paid for these highways, instead of taxing the people of Saskatchewan 

now to pay for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I just have a few moments, let me call it 5:30. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7:30 o‟clock p.m. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker; before I sat down, I had answered a number of Members and some 

of the charges that they had made, and I also had discussed something about the Budget. I think I said 

that the Budget is a sad one and it came out that way because the Government had been overly 

optimistic. I said international finance has demanded the public pound of flesh. The money power has 

stepped in openly as it did in Britain. I also said that the Governments of this country and this Province 

have been conditioned to an era of deflation. And no doubt, as I said, the Provincial Government has had 

to heed these demands and has asked us to tighten our belts. This Government has moved also in the 

direction of trying to control all of education, labor, and eventually of course, it will try to control small 

business and farmers with high taxes and controls. I also mentioned the tremendous amount of money 

that is being spent in order to induce industry to get going in the Province of Saskatchewan. I had 

mentioned some of the Liberal promises that had been made. I notice in looking over some of these 

promises that four out of five of the promises were for industry. I pointed out that we cannot have this 

kind of thing. We cannot give tax concessions to industry. We cannot give subsidies to industry, unless 

we pay it out of our taxes. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

883 

Now concerning highways, I would like to point out that I have estimated that in my constituency these 

highways starting nowhere and only leading to the mill, are of no particular benefit to the people, and 

will cost the Province about $7 million this year. I could talk about Highway No.2. They are going to 

complete a grade from Spruce Home to Christopher Lake, they are going to pave from Spruce Home on 

to the Waskesiu access road. They are going to complete the grading and gravelling of the Waskesiu 

access road to the south end of Montreal Lake. They are going to grade and gravel from the south end of 

Montreal Lake. They are going to grade and gravel from the south end of Montreal Lake to the north. 

They are going to clear and grade No. 165 wherever that is, to the southwest, grading at La Ronge. No. 

120 will be graded and gravelled from Meath Park to Candle Lake, grading Highway No. 106 to Cut 

Hill, clearing and draining from Pelican Narrows north; oiling from Denare Beach to Flin Flon; 

completion of grading and paving of the Waskesiu access road; grading and gravelling from Prince 

Albert pulp mill to Spruce Home. Hon. Members must have read the press and know that my people are 

up in arms about this last highway project. The remarkable thing which I would like to point out to this 

Government is that it can find $7 million for my constituency yet I am sure that it is denying other 

constituencies of this Province highways that should be built there. My people don‟t want all of these 

highways, because they cut up the land, they butcher up farms and homesteads. Surely the Government 

can use some care to see that this tax money is wisely spent. 

 

I would like to point out that, when I asked for an access road to a settlement, to people, I got the answer 

that it hasn‟t got the money. Last year when I asked about the needs of the people of Montreal Lake 

along No. 2 highway, the Minister answered me and said, “Oh they have a way out.” When I asked him 

why they were making an extra 18 miles down to La Ronge on the west side of Montreal Lake, the 

answer was, “There is timber there for the pulp mill.” Why doesn‟t the Government build access roads 

into the forest and conversely build highways for people where they need highways. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Things before people! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now I have always considered, Mr. Speaker, and in all seriousness, that the 

function of a government, of course, is to be an instrument of human welfare and look after the well-

being of its people. This Government is retreating from that age-old concept and has now brought in a 

vicious Budget which is contrary to this concept. It is taking tax money, using it for the pulp roads I 

mentioned and other such purposes and denying the people of this province the services that they are 

entitled to and which they are paying for. Now I am sure that we are all Christians here, and maybe we 

don‟t read the Bible all the time, but I couldn‟t help remembering that it says somewhere in the Bible 

something like this: “Show mercy and compassion, everyone his brother.” Mr. Speaker, yet this is not 

the concern of the Thatcher Government. It is not concerned about people. The Minister, who just 

walked in, time and time again has said, “Industry comes first, that‟s our priority.” And this Budget 

exemplifies exactly that. We have said, and I always will say, whether you call us Socialists or whatever 

else you call us, that people come first and the needs of the people come first, not the needs of industry. 

Give people the education and the health and the ability to organize themselves in a good community, 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

884 

such as we have had in Saskatchewan, and I hope we will have, then we will have industry and we will 

have a good life, as we should have. 

 

Before I say more, Mr. Speaker, now that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has sat down, I know 

that he is a clever and foxy politician and I know that he has challenged us to speak about matters which 

I think would have been better for him, if we had not, and that is about the pulp mill. I am going to talk a 

little bit about the pulp mill and his other corporations. But I will vouch that he is attempting to extract 

all this money out of the people of Saskatchewan at whatever the cost, four years before the next 

election so that he can set up a nice little fat fund and come back as the Liberals promised in their 

platform, to give homeowner grants of $100 and maybe even $150. Yes, they will come, Mr. Speaker, 

four years from now and say to the people of Saskatchewan, “Well you know we had to collect high 

taxes back in 1968, because we needed this tax money to pay for the then services and because we didn‟t 

have the money where else could we get it.” From you! And they will be setting up this little fund and in 

four years from now they will come back and say, “Look what fine people we are. We are giving you 

$150·homeowner grants.” In other words they rob one pocket and put it into another, letting it stay there 

for a while, later to bribe us with our own money to get elected again, if that would be possible. But I am 

going to say this, to this Government, that the people will never forget, because as far as I am concerned, 

I won‟t let my people forget and I am going to fight right here, I am going to fight in the community 

halls, I am going to fight in the church, I am going to fight on the streets, and I am going to fight in 

every place in Saskatchewan, to see that the people of Saskatchewan remember the injustice that this 

Government has imposed upon them. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Those guys fought everywhere except in the war. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You try to defeat me! I‟ll stay here two or three more terms. You will never defeat 

me because at least I am honest with my people and you are not. Despite the fact that you thought that 

by establishing the pulp mill and filling the place with your voters, that they could defeat me. In spite of 

that Government workers supported me, whether you like it or not! 

 

What has this Government done in the last few years? It should be talking about its record, if anything. 

But what has it done? It ruined a local company by the name of Wisewood in which the people of 

Saskatchewan had a 100 per cent interest. It gave it away, sold it to a foreign company from British 

Columbia for 50 cents on a dollar. It robbed our people of $1 million. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — 60 cents! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — 60 cents. Okay 60 cents. Even at that you robbed the people of 40 per cent of the 

money that they invested. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A give-away! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It closed up a plant that we had, a plywood plant, in Prince Albert because it 

wouldn‟t co-operate with the plant in 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

885 

which the small people had an interest in. It closed it down and 65 people lost their jobs. It had a deal 

with NorCanAir, who got our SaskAir for nothing. We are paying for it by subsidies, as the Minister 

knows. NorCanAir closed down the repair shop and the Government didn‟t have the decency to cancel 

the existing agreement. It had no right to close this service. Yet this Government allowed them to do so. 

And on top of that to add insult to injury, we find that the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Radloff) comes out 

and announces an iron mine at Choiceland. I am waiting to see when the Japanese are going to start this 

iron mine. Apparently even the Premier was embarrassed at this one. But this is the kind of nonsense 

that we hear. I would say this, this Government could have obtained the necessary money, either by 

floating loans or in any other way, to develop industry for the people of Saskatchewan because we have 

the resources, we‟ve got the sodium, we‟ve got the potash, we‟ve got the siliceous sands and we have 

other minerals. We could have chemical and fertilizer plants of our own, or co-operatively owned as it 

doesn‟t matter, but we could have local industry and the people of Saskatchewan would have co-

operated with this Government. But this Government refuses to work with the people of Saskatchewan 

and refuses to have the people of Saskatchewan work with them and is giving away the resources as the 

records show. And it is loading us with taxes as the records show, and then it wants us to vote for its 

Budget. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Give away. Give away to Washington! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, surely we all realize that, if industry was using our power and our 

resources and our manpower, it would bring economic freedom to this Province. Certainly I believe in 

that. We would have the highest educational institutions that mankind could have, because we have the 

resources in Saskatchewan. But when you look at the Budget and then look at the amount of wealth that 

is taken out of our potash mines, it makes me sick inside. Millions and millions of dollars going out of 

Saskatchewan and yet we get a measly $2 million in revenue. A disgrace and a shame to the 

Government of this Province. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Give them some more truth, Bill! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) the other day talked about or 

tried to answer the Members in this House, and he talked about the tremendous amounts of money that 

have come in to the Treasury. You are lucky that the previous Government, the CCF, had encouraged oil 

companies and set up reasonable royalties, so now you get $30 million or more in revenue. He was 

talking about all the money that was turned in. If you have made all this money, then I ask the Minister 

and I as the Government: what have you done with this money? That‟s the point, what have you done 

with it? This is what people ask me back home. Look at all these industries, look at all this money 

pouring in. $10 million coming in from Ottawa to help out in Medical Care Insurance and here is a 

Government imposing a deterrent or utilization fee. Why then do we have to pay such taxes now? 

 

You wonder, Mr. Speaker, that I stand up here in anger, not angry at the individuals, but angry that we 

have a Government 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

886 

that has so little regard for the needs of our people, so little regard for our resources. I don‟t believe in 

this kind of a set-up, because I believe that in every just society taxes should be paid according to 

ability. We have heard of a French writer, I think, who wrote, “Each according to his needs, and from 

each according to his ability.” This Government has not done that. This Government is extracting from 

the poor and the sick. We can keep on repeating it and we are going to keep on repeating it. Yet it 

refuses to extract fair taxes from corporations which are making huge profits at our expense, although, 

Mr. Speaker, it is a simple fact that profits are taxes that corporations extract from the province and from 

our people. So why shouldn‟t they pay their fair share? Why should they get away with less while we 

have to pay more? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not alone in some of the things that I have said. We just had a report the other day 

from a person that we all admire, Judge Batten, concerning all this assistance to industry and listen to 

what she says on page 408 and I quote: 

 

The practice of subsidizing private enterprise and industry or locations which are not economically 

attractive generally results mainly in the transfer of the taxpayer‟s money. 

 

I hope that sinks in. 

 

The taxpayer usually receives no benefit from funds so expended and his living standard may be held 

below what it could otherwise have been by such practices, because taxation must be higher or the 

level of public services must be lower than they would have been otherwise. 

 

There you have it all in a nutshell. Why don‟t you admit it? You spent public money in doubtful 

industries where you should not have spent it. I don‟t say you should not have spent some, as we are not 

against incentives, but you have overdone it. And Judge Batten says very clearly what the final result 

will be. And she is right: Another thing that you have forgotten and I want to bring it to your attention 

and again Judge Batten agrees with me. I quote from page 410: 

 

The Commission believes that the people of the Prairie Provinces desire to prepare their sons and 

daughters to cope with an increasingly complex world by providing them with the best education 

possible, regardless of where they choose to live. It is, after all, enhancement of the well-being of 

people, not of places, that must always be the primary objective of public policies. 

 

Why don‟t you accept what the Judge has said, which is the truth? Why do you place deterrents on 

education trying to stop young people from going to school? Because when you impose high tuition fees 

that‟s exactly what you are doing. As well you are setting up a class system and I could spend an 

evening discussing just that. Well, I‟m sorry, Mr. Minister, I know that you have a tough job, and you 

can‟t very well vote against your own Government, but I am sure that you agree with what I have said. 

We hope that some day it won‟t be necessary to pay tuition fees. For a Province with all the resources 

that we have we should be able to say to our children and our grandchildren attending schools in 

Saskatchewan, we the people are so rich, you don‟t have to worry about education as long as you are 

willing to learn. That is the important thing. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

887 

I charge this Government with waste. When it comes down to selling agricultural land, it at times puts it 

up for tender, now I understand, to the highest bidder. It will be like the situation some 30 or 40 years 

ago as I recall, where one man a Mr. Robins who had the money bought up 22 quarters of land. What is 

Government policy when Simpson wants land? It gives it to them for $10 an acre, because this is 

industry. When a farmer wants land he has to compete against his neighbor. This is the kind of 

government you have. We have a box factory in Prince Albert. I tried to get an answer, though I know 

the answer, as to the person who bought it. I could tell you what he paid for it and it is a disgrace. This 

Government has taken a box factory and sold it to an individual in Prince Albert, without tendering. Let 

the Minister tell me when he put it up for tender. It was a lease option. And it sold 33 acres of valuable 

land in the area with the factory without it being tendered. This is what the Government is doing and this 

I call waste, because this is a public domain and it should have been tendered, the same as land is 

tendered insofar as agricultural lands are concerned. 

 

I notice that my time is flying and yet there is so much that could be said. One could talk for hours and 

point a finger at the Government, but their faces can‟t be any redder than they are now. But I do want to 

say, Mr. Minister, that your policies are short-sighted policies. They are not only going to affect this 

generation but future generations, and when they read the history books 50 or 100 years from now, they 

will be pointing a finger at the out-dated and backward Government that we had in 1968. 

 

The Government has departed, Mr. Speaker, from good conservation of forest, game and water 

resources. I could talk about it. Clear-cutting has been accepted as a policy. What do they mean by that? 

They are clear-cutting everything, it doesn‟t matter whether the trees are 20 or 30 years old, down they 

go and get piled up. And then it has been suggested in the Natural Resources Report they are going to 

burn the slash. This is not British Columbia where they have a lot of rainfall. This is a country where the 

ground is dry and if you start burning slash you burn the leaf mould. And that isn‟t the end of the story 

of conservation, because when you burn the leaf mould you will contaminate the lakes with lye. You 

will kill the wildlife, which can‟t survive where there aren‟t any forests. Also, you may have other very 

difficult conditions because your lakes and rivers may start drying up. We have seen it happen in two or 

three lakes up in the north, and the Minister knows what I am talking about. You have Whelan Bay 

which is a very large bay and part of White Swan Lakes, which because of fires has dropped and has 

never gone back to its original level. It is now 15 to 20 feet below what it used to be. I could give you 

other lakes. That is why the other day I asked what dams are being put up, though some of these lakes 

can‟t be saved because they have no outlets. 

 

I would suggest to the Government that insofar as conservation is concerned, if you are going to cut 

down our forest, at least use some good common sense and do selective cutting. Take out the trees that 

you want, even if you wastefully take out the trees suitable for lumber and ship them down for pulp, at 

maybe, one-third of the royalties. I still won‟t criticize you as much as I will criticize you for clear-

cutting. Time will show that I am right. You must not destroy the resources that belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan. You have no right to do so. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

888 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken as I have, because I am concerned with the daily and future needs of the 

people of the Province and of the people of my constituency whom I represent. I cannot but think of 

their dignity, their freedom and their rights, and my job is to do everything I can to stop this sell-out and 

the degradation of human and natural resources. And I am here to speak against the goals of power-

hungry and greedy exploiters of humanity and against the philosophy of international establishments and 

money-changers who have brought about this kind of a situation in which we find ourselves in today. I 

am afraid, yes, I am afraid, Mr. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) that your provincial credit is gone and 

therefore you cannot borrow the money you need for your Budget, that you should have borrowed 

money for, so you are taxing the people of Saskatchewan. But I say this, we must go forward to better 

things or we will revert to die. I plead with this Administration to reconsider the folly of their ways. I 

plead for social change, for recognition of the voices of the next generation, for understanding of 

interdependence of human beings who must live together in this planet and our community of 

Saskatchewan. I plead for new ideas, a truly New Saskatchewan and not the kind that you think of. And 

finally, I plead for this Government to become Socially conscious of its responsibility and its 

prerogatives to bring to our province and to our land, peace and joy and happiness and some material 

benefits as well. I am not certain if the Thatcher Government hears my voice or the voice of the 

Saskatchewan people, the people who are phoning in, sending in telegrams and writing letters because 

of the injustice you have done to them. But I will not talk about what you have done to them in the field 

of medicine. I could but others have spoken. I am not going to talk about other matters now, as I have 

said enough to show you, Mr. Speaker, that it is impossible for me to support the motion and because I 

am duty bound to support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica: (Cutknife) — Mr. Speaker, in examining closely the Budget Speech made by the 

Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) a week ago Friday, I couldn‟t help but notice the ridiculous 

paradox in it. On page 4, the second paragraph in his speech, he said: 

 

In bringing down the first Budget of the new Liberal Government in 1965, Premier Thatcher in his 

capacity as Treasurer stated four principles we would attempt to follow as a Government. 

 

I want to quote the first two principles: 1. Keep our promises to the people. 2. Reduce taxes. The 

Provincial Treasurer went on to say and I quote: 

 

We have maintained these principles: 1. We kept faith with the people of Saskatchewan. 2. We 

lowered Provincial taxes. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes: (Touchwood) — Said that without a smile too! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — First of all, let me point out again that the Liberals deliberately broke faith with the 

people of Saskatchewan prior to the October 11th election by painting a completely false picture. They 

again deceived the people of Saskatchewan by lowering the sales tax from five to four per cent, but then 

they expanded its base and imposed a host of other taxes, so 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

889 

that there really was an over-all tax increase in 1967 of some $22 million, about $23 for every man, 

woman and child in Saskatchewan. Now how low can you get? The Provincial Treasurer spoke of 

promising to reduce taxes. He said that they did and I have just shown that they didn‟t, and then in his 

new Budget proceeded to impose the most vicious array of taxes this Province has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Now this is not only a paradox, it is a farce. It is as ridiculous as a jackass who has 

two heads, one at each end and trying to run in different directions at the same time. From what the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has said in his Budget Speech, there can be no doubt that the people 

of Saskatchewan have learned a very important lesson the hard way. That lesson they must never forget. 

Never trust a Liberal, but worse still, never, never trust a Thatcherite Liberal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, being a teacher by profession, I want to relate the Budget expenditures 

to the needs of school boards, teachers, parents and students, who stand to gain or lose the most, 

depending on how wisely a government allocates its yearly budget. First of all, we must note that the 

niggardly proposed grants to schools of $2.7 million is going to have a detrimental effect on the 

education system of Saskatchewan. Please notice that this amount is some $1 million less than the 

increase in operating grants provided last year, and last year the mill rates rose anywhere from 2 to 17 

mills across the Province. 

 

Now this $2.7 million increase will not even take care of teacher salary increases or the added cost of 

administration or other costs. I predict that mill rates will rise again this year, in order to take up the 

slack. And don‟t forget, the new taxes imposed will at the same time reduce the purchasing power of 

school boards. Every school bus purchased, and every gallon of gas to run those buses, every bit of lab 

equipment, every desk and chair, film or slide projector, every radio, record player or television set, 

overhead projector, or tape recorder will cost more because of the added taxes. So, we have a double-

barrelled effect here of a reduction by this Government of operating grants and the added effects of extra 

taxes on equipment and services purchased. How does this Government expect local school boards to 

survive? What a job school boards will have facing the irate tax payer. I sympathize with them because 

they are caught in a dilemma which is not of their own making, but the making of this Liberal 

Government who has so badly misallocated its Budget. 

 

Now, according to a press release, issued by the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) on January 19, 

1968 to the Star Phoenix, he announced that school grants paid to school boards will be tied to the 

teacher-pupil ratio of a school. He stated that his Department will aim at a ratio of 1 to 22 1/2 for the 

coming year. Now this is higher by two pupils per teacher than last year‟s ratio. I am very sorry that the 

Minister does not have the necessary background and insight to know what the implications of such a 

policy will be or if he does understand, he chooses to ignore them. Now let‟s look at the implications. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

890 

One of the main objectives of junior and senior high schools, or composite or comprehensive schools — 

call them what you may — is to provide better facilities and a wider choice of subjects for students. In 

one of these schools today, a teacher could teach as many as 240 different students in a school year. If 

this teacher were to use all his available teaching time plus l 1/2 hours after school for individual help, 

he would be able to give each student about six hours of individual instruction in a school year. The 

point here is that this increased teacher-pupil ratio will aggravate an already bad situation in many 

schools. The increased size of classes will decrease the individual attention given the student and will 

therefore lower the quality of education. Increasing the number of students in a class is fine, if you want 

a stereo-typed student educated in mass, unable to think or discover for himself. But this is not the 

purpose of education. These composite schools provide many vocational subjects such as home 

economics, woodwork, metal work, drafting, typing, welding, and motor mechanics. The nature of these 

subjects is such that space and complexity of the machine used limit the size of classes to around 8 to 12 

students. Now to achieve the proposed 1 to 22 1/2 ratio, the ordinary classroom teacher must take up the 

slack and teach larger sized classes. By pressing for this new ratio, and tying it to the grants paid to a 

school, the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) is putting pressure on school boards and administrators 

and leaving school boards with four unpleasant and unfortunate alternatives: The first one, they could 

increase the size of the already too large academic classes, the English, History, Maths and Sciences. 

This will increase the teacher work-load and create new frictions between teachers and boards. Oh yes, 

this is the greater use of staff that the Minister of Education was talking about earlier today. The second 

unpleasant alternative would be to reduce the number of vocational and optional courses offered in 

schools and revert back to the good old days when students took the same basic eight subjects. What 

happens to individual differences of students under such a policy, Mr. Speaker? This policy reminds me 

of the horse doctor who prescribed one cure — castor oil — for all his patients regardless of the nature 

of the illness. Everybody takes the basic eight subjects. The third alternative might be to reduce the 

number of staff in schools in order to qualify for that full grant decided by this ratio of 1 to 22 1/2. The 

effects are already apparent of this. Several high schools across the province will find themselves over-

staffed according to this new ratio and teachers are very concerned about this threat of increasing work-

load. Well, a fourth unpleasant alternative left to school boards is to hold a tough line on teachers‟ 

salaries in order to make ends meet. This is probably why the school trustees are very ready to give up 

their right to negotiate with their teachers at the local level. If I were a school trustee, Mr. Speaker, I 

wouldn‟t want this callous and unfair task either. No wonder this Government is in such a rush to 

implement compulsory area bargaining, and all of this to improve education as the Hon. Minister of 

Education stated before supper today. 

 

I am also disappointed, Mr. Speaker, by the $17,000 odd dollars decrease in the proposed estimates for 

the Curriculum Branch of the Department of Education. This decrease no doubt implies that the new 

courses intended for divisions 3 and 4 programs. I want to point out that school curriculum should be 

revised continually, not just 5, 10 or 15 years, therefore, I urge this Government to keep the Branch 

working steadily, looking 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

891 

for and revising new courses and techniques, especially at the junior and senior high school levels. 

 

The most common complaint of the modern student today is, “Why do I have to take such and such a 

subject? Why aren‟t there some other practical and more interesting subjects to choose from?” Our 

technical schools are also offering courses that are too routine and stereotyped; variety is lacking. Our 

buildings are overcrowded and unable to handle the large numbers of interested students. The youth of 

today demand new and interesting fields of endeavor. They want courses in electronics, radio, 

computers, technology, space research, cybernation, personnel management and a host of others. Our 

technical institutes are far behind Alberta‟s two famous and thriving technical institutes — one at 

Edmonton called NAIT, and the one at Calgary called SAIT. (Southern Alberta Institute of Technology.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Budget Speech so far, I have made it clear that the educational system of our 

province has been short-changed, short-changed because the grants to schools are insufficient to meet 

the challenges of the day. School boards will find it more difficult to find the necessary money to build 

the needed additions to schoolrooms and auditoriums. They will find it more difficult to purchase the 

necessary teaching aids to assist students to learn through discovery, to pay the necessary salaries to 

teachers comparable to those in other provinces, and they will find it more difficult to raise the necessary 

local taxes from the already irate property owner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — The Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) by aiming at this teacher-pupil ratio of 1 to 

22 1/2, has poured more fuel on the fire by giving local boards the unpleasant task of increasing the size 

of academic classes or as I said before, of reducing the number of meaningful and varied subjects 

offered to students. 

 

Add to all of this, Mr. Speaker, the hastily drawn up compulsory area bargaining legislation which this 

Government has insisted on ramming through, and we will be ready for another Frazier Report in a year 

or so, this time not into the Mental Health Program of Saskatchewan but into the Educational System of 

our Province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica:— . . . simply because this Government chose to short-change education instead of 

building a sound and meaningful education policy. Mr. Speaker, casting all political bias aside, I am 

deeply concerned about this Government‟s attitude toward education, this Government‟s lack of respect 

and consideration for teachers, students, school boards, parents I am concerned with this Government‟s 

lack of respect for university staff and students. 

 

I would briefly like to comment on the statement made in the Budget debate by the Hon. Member from 

Hanley (Mr. Heggie). He said that our Members on this side of the House accused the Government of 

being old. So, he took it literally, Mr. Speaker, and thought we meant old in years. And to show his 

shallow 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

892 

thinking, he spent hours tallying up the ages of all the MLAs and dividing by 24 or 35 to prove that the 

New Democrats were 2 years younger than the Liberals. This was true, Mr. Speaker, we did say, and I‟ll 

say it again: and again. The Liberal party and the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan is old, 

hackneyed, it‟s still-wallowing in 18th century philosophy of dog eat dog and may the devil take the 

hindmost in the rush for the almighty dollar. I‟m sure the Hon. Member will be a much better legislator 

and MLA to his constituents, because he spent many hours on this futile and ridiculous mathematical 

mental exercise. I would like to suggest that the Hon. Member would have been better advised to spend 

his mathematical skill in calculating how to reduce or better still wipe out the tax on the sick and those 

lying flat on their backs in the hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to your attention the third paragraph on page 25 

of the Budget Speech made by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). He said and I quote: 

 

We have been assured by the Board of Governors that the proposed level of grants will enable the 

University to accommodate any student who meets the required academic qualifications. 

 

These will be hollow, deceitful words, Mr. Speaker, because on page 25 of last year‟s Budget Speech, 

the fourth paragraph under the heading “University” and I quote: 

 

So far, entrance of. students has not been limited where academic qualifications were met. 

 

I challenge the truth of the above statements by referring you to two news items, both from the Leader-

Post The first one, called, “Campus Near Admission Limit”, November 23, 1967, and I quote from that 

article: 

 

Regina Campus may not be able to accept all students who have applied for admission for the January 

semester. Approximately 40 students have been unable to get into the academic areas for which they 

had applied. Mr. Blight said he regrets that all students applying for admission cannot be accepted. 

 

The second news article, again from the same paper, entitled “Regina Campus Filled”, January 11, 1968, 

only one month ago, and I quote: 

 

About 25 students were turned away through lack of space including about 15 in education and 10 in 

administration. 

 

Well, 25 plus 40 makes a total of 65 students, Mr. Speaker, who were denied entry because of lack of 

space in this academic year at the Regina campus alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — What about the Saskatoon campus? I ask in all sincerity: Is our Provincial Treasurer 

completely honest? Can we trust the governing of our Province to such a Premier and 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

893 

such a Provincial Treasurer? Do they think the people of Saskatchewan are completely ignorant of facts? 

I ask all Members opposite to search their consciences and consider honesty and integrity in government 

before voting for this Budget. 

 

Personally, I cannot vote for the motion, but I will support the amendment as moved by the Member for 

Regina Centre. (Mr. Blakeney). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank: (Saskatoon Mayfair) — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll begin my remarks this evening by a 

statement that you have probably heard before in this House. The statement is that I had not intended 

taking part in this debate. However, because of the implications of this document which was presented 

to us on March 1 plus the pleas from my constituents with regard to some parts of that particular 

document, I feel that I must take part in this second main debate of the Legislature. 

 

I just want first of all, Mr. Speaker, to refer to the pleas from my constituents and not only my 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, but other constituents in Saskatoon City. I have here, Mr. Speaker, a file of 

letters with regard to deterrent fees, the imposition of deterrent fees on hospital and medicare services. 

 

I have an excess of 20 letters from people in Saskatoon. I have a petition in addition to that, with 61 

names from one of the old folks homes in my constituency. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — All Socialists? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — All Socialists? 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — All Socialists? I have another petition with 22 names on it; in addition to that I 

have another telegram with 23 names on it. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I have letters from two 

organizations. Mr. Speaker, I will divulge more of what is in that file at a later time, if the Government 

chooses not to change its position on some of the legislation it will bring before us in this House and on 

this particular Budget. You can rest assured of that. 

 

The other day I listened with interest to the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) and I always get a kick out 

of listening to the Minister of Labour speak in this Legislature because he is so homey, and he just 

touches your heart when he speaks. He got himself out on the statistics limb and it happens, Mr. Speaker 

that he got himself out on the statistics limb about labor last year. Apparently he hasn‟t learned a thing 

about that shaky limb that he was on last year that eventually got sawed off and down he went with the 

limb. And I think if he is prepared in his estimates, we‟ll give him another run on statistics this year and 

we‟ll probably find that he‟ll get sawed off again. 

 

I think he subscribes to the thesis that it takes fewer muscles for a person to laugh than to frown. And 

actually this is a good thesis for people to follow. We followed his exercise in the art of keeping „em 

laughing. He began, of course, with 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

894 

the NDP Convention in Saskatoon this fall. Well, I think, Mr, Speaker, that I detected a subconscious 

frustration on the part of the Minister about conventions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Now it happens this fall that Caesar decreed there shall be no Liberal Convention 

and there was no Liberal Convention. I think he feels that he has been taken. In other words, he has no 

resolutions of his own, from his own convention to talk about, so he feels he must talk about some and 

ours are very good resolutions and I commend them to him all the more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I‟ve listened with interest to the Members across the way, and I listened with 

interest last year when they brought down the Budget Speech. It‟s a little different man bringing it down 

but very close to the man that‟s there now. Last year everything was related to the Ontario Budget and 

what terrible taxation the people of Ontario had and how Saskatchewan was really no worse than the 

Province of Ontario. Well, there is very little relation this year, Mr. Speaker, with the Province of 

Ontario and what the Legislature in Ontario is doing. I understand that the Ontario Budget will propose 

some small increases in tobacco tax, gasoline tax,. and it will, also implement a homeowner grant 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the homeowner grants will apply to tenants. Yes, 

to tenants in the Province of Ontario. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . getting closer to Socialism all the time. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — This is something, Mr. Speaker, that we proposed when the Government brought 

in the legislation on homeowner grants. It was denied at that time, it was a plank in our platform and we 

will continue to fight for that particular benefit for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — What happened, Mr. Speaker, was that it couldn‟t compare itself with the 

Province of Ontario so it took many trips across the great water to Great Britain. It found Great Britain 

on her knees. It conjured up Winston Churchill to support their shaky arguments, it reminded us of the 

dangers of Socialism and how it could spread; and it reminded us that the British Government‟s 

Medicare Plan is almost in total collapse. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have only one thing to say about that. If 

Air Canada could have charged every Member opposite for every trip he took across the ocean they 

could wind up the year with a healthy surplus in their operations. I‟m sure we‟ve all had the experience 

of seeing a cat on a tin roof. Well, that was the Government benches in this Budget. They are like a cat 

on a tin 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

895 

roof, clawing for a foothold. Mr. Speaker, the problems are here, in Saskatchewan, this is what we 

should be talking about. When it comes to facing up. to the problems of Saskatchewan, these Liberals, 

Mr. Speaker, have a bull-in-a-china-shop mentality. A dangerous pattern has been exposed in this 

province. 

 

Let‟s examine the record, Mr. Speaker. They blunder in, the result is irreparable harm done to different 

organizations in different segments of this province. Let‟s take for instance the matter of labor and how 

the Provincial Government has blundered into that particular area in this province. A few years ago, the 

employees of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation went on strike. Mr. Speaker. that was the first time 

in 20 years that the Saskatchewan Power Corporation employees had gone on strike. The first time since 

the inception of that corporation that they had gone on strike. And, Mr. Speaker, that was due to the 

blundering of the Provincial Government and the Department of Labour‟s Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Was the matter successfully cleared up? Well I think the Government thought it 

was successfully cleared up. But the Government used that as an opportunity to put on the statute books 

of this province unnecessary, oppressive and permanent labor legislation. 

 

How about the treatment of Indians in this province? Mr. Speaker, that‟s a sad story. This Government 

has been in power for four years and its treatment is no better than it was after its first year. We have the 

Prince Albert blunder, where the Hon. Member from Prince Albert at that time and the Member from 

Athabasca high-handedly, arbitrarily told an organization in Prince Albert that they would elect the 

officers that these Ministers wanted or else they would have their Provincial grant cut off — blundered 

in, irreparable harm done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Get rid of that Commie . . . 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — We have the nationally reported remarks of the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) about the 

Indians of Saskatchewan, another blunder, irreparable harm done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about the University of Saskatchewan? Again the Government arbitrarily proposes a whole batch 

of legislation for the University of Saskatchewan. It blundered in, it had to retreat, but it hasn‟t given up, 

Mr. Speaker. It will be back for more at a later date. What about the Saskatchewan teachers? This 

Government blundered in again, Mr. Speaker, with a whole batch of new legislation for the teachers of 

Saskatchewan, legislation that would be largely unworkable and would work a hardship on the teachers 

and the people of Saskatchewan. It was necessary for the Government to withdraw a considerable 

portion of that legislation. It refers to it gently as a working paper, Mr. Speaker, but believe me, I think it 

was legislation prepared and ready for implementation, blundering in, retreating, irreparable harm done, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen some Government skulduggery going on in this Province and it is unfortunate. 

We need only refer to the little matter of the Saskatchewan Economic Review, 5,000 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

896 

copies printed in April, 1967, hidden for 10 months to get the Government past the Provincial election. 

Shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have another area of, Government failure, the area of mental health. A year and one-half, or two 

years ago, New Democratic Members of this Chamber called for an investigation of the Mental Health 

Program of this Province. The Government having blundered on this, eventually set up a Royal 

Commission to investigate our charges, to investigate the Mental Health Program. This report confirmed 

that this Government, Mr. Speaker, was ruining the Mental Health Program of this Province. Mr. 

Speaker, the smidgen of money it has put forward in the Budget for this program doesn‟t even bail the 

program out. 

 

What about Government callousness, Mr. Speaker? Well, 18 months ago, in 1966, we called for an 

investigation of the cost of living in this Province. Pardon me, that was two years ago. Over a period of 

18 months, at that time, Mr. Speaker, the cost of living had risen 10 per cent. The Government put us 

off. Eventually it did establish a Royal Commission and it has just submitted its Report. And this Report 

has confirmed beyond a doubt, Mr. Speaker, the matter we were prepared to talk about two years ago. 

Government callousness. 

 

I feel that I must make some remarks directly about the Budget and I think it wouldn‟t hurt to just 

review what has gone on and what the new features of this Budget are. There are no new programs, Mr. 

Speaker, so there‟s nothing to talk about there. 

 

In the pre-Budget time, the Government took the opportunity after the Provincial election to implement 

some new fees and charges, and they have been referred to by several speakers at this time. The Feds. 

were in their collecting some more tax on the liquor and while the Feds. were there, our boys sneaked in 

a got a couple of million too. 

 

With regard to the Budget which has been delivered in this House, the Education and Hospitalization tax 

has gone from 4 per cent to 5 per cent, this is an increase that began on March 1. A new tax absolute1y 

new tax, Mr. Speaker, E & H, 5 per cent, on hotel, motor hotel, motel rooms, commercial cabins and 

cottages, to begin April 1, 1968. E & H, 5 per cent on $2 meals, absolutely new tax, Mr. Speaker. E & H 

tax, 5 per cent on telecommunications, telephone, telegrams, telegraph, private wire, absolutely new tax, 

Mr. Speaker, to begin April 1. A new fee, hospital deterrents, $2.50 per day, after 30 days, $1.50 per 

day, absolutely new tax, Mr. Speaker. A new fee on medicare, physician‟s office calls, $1.50 per visit, 

physician‟s visits, $2.00 per visit, absolutely new tax, Mr. Speaker. Gasoline tax, 2 cents per gallon, an 

increase to begin March 1, 1968. Farm petroleum tax, 2 cents per gallon, absolutely new tax, Mr. 

Speaker, to begin April 1
st
. Operator‟s licence fee, increased registration fee, passenger vehicles, school 

buses, farm trucks, an increase, Mr. Speaker. This Budget, I think has to be the main jewel in the Liberal 

Crown of deceit that has been put on the head of the people of this Province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the matter of deterrent, fees deserves considerable investigation. The Member from Prince Albert 

West (Mr. Steuart) apparently decided to opt out of the human race. And his patron saint of the KOD the 

one that goes around kicking on doors is right there with him. He mentions abuses that exist in the 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

897 

Hospital and Medicare Plan. Yet after a number of tries, Mr. Speaker, we have not got one indication of 

an abuse, not one Member on that side of the House has listed these horrible abuses that are taking place 

in our Medicare and Hospital Plan. We want to see them, Mr. Speaker, before this debate is concluded. 

 

The Hon. Provincial Treasurer stands up with righteous indignation and says where should we cut the 

Budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there are some spots where we can do a little chopping. It happens 

that I received a letter from a friend and he was complaining about deterrent fees. He suggested that 

some of the highway programs could be cut out of the Budget. He said for instance the road from here to 

Rosthern, that‟s from Saskatoon to Rosthern and the bridge east of there could be cut out. Now I‟d like 

to be able to release his name to the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, but I fear for the man‟s business life. It 

happens that the Minister in charge of wrecking the Saskatchewan Government Insurance has already 

taken his insurance business away from him, and he might persecute him further if I were to release his 

name at this time. However, he has a suggestion worthy of consideration by the Member from Rosthern, 

the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt). I think Mr. Speaker, that it‟s time that we had an independent 

investigation of highway construction, contracting, pricing and volume of business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — And I am certain there will be some very interesting surprises if the Government 

takes it upon itself to call for an independent investigation of highways in this Province. I would suggest 

the need for an investigation of the need for deterrent fees, but I‟m sure the Government has all kinds of 

information which they will put before the House before the close of this debate. 

 

In addition to the document of Black Friday, yesterday the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) 

proved he is just as slippery as his predecessor in the Department of Municipal Affairs. He attempted to 

bamboozle the public by citing some statistics that have no relation to the matter of new rent schedules, 

as proposed by the Federal Government in low rental housing in the Province of Saskatchewan. He 

quotes that 200 people in low rental pay $50 per month or less and the average rental is $65 to $66 per 

month. I say, Mr. Speaker, so what! In other provinces in Canada, I dare say you could find the same 

statistics, except in those other provinces in Canada the tenants are paying considerably less because 

other provinces implemented the new lower rent schedules in low rental housing. Another smoke screen 

that the Minister of Municipal Affairs spun out when he was speaking the other day, he said in 1964 

there were just 234 low rental units in Saskatchewan, at the end of 1967 we have 600. Another 150 on 

the board. But Mr. Speaker, that was the smoke screen. I haven‟t investigated the matter thoroughly, but 

I do realize at this time that there were 200 units in Greer Court in the city of Regina that were opened 

for occupancy shortly after this Government took office in 1964. And they are taking credit for them, 

Mr. Speaker. Smoke screens. What about the allotment in the Budget for low rental housing? In 1966 

you find there was an allotment of $21,800. And this was unexpended to the extent of 29 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. You move ahead to March 31, 1967, there was an allotment of $31,380. You find, Mr. 

Speaker, that this was unexpended to the extent of 11 1/2 per cent. In 1968, we find an allotment of 

$40,100 and I dare say 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

898 

that it too will be unexpended to a great extent. Something else that the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

had to say about low rental housing, it just doesn‟t make sense. I‟m referring now to the previous 

Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. McIsaac). I attempted to get him to explain why the Provincial 

Government was not implementing the new low rent schedules and he wrote a letter back to me on 

September 7; 1967, and he said, 

 

As you no doubt are well aware the Provincial Government is this year putting major emphasis on 

expanding this program to other urban areas, as well as increasing the number of units in the city of 

Saskatoon. It is my contention that we can better direct our efforts to enable more people to utilize this 

program. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the implementation of these rent schedules has absolutely nothing to do with 

expanding the program. They are two different things. Now I don‟t know whether the Minister knows 

this, the previous Minister, and I am sure the present Minister must know this. If they are attempting to 

get us to believe the money that they scalped in rent in this Province, can be applied to capital 

construction program, I am afraid I find that a little far-fetched. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people in my constituency I find that I cannot support this Black 

Document, I find that I can support the amendment, because it is realistic and it points out the 

weaknesses in the Budget. I feel that this Budget, Mr. Speaker, is the embodiment of treachery and as 

such I cannot support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Messer: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, I am rising this evening to speak in opposition to the Budget 

which has many factors I strongly oppose, as do many people in Saskatchewan. Whether they are young 

or old, healthy or sick, whether these people supported the New Democratic party, the Conservatives, 

the Social Credit or even the Liberal party in the last election . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — they are all opposed to. This Budget, either entirely or at least some major aspect of it. 

They are opposed because the present Government deceived them in the election of October 11. I must 

also say here that the people who will identify themselves as Liberals are becoming very hard to find 

since that Black Friday. I have also seen, Mr. Speaker, on numerous occasions in various places in this 

province, signs both large and small, stating we were Liberals, and I‟ll emphasize that were. I can only 

assume from these signs the silence and the type of speeches that we have been hearing from the Liberal 

Members opposite that there are Liberal Members in this Assembly as there are past Liberal supporters 

in the Province of Saskatchewan that have misgivings about this Budget. There are, Mr. Speaker, 

however, a few loyal supporters of the Hon. Premier and the Provincial Treasurer of this Province who 

support and believe in this Budget and the present Government‟s actions. One of these, Members is the 

Hon. Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) who on Friday last was doling out threats to Opposition 

Members in wholesale quantities in regard to his highway program. May I quote, Mr. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

899 

Speaker, from his beloved paper, the Saskatoon Star Phoenix, which says: 

 

On his highway program, which he announced Friday, he told Opposition Members he would be ready 

to make any deletions from their constituencies if they would suggest which roads should be dropped. 

 

No Members made any suggestions, he asked the Member from Cutknife, my colleague Mr. Kwasnica if 

he would like to have work deleted from Highways 40, 17 or 5. He also asked the Member from Kelsey, 

myself, if he would suggest some work be deleted from that constituency. These were questions which 

the Members should ask themselves before they criticize the highway budget, he said. Then he went on 

to say and I quote, “Don‟t tempt me.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for your information and the House‟s I could well criticize him, because the only 

highway construction I have in the constituency of Kelsey this year is 8 1/2 miles west of Hudson Bay 

which was started in 1966 and still isn‟t finished. Mr. Speaker, such intimidations do not bother me 

personally, but they are threats against the people of the constituency I represent. Mr. Speaker, I say that 

if the Hon. Minister is tempted to withdraw highway programs and expenditures in constituencies, 

simply because Members of that constituency may have criticized his highway budget of which, Mr. 

Speaker, for your further information, and for the House‟s further information my only criticism was of 

the Department‟s refusal to remove hazardous and dangerous ice conditions on highways of the 

constituency I represent. Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, criticism or not, this is a democratic Government, 

criticisms are a matter of course in such a democratic process. 

 

But the Hon. Minister of Highways in regard to Opposition criticism indicates the attitude of the present 

Government of this Province. I say this, Mr. Speaker, because when we look at the Budget, we find the 

introduction of utilization fees for doctors and hospitals can only be determined as deterrent charges, 

which, Mr. Speaker, according to the Random House Dictionary of the English language, means and if I 

may quote from that dictionary, “to discourage or restrain from passing or proceeding through fear or 

doubt.” Mr. Speaker, I and the people of Saskatchewan can only assume through the Government‟s 

actions that this Administration is one that is administering the affairs of this Province through threats, 

fears and doubt. 

 

Saskatchewan, which was a leader in the introduction of the Hospitalization Plan, Saskatchewan which 

was a leader in the introduction of Medicare, is now through this Government‟s actions taking away the 

very reason for the initiation of these plans. I say, Mr. Speaker, because the primary reason for the 

introduction of the Hospital and Medicare Plan was to spread the cost of the services on the ability to 

pay, so that the unbearable burdens do not fall on the sick or their families. Deterrent fees take away the 

fundamental reasons for this plan, and deterrent fees are an additional tax for the people who are sick. 

Deterrent fees are an additional tax for the people who are not well-off. Deterrent fees are an additional 

tax for the unemployed. Deterrent fees are an additional tax for the people who have large families. 

Deterrent fees are an additional tax for the people who have chronic illnesses and require hospital care 

frequently. Deterrent fees are further an additional tax and a burden for the old. Mr. Speaker, this tax is a 

tax that is 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

900 

so despicable that I could not contemplate a Government‟s introduction of such a tax under any 

circumstances. This tax deters the people from seeking medical service. This tax keeps people from 

seeking preventive care and early treatment. This tax discourages regular follow-up treatment, this tax is 

an inconvenience and a nuisance to the patient. This tax is further an inconvenience and nuisance to 

doctors, and it discriminates against doctors who are trying to keep their patients out of the hospital. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I can see no merit in the introduction of this tax except to further burden those who 

have the least ability to pay for these services. In fact deterrent fees will not, as the present Government 

will have us believe, reduce costs of medical care, because those, who happen to be hypochondriacs, 

will still irregardless of charge seek medical care, those who are wealthy enough will continue to seek 

adequate medicare care, which they justly should. But, Mr. Speaker, those that I have mentioned 

previously because of the deterrent charges will put off regular visitations and consequently increase the 

use of hospital beds, because they did not get preventative medical care early enough. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — An example of such a situation, Mr. Speaker, is that of the Swift Current Health Region 

where deterrent charges have been in effect for a number of years. Well, there are far fewer repeat office 

visits meaning less follow-up on chronic illnesses and follow-through on acute illnesses. Deterrent fees 

have played a part in sharply increasing the use of hospital beds. In that Health Region there are the 

highest surgical rates in Saskatchewan, and by far the highest use of hospital beds for medical reasons of 

anywhere else in Canada. Inpatient costs in the hospital Health Region for non-surgical reasons have 

reached $52.00 per person in 1966, compared to about $32.00 per person for the rest of Saskatchewan. 

The Hospital Plan could well have cost us $10 million more in 1966, if hospital services had been used 

the way they are in Swift Current where there are already deterrent fees. The net effect of deterrent fees 

will be a great increase in pressure for inpatient hospital services. Such deterrent charges as I stated 

before will tax the people with the least ability to pay. Consequently because of unpaid hospital 

deterrent fees, there will be an increase of municipal taxes to underwrite these debts. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, these utilization fees, deterrent fees, charges or tax increases or whatever you 

may call them were only a beginning. The Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) increased taxes in 

nine or ten other fields. The Provincial sales tax was increased from 4 to 5 percent. Mr. Speaker, I am 

sure that not all the people of this province will forget that this was a promise in 1964 to reduce this tax 

to 4 per cent and further to 3. Instead of this happening, we find that the Provincial Treasurer somehow 

got turned around 180 degrees, and it went back up to 5 per cent instead of down to 3. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Milestone (Mr. MacDonald) was this afternoon stating 

increases under the former CCF Administration. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want to be repetitious, but I do 

want to list some of the major tax increases under the Liberal Government since 1964, a Government 

that went into power in this province on a platform of a reduction of taxes. Some 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

901 

of these major tax increases were an increase in the hospital and medicare premiums, a tobacco tax, auto 

insurance premiums were increased, the removal of the education and health tax on soaps and so on, the 

gasoline tax, property tax soared. — This was another plank in their platform in 1964, a promise to find 

a way to reduce the property taxes, instead they went up over 24 per cent within a matter of years, — 

increased telephone toll rates, increased liquor prices. Mr. Speaker, the tax increases that the present 

Government has introduced since 1964, indeed make the CCF look like pikers in comparison. Mr. 

Speaker, this Government started with juggling and shuffling and confusing taxes to taxing detergents 

and now has graduated to deterrents. Starting April 1 they are taxing hotel-motel accommodations, 

commercial cabins and cottages extending to cover meals costing $2 or more. All forms of 

telecommunications including telephones, telegrams, teletype and private wires. A further tax increase 

on gasoline and on diesel fuels, increased by two cents a gallon. And then of course, Mr. Speaker, 

supposedly the present Government dearly loves the farmer, and it made available purple gas for him. 

But what do we find in this Budget? We find that all tax-exempt fuels, petroleum products, except 

heating fuel will be taxed two cents a gallon effective April 1. This includes purple gas and diesel fuel 

for agricultural industry and also aircraft fuel. In this tax increase we find the Liberal Government 

resorting to their 1964 practice of shuffling and juggling, but nevertheless increased taxation. 

 

There are a host of other tax increases, Mr. Speaker, fee increases of over 100 per cent for operator‟s 

licence, registration fees for private passenger vehicles, commercial trucks and farm trucks, an increase 

in the tobacco tax and the pari-mutuel tax increase. 

 

If taxes have to be increased, Mr. Speaker, some of the areas that the present Government has chosen are 

indeed justifiable. But in most instances, taxes such as the deterrent fees on health and hospitalization 

are areas which tax the people that have the least ability to pay. Because these tax increases are going to 

further burden the wrong people, and further because of the present Government‟s neglect to tell the 

residents of Saskatchewan prior to and during the election campaign of 1967, what the true situation of 

the economy was in this Province of Saskatchewan, I cannot on behalf of myself or the constituency I 

represent support the motion. However, I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood: (Swift Current) — Mr. Speaker, it would appear that the time has come that I should 

rise and say a few words in this debate. I have heard a good deal being said back and forth for the last 

few days and I would like to add my small contribution to the remarks that have been made. 

 

There is one point that I would like to make tonight, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was the Hon. Member 

from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) in speaking this afternoon that said that the former CCF 

Government had done nothing for the Indians and Métis in this Province. I am quick to admit that we 

did not do enough, I maintain that the shame of the white man‟s treatment of these people was there 

when we took office in 1944, it was still there when we left office and it is still there now. I maintain 

that 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

902 

none of us are doing enough for the Indian and Métis people of this Province. It is a very difficult 

problem I realize and it is not one where we can rush in, and just by simply making hand-outs achieve 

the desired effect, but it is a problem that we are faced with, and we have been faced with it for a good 

deal of time, and we are still faced with it. 

 

But I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the former CCF Government did a good deal about the 

problems of the Indian and Métis people. We did something about employment. We stopped the 

indiscriminate waste of our resources by the big operators and insisted on a sustained cut of the timber 

of the north country, thus ensuring the continued climate of people in the north. 

 

The Timber Board was set up to standardize the quality of the lumber marketed. This couldn‟t help but 

increase the output and keep up the markets for this lumber which would help out and increase a good 

deal the employment opportunities in the north. We set up lumber operations for the Indian and Métis 

themselves in such places as Green Lake and Canoe Lake. Through our fish marketing and fur 

marketing we assured a fair return for the Indian people in these occupations. We encouraged handicraft 

at LaRonge and other points. We weren‟t successful in getting a pulp mill started. The one initiated by 

the Liberals has not yet proved itself to be an unqualified success, but I am prepared to give them full 

marks for what they have done. I‟m not prepared to endeavor to detract from what they have done 

whatsoever, but I do feel that they cannot say that we did nothing in regard to assist the Indians in 

employment opportunities. 

 

I think also the record shows that we did a great deal for them by way of education. Now I looked back 

in the reports of the Department of Education, I looked back through the Annual Report of 1943-44 and 

I could find practically nothing about the education for the Indians in the northern part of the Province. 

There is a picture here of a small school; it says it is a reserve Government-aided school for children of 

employees of The Pas Lumber Company Mill. That‟s about the only thing I can find in the Report 

regarding them. 

 

I turn over to page 52 of the Annual Report of 1944-45. This was shortly after the Hon. Member from 

Biggar, the present Leader of the Opposition, and at that time the Minister of Education had come to the 

helm of the Department of Education. With your consent, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read a few paragraphs 

from this Report. The Social Report for the Administrative Area of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

The appointment of an administrator of education for remote northern Saskatchewan was approved on 

April 15, 1945. An office was immediately set up and office space secured in the Natural Resources 

Building at Prince Albert. 

 

With the information available and contained in a survey made in the autumn of 1944, plans were laid 

to provide education for all children in the area, not including the children of Treaty Indians. 

 

Many factors mitigated against achieving much during the year 1945. 

 

The late spring restricted visits to the settlement as 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

903 

the lakes were not open for navigation or for landing by plane until late in June. 

 

Transportation along Trade Route No. 1 from Ft. McMurray to Stony Rapids is restricted to sailings in 

June and September, while transportation of heavy materials along the other trade routes is restricted 

during winter months. It was impossible, therefore, in some cases to take in materials and equipment 

to some settlements and in some cases the late arrival of the materials necessitated postponement of 

construction until the spring of 1946. 

 

Another delay was caused by difficulty in securing titles for school sites. Most of the settlements in the 

north have not been surveyed and definite descriptions of the property required are difficult to obtain. 

 

Schools are now in operation at Stony Rapids, Camsell Portage, Lac la Loche (two rooms), Buffalo 

Narrows (two rooms), Beauval, Green Lake (three rooms), Chitek Lake, Candle Lake, Lac La Ronge 

(two rooms), Sandy Beach, Island Falls, Denare Beach, Cumberland House (two rooms), Pemmican 

Portage. In addition three teachers are engaged at the Mission School at Ile a la Crosse with pupils 

from the hamlet in attendance as day pupils. A school at Montreal Lake North will be in operation as 

soon as the teacher is released by the Navy. This makes a total of 24 rooms in operation. 

 

And it goes on next paragraph, if I may continue, Mr. Speaker, I won‟t read too much of this, because I 

know that reading is not too good a thing in the House, but it does show a picture of what was going 

forward in the year 1945 when this new plan was erected for the administration of schools in the 

Administrative Area of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Appropriations made for the erection of one-room schools at Stony Rapids, Candle Lake, Denare 

Beach, Garson Lake; two-room schools at Beauval, Buffalo Narrows, La Loche and an additional 

room at Cumberland House; for remodelling existing buildings at Chitek Lake, Pemmican Portage, 

Camsell Portage, Sandy Beach; for the erection of teacherages at Pemmican Portage, Denare Beach 

and Stony Rapids and securing and remodelling a residence at Camsell Portage. 

 

The schools at Candle Lake and Denare Beach have been completed, while the materials for Stony 

Rapids is on the ground and construction has started. Additional rooms are opened and temporary 

quarters at La Loche, Buffalo Narrows and Lac La Ronge. The schools at Chitek Lake, Pemmican 

Portage, Camsell Portage and Sandy Beach have been remodelled. Temporary quarters for the school 

and teacherage have been secured and remodelled at Camsell Portage. The log teacherage at Buffalo 

Narrows has been opened. Combined teacherage-outpost hospitals continue in operation at La Loche 

and Green Lake. 

 

You can just get the spirit of the energy and the work that went forward in bringing education to the 

children of the north. You read over on the next page, skipping a good deal, in regard to noon lunch. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

904 

An appropriation of $100 was made for each school and instruction given to these teachers in the 

preparation of food to be provided. 

 

With the payment of family allowances, the appointment of local attendance officers and opening of 

additional rooms in the schools, coupled with the offer of attendance of 60 cents per child per teaching 

day where no school is provided, the attendance has shown a marked increase. Many settlements are 

showing 100 per cent in both enrolment and attendance. Practically all children (excluding Treaty 

Indians) on Lake Athabasca are at school and through moccasin telegraph one family of six is 

expected in from the Barrens, a distance of 240 air miles, to attend at Stony Rapids. Several larger 

schools show an enrolment in grade one of over 25 of all ages who cannot speak English. 

 

I think this, Mr. Speaker, is a wonderful record in this regard of showing what was done in 1945 by. the 

Department of Education under the leadership of the present Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). Mr. 

Speaker, this sort of energy applied to the problem had definite results. In September of 1945 this 

Annual Report shows that there was some 829 pupils enrolled in the northern administration area. A 

year later there were some 989, with 27 teachers on the staff. In the 1963-64 report, Mr. Speaker, which 

is the last report that we would have of a full year while the CCF were in office, there were 128 teachers 

and an enrolment of 3,551. The record of the CCF in regard to education in the north for Indian and 

Métis children was that the enrolment rose from 829 pupils in 1945 to 3,551 in 1963-64. Now we have 

evidence, on the basis of some reports that have emanated from the other side, that the Indian population 

does increase very rapidly, but they don‟t increase this rapidly, Mr. Speaker. This shows that the CCF 

Government brought education to the children of the north, and I think it is a record of which they do 

not need to be ashamed. I think that we can be proud of the record of the CCF in bringing education to 

the northern people. 

 

As someone has said that education and employment are the key to the problem, I think that the CCFs 

record in this regard is not bad. As I said earlier, there is a great deal more that can be done, and I don‟t 

want to intimate in any way that we have done all that we should, but I do mean to say that we have 

done a good deal in that regard and we are not ashamed of what we have done. 

 

A little further in this regard I‟d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that in 1962 we set up a Community 

Development Branch to endeavor to correlate the work of the various Departments as they affected the 

Métis and Indian people. We made some progress in this, especially in the Meadow Lake area, before 

we left office. I notice that the present Administration has done little in this regard, for the reports that 

we get are that both the provincial and Federal civil servants are following one another around the 

reserves and bewildering both themselves and the people they are supposed to serve. I think a good deal 

more could be done about amalgamating and correlating the work of the different branches of 

Government that are working to serve the Indian people on which we made a start back in 1962, but 

little appears to have been done in this line since that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to go on to say a few words about 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

905 

some other underprivileged people in this province, namely the farmers. The Government opposite likes 

to applaud itself for what it has done or what it is doing in this present Budget for the farmers. I think the 

record shows that it has done very little and that there is need of a good deal more being done. I would 

like to read, if I may, a couple of short paragraphs from the February 21st issue of the “Co-op 

Commentary”, an article regarding the cost of producing a bushel of wheat. This study was made by Jim 

Clarke who is a vocational educational instructor in the Kindersley school unit and set up the first course 

in vocational agricultural education at that point. This is what he has to say in the Co-op Commentary of 

February 21st: 

 

A recent research study on the wheat farmer‟s position in the economy contains much interesting 

information. The study, commissioned by the county council of Vulcan, Alberta and paid for by 1000 

farmers in the county, reveals that in 1965 the average cost of producing a bushel of wheat in that 

county was $1.57. The net price paid that year was about $1.60 a bushel. 

 

The Vulcan study arrived at an average cost of producing a bushel of wheat for a specific group of 

farmers for just one year. It also highlighted the variable nature of farm costs. Aggregate costs of 

producing a bushel of wheat varied widely within the county. Farms of more than 1,280 acres 

averaged $1.47 a bushel; farms of 640 to 1,280 acres averaged a cost of $1.63 bushel, and farms of 

less than 640 acres averaged $1.90 a bushel. Although the figure of $1.57 is not applicable elsewhere 

or even for another year in Vulcan County, the study indicates very clearly the unfavorable position in 

which the wheat farmer finds himself. 

 

When you have farmers receiving $1.60 a bushel and an accurate study in one part of the country, which 

I might say could probably be an average or possibly a better average than in most of the country, shows 

the cost was from $1.47 to $1.90 a bushel, it shows what a lean margin that the farmers are operating 

upon. And I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, in this regard that I do not think that the farmers of this 

province can well afford to pay the extra two cents per gallon that is being imposed upon them in 

payment of farm fuel, that is being imposed by this Budget. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the Government 

opposite while it claims to be a farmer‟s Government, would be well advised to pay a little more 

attention to the problem in this regard. 

 

While I am on the subject of farm matters, I would like to say something about the swine program. Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) in addressing the House the other day, if I recall 

his words correctly, as I didn‟t take them down exactly, I believe he said something to the effect that 

when the ARDA program was set up, that it was set up before the results of the 1961 crop failure had 

been taken into full account. Thereby it would appear to me, and I think that the Hon. Minister would 

agree with me in this, that it does not truly reflect the vagaries of the returns of the wheat-growing areas 

in the Province. I think that the data that were obtained and through which the ARDA was arrived at, 

possibly do not take into full consideration some of the crop failures of the southwest and other parts of 

the province. I believe that the swine facilities program is set up in such a way that grants are made to 

those young farmers and others setting up swine facilities in the ARDA area. These grants are available 

to them in building facilities for producing hogs. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

906 

I have nothing to say against this program and I believe that it is one that is under-written to a large 

degree by the Federal Government and I think that it is a good program. But, along with some other 

Members, and I am sad to say that most sit on the other side of the House, from the great southwest, I 

have to point out that this program is not available down in our country. I have had young farmers come 

to me and tell me of the expense that they were under in setting up proper facilities for producing swine 

and hogs. It runs into many thousands of dollars, from $20,000, to $50,000 for a good set-up. On this 

they get no help from the Provincial Government except possibly in regard to plans. The young man that 

was speaking to me said that the cost shown in these plans hadn‟t proved very accurate in his case. He 

had to pay a good many thousand dollars more for the completed structure than what he was led to 

believe he would, and he was unable to get any help under this Swine Facility Program. 

 

Now I realize that the Federal payments on this are only available in the ARDA area, as it is an ARDA 

program, and therefore, not available in our part of the country. But I would like to point out, Mr. 

Speaker, that the farmers in the southwest are just not that rich that they should be cut off from help of 

this kind. I do think that possibly, if all the factors have been taken into consideration, when the ARDA 

area was drawn up, it might have extended a little further than it does at the present time. I do think that 

the Government should give some attention to the fact that these young farmers getting started in the 

southwest have just as much need for this sort of thing as others in other parts of the country. I do think 

that they should be given some consideration and assistance from the Government opposite. I want to 

point this out especially to the Hon. Members from Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron), Shaunavon (Mr. 

Larochelle), Morse (Mr. Thatcher) and Kerrobert-Kindersley (Mr. Howes) and some of· the others in 

that area,and maybe our Hon. Friend from Wilkie (Mr. McIsaac), I think that I should get a little help on 

this from some of the Members from the other side of the House, because I think that our young people 

do need this kind of help over there as well as in the eastern part of the province. It would mean possibly 

100 per cent payment by the Provincial Government if they aren‟t able to get this help from the Federal 

Government. I see that the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) is in his seat now and I would 

like to ask him to give consideration to extending this Swine Facility Program in some way to all the 

young farmers in the province, because this help is needed just as badly in my area and in the southwest 

as it is in the rest of the province. 

 

There is another matter that I would like to speak of and I believe that it has been mentioned earlier in 

this debate, but I would also like to say something on it. And this is the matter of the handling of Crown 

land. In the last few months some of my neighbors and people that I have met have approached me and 

said they were afraid that they were going to have to buy their leases. They had received some literature 

from the Department that tended to make them think that. I obtained. some of the information, some of 

the literature and some letters that they had received and so far as I could see it didn‟t tend this way. I 

just couldn‟t take that interpretation from it, that they were going to be obliged to purchase their land, 

that they could still continue to keep it at least as long as their lease held out. I wrote to the Hon. 

Minister in this regard a few weeks ago and he answered to the effect that I was right in 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

907 

this, that they did have nothing to fear from this so long as their leases held and that there was no 

intention of the Government making them purchase their leases. From what has been said by the Premier 

during this session, there have been some remarks made that a program is considered of tendering the 

Crown lands. I am worried again of this, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane) to continue to give this consideration, especially in regard to some of our older people. I had 

a couple of my neighbors approach me in this that some of them are getting on in years and that they 

have a lease that is good for 10 or 20 years yet, but they don‟t want to spend the money that is necessary 

for them to purchase this. They don‟t have it in the first place. It would completely wreck their 

organization. It would completely wreck their setup if they had to go to work and buy this lease. On the 

other hand, if they don‟t keep this lease, they have lost a good share of their livelihood. The people that 

have approached me in this regard earlier, which I mentioned to the Hon. Minister earlier, were greatly 

worried that they might have to do this and that it was going to be a real hardship to them. I sincerely 

hope that he is able to maintain the policy whereby these people are not forced to step out and bid 

against other concerns in order to hold the leases that they now have. In cases that I know of, it would 

really mean a severe hardship to them. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane: (Minister of Agriculture) — No changes! 

 

Mr. Wood: — Very good! I am glad to hear that because I have been worried. This matter of tendering 

Crown leases doesn‟t sound very good to some of us who have run into this sort of thing. 

 

There is another matter that I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, and that is in regard to chiropractors. 

This matter has been mentioned to us from time to time and there have been different statements made 

concerning the possibility of bringing the chiropractors under the Medical Care Plan. The Members 

opposite, when they were elected back in 1964, were elected, I believe, on the basis that they were going 

to improve the Medical Care Plan. This is one of the things that we thought they might be able to bring 

in along with the promised drug plan. But we have heard nothing about it in this Budget. I can‟t see that 

it would cost a great deal, because there are many people who would make use of these chiropractic 

treatments which are comparatively reasonable in price, instead of having more costly medical 

treatments. There are a good many people who place a good deal of faith and trust in the chiropractor‟s 

treatments. I have to admit myself, Mr. Speaker, that I have never had one of these treatments, but I 

know a good many people who do place a good deal of confidence in them. I think that these people 

have just as much right to have their treatment paid for by the Medical Care Plan as those who patronize 

the medical doctors. I would urge that this Government gives some consideration to this. I know that it is 

adding charges in regard to the utilization of the services which will bring several millions of dollars 

into the funds of the Province in this regard, and possibly it could be able to give some consideration to 

extending the benefits of the Plan in this way, at this time. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about the taxation features that are in this Budget 

before us. I have to admit, Sir, that I found out tonight that I was going to speak 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

908 

in this debate with rather short notice, I wasn‟t able to compile all the data that I would like to have. I 

believe that the Hon. Members opposite when they were elected in 1964, were elected on a program that 

they would reduce taxes, both Provincial and property taxes. This was the program under which it was 

elected in 1964. I have a few figures that I got together rather hurriedly but I took a look in an old 

Financial Report and found that in 1963-64, the last complete year under the former CCF Government, 

the revenue from taxes shown in the Financial Statement was $102,320,830. The revenue from motor 

vehicles was $8,954,595. The total property tax in that 1963-64 year shown by the report was 

$96,432,268, for a total revenue of taxes as shown by the Financial Report and motor vehicle taxes, 

(There were many other forms of taxation that I didn‟t have time to work into this, I just picked out two 

or three of the main ones.) a total at this time of some $207,707,000 of taxation on the people of the 

province in the last year that the CCF were in office. Now I take this Budget that we have before us at 

the present time; the estimated revenue from taxes in 1968-69 is $193,021,000. The motor vehicle 

licences are not $9 million but $13,787,000. The property tax, we don‟t have for this year, but the last 

figure that we have is in regard to 1966-67, and at that time it is not $96 million, but $123,708,802. In 

the last year, Mr. Speaker, as I noted in a former debate, I pointed out to the House that they had 

increased in this last year, for which we have the records by some $10.5 million. The property tax in 

1966-67 is $123 million and I think that you will have to add to that, to bring it up to what we may 

anticipate to pay in the present year. You will have to add another $10 million, for last year and another 

$10 million for the coming year, or a total of $20 million. You add these figures together, Mr. Speaker, 

and you come up with a total which the people of this Province will be paying in taxes this year of 

$350,516,000. You have to give the credit where it is due. The Government is paying out $8 million a 

year in homeowner grants, so you will have to subtract this from this figure and you will come up with 

$342 million more being paid this year by the people of Saskatchewan than what was paid back in the 

last year in which the CCF were in office. 

 

Now, back in 1963-64, the population of Saskatchewan, I believe, was in „he neighbourhood of 942,000 

people. You divide this into the figure of $207,700,000 and you come up with approximately a tax of 

$220.00 per capita. The people Saskatchewan back in the last year in which the CCF were in office, 

were taxed $220 for every man, woman and child in the Province. But look at the picture now, Mr. 

Speaker, the population has increased, not too much, I‟ll have to, admit, but it has increased to 

approximately 960,000 (actually 959,000) as of January 1st of this year. You divide this into the figure 

of $342.5 million and you come up with approximately $356. The people of the Province are now 

paying approximately $356 for every man, woman and child in the Province. This is the record of four 

years of Liberal Government, which. was elected in 1964 on the promise, heralded far and wide 

throughout the province, that it was going to reduce taxes, not only Provincial but also property taxes. 

You take the per capita taxation of $356 per capita now and the per capita taxation of $220 per capita 

back in 1963-64, and you have an increase of $137 per capita, that will be paid by the people of the 

province this coming year, more than what they paid back in 1963-64. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

909 

This is a result of a policy of tax reduction by the Members opposite. I think that you can check these 

figures as I threw them together I‟ll have to admit rather hurriedly, but I think you can check these out, 

and I think that you will find that this is very close to the truth in this regard, that a family of five will be 

paying $685 more this year than what the same family would have paid back in 1963-64. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that covers most of what I have to say tonight. I think that you will have gathered from 

what I have said, that it is really not my intention to support the motion that we have before us, but I will 

certainly support the amendment. 

 

But before I sit down, I just have to admit, Sir, that I did think of something else and possibly I should 

say something about it. There has a good deal been said in this House, on both sides of the House, in this 

debate, concerning the Swift Current Health Region, and the deterrent fees that we have there. We have 

had these deterrent fees for a good many years. They weren‟t for the complete life of the Health Region 

that was established back in 1946 and has been an outstanding example of what the Medical Care can do 

for the people of this Province or any other place in the world. We are proud of our Swift Current Health 

Region and what it has shown that can be done. We have had deterrent fees there, as has been 

proclaimed, for some years. These fees, Mr. Speaker, are not $1.50 per visit, they are $1 per visit. And I 

might say, Mr. Speaker, that the policy that is practised by most of the doctors in the area, that this $1 

per visit applies only to the first call in regard to any specific complaint. If I go in there with a sore toe, 

well it‟s $1, and if I come back again in regard to that same sore toe, I am not charged anything and this 

is standard policy, although I do understand that doctors do have the authority and are able to charge $1 

for each visit, regardless of what the reason might be. If I come, in, however, in regard to some other 

ailment the charge is $1 for each new ailment that I may come to the doctor with. There are also charges 

of $2 for house visits and $3 for night or emergency calls. I think that on the whole these charges are a 

good deal less than what is proposed by the Government in this Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — I think that the difference is going to be such that the people of the Swift Current area are 

not going to be happy with them. Because it is my understanding, and I think that the Hon. Minister will 

back me up in this, the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant), that when these new deterrent fees in regard to 

medical care come into operation they will to a good extent, to the extent at least that these things apply, 

cut the amount of money that is made available by the Department to the Swift Current Health Region in 

regard to their Plan. I think that the Swift Current Health Region Board is considering that this is going 

to cut the amount that they receive from the Provincial Plan some $100,000 to $120,000. 

 

Now we have for years had a dental program which has been carried on and paid for, largely by the 

savings through the plan by these deterrent charges. This has been an added cost which the people of 

Swift Current area have paid and they have turned around and put this money into a dental program. It 

has been much appreciated and has done a good deal for the younger people of that area. Now with this 

added charge being put on the 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

910 

medicare care program, it is apparent that there is going to be great difficulty for the people of Swift 

Current to retain this dental program. 

 

As I say, much has been said here about the Swift Current program and it has been bandied back and 

forth a good deal, but let me make this statement, that I am very assured that the people of the Swift 

Current area aren‟t going to be any happier about the imposition of this $1.50 charge and the $2 charge 

for house calls than any other people of the Province, because it is going to hit them just as hard, as it is 

going to be added on to the fee that they already are paying, not that they will have to make this fee, the 

charge of $1.50, added on to the $1 they now pay, $2.50 per visit, but this amount is going to be 

subtracted from the gross payment that is made to them in regard to their program, because they are paid 

on the per capita basis of what the plan costs the MC1C Program per capita for the people of the 

province. This amount is paid over to the Swift Current Plan on a per capita basis and any reduction in 

the cost of MC1C in regard to this plan is going to result in a reduction of the amount of money that is 

paid over to the Swift Current Plan. This reduction that we have before us is not going to be accepted 

very happily in the Swift Current area anymore than it is anywhere else. 

 

As has been said before, this matter of, if I may repeat, Sir, this matter of the deterrent charge which is a 

very poor name indeed for the charge for the use of hospital facilities, is something that is going to be 

new in the Swift Current area as well as it is in other parts of the Province and to call such a charge a 

deterrent fee is entirely wrong. Any effect that it can have upon the plan in regard to reducing the 

number of calls, I fail entirely to see how it could work out. The doctors are responsible for putting the 

patients in the hospital, they are responsible for releasing them from the hospital and any responsibility 

by the patient in this regard is nil, except that in the future he is going to have to pay this extra $2.50 per 

day that he is in there. I do like to speak very strongly against the imposition of these figures, I think that 

if we have to have money we should be able to get it from other sources. 

 

I think the Members opposite have raised the objection that we have said we want to cut taxes. We have 

said a lot about the taxes we felt are unjust, that this is a terribly backward Budget, a tremendous amount 

of taxes are being charged and yet at the same time we are not prepared to say what should be done and 

take a position on this. I do maintain, Mr. Speaker, that the Government, faced with the possibility of 

borrowing money or cutting needed services, possibly has done the right thing in raising some taxes, but 

I maintain that there are services that could have been cut. I think if you look, at the Budget in many 

ways there are a lot of frills that could be cut off. I think that even some of our Highway programs could 

have been deducted. This matter of four-lane highways may be carried a little too far. Reference has 

been made to the traffic exchange at Swift Current, in the city of Swift Current. I am sure this is 

appreciated by the people of the area, it was needed for something had to be done there, but if the Hon. 

Members opposite had been following me around the last year, trying to explain to some of the property 

owners there that this was a good thing, I think they would have found that they have quite a chore on 

their hands. I know I found it very difficult. I think that possibly there are some things along this line 

that could have been saved. I don‟t hardly think that this large expenditure was entirely 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

911 

justified, I think that some other way could have been arrived at that would have been just as acceptable 

to the people of the area without spending quite so much money.~ 

 

Now again, Mr. Speaker, I must day that I will not support the motion but I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy: (Minister of Public Works) — Mr. Speaker, I am. certainly glad that the gentleman 

that just sat down (Mr. Wood) remembered to say the last few remarks that he had. They proved to be 

probably the most sensible that have come from the other side of the House this evening. The House 

would have been a loser if we hadn‟t heard those last ones. 

 

In rising to participate ill this debate I want first of all to say that I am a little under the weather tonight. I 

thought first of all that it was the flu, but after listening to the speeches from across the way, I am not so 

sure whether that‟s what made me sick or not. 

 

I intend to deal primarily tonight with the programs of my Department for the coming year. However, 

before I do I wish to refer to some of the remarks that have been made by Members opposite this 

evening, some of the remarks that were made the other day by the Member from The Battlefords (Mr. 

Kramer). I am sorry that he isn‟t in his seat, but I don‟t know why we would expect him to be here this 

evening when there are other things more important I suppose than representing the city of North 

Battleford in the Legislature. No, he doesn‟t care, he made his one speech for the session so I suppose he 

probably won‟t be back. He‟s a hit and run speaker. 

 

I would like to refer to the Member for Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) for just a minute or two. You know I 

was really touched by the crocodile tears that the Member for Cutknife showed in regard to the teaching 

situation in this province. He was crying about the student-teacher ratio being set or suggested at 1 to 

22.5, and its effect on individual instruction. Well now of course, Mr. Speaker, the desirable figure 

would be a teacher for every student. However, I am afraid that in this day and age we can‟t reach that 

Socialist Utopia which they are always referring to, but I would like to say that certainly a ratio of 1 to 

22.5 is a darned sight better than it was when I started teaching under the Socialists some 16 years ago. 

Teachers during that day and age if they had less than 35 in their classroom and teaching anywhere from 

4 to 8 grades, that was an exception. So a ratio of 1 to 22.5 isn‟t that bad when you consider that today 

we are more specialized, we have fewer classes and the situation has improved considerably, particularly 

in the last few years. However, his concern for education is just one more hollow statement which 

Members opposite believe that if they repeat often enough is bound to come true. One only needs to 

look at one thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is the dollars spent by the Liberals for education and the dollars 

spent by the Socialists when they were in office. I am not going to go over the record again tonight; my 

colleagues have placed this on the records several times. When you add it all up there is no comparison 

of the money that was provided by the Liberals since they came into office and the money that was spent 

by the Socialists during their 20 years of dictatorship. 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

912 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say just one or two words about the speech of the Member from Prince 

Albert East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky). He said so little tonight it is difficult to find anything to 

comment on. He started out his speech “that rumor has it” and then he went on to read a letter. Well he 

ended it in the same way, with a rumor. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that that gentleman has listened to 

rumors so often and he has spread rumors so often, that he wouldn‟t know the truth if he tripped over it. 

 

Now, I appreciated the-remarks of the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood), regarding the school 

situation in Northern Saskatchewan, He spent some time putting on the records of the House the work 

done by the CCF Government back in 1944-45. He referred to many of the temporary classrooms and 

teacherages that were provided during those few years. It brought back old memories, Mr. Speaker, 

because when I went North in 1954, ten years later, these temporary classrooms and teacherages were 

still in use. In fact in 1964 there were a good number of temporary classrooms and teacherages in use, 

and I am proud to say today that in my constituency under a Liberal Government there is not one 

temporary classroom. Every one-room school has been replaced by the Liberal Government and each 

and every one of these schools has modern facilities. There is no one running out in the cold weather to 

the back with an Eaton‟s Catalogue under their arm. In fact the increase in La Ronge itself is a good 

example of what has happened under a Liberal Government. In 1954 when I had the pleasure of going to 

La Ronge, there were five classrooms; in 1963, there were ten. However, from 1964 until 1967 these ten 

classrooms have mushroomed until today there are a total of 26. Now, of course, this isn‟t all due to the 

population explosion that the gentleman from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) referred to. A good part of it is 

due to the industrial development that the Liberals have brought to Northern Saskatchewan. In fact I 

would invite the prairie chicken from Swift Current, in fact all the prairie chickens from across the way 

there, to visit Northern Saskatchewan and see Liberal development at its best. I know that for someone 

who is unaware of the area it is very difficult to understand the development that has taken place during 

the last four years, so I would invite you to come up there and see for yourself what a good-free 

enterprise approach to the development of resources will do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other day we listened I suppose for an hour and a half to the Member for The 

Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) while he fumbled through another speech that someone had written for him. I 

would like to suggest — and I‟ hope it doesn‟t hurt his tender feelings — that before he delivers his 

speeches in this House that he at least read them over once. Then at least it would be less embarrassing 

for him and certainly would be less painful for us who have to listen to him. I would suggest also that his 

ghost writer, whether it is Mr. Burton or Mr. de Jong, limit his speech to three or four-lettered words so 

that he can pronounce them correctly and not stumble over them the way he did the other day. A student 

in grade four would have done a better job of reading his speech intelligently than he was able to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — However, Members on this side were not disappointed that the content at least was the 

same as it has been in the 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

913 

past. He proved again how uncouth and boorish he can be. His speech consisted of maligning 

individuals, smutty expressions and pitiful attempts to be funny which fell flat. As in the past, it was 

noticeable that he tends to attack personally anyone with an education, but again I suppose it is only 

natural from one who recognizes his own weaknesses in this regard. He particularly delighted in 

maligning the Premier, the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac), and the former Minister of Health (Mr. 

Steuart) because of their business and professional background. 1 would ask; who is the Member for 

The Battlefords to question the Premier‟s choice. of a man with a teaching background and a doctor‟s 

degree as Minister of Education? One would well ask; what were the qualifications of an auctioneer who 

became the Minister of the Department of Natural Resources? It was obvious to those who sat in this 

House during that period that the only qualification he brought to the job was a big mouth and an empty 

head. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — It doesn‟t say much for Members opposite when one considers that this trio he thinks so 

little of removed them quite satisfactorily from the Government benches and in three and a half years 

cleaned up the mess left by the loud-mouthed auctioneer and his friends. Again as in the past his 

favourite targets were the new Cabinet Ministers that had been appointed since the last election. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, I have often wondered why he had the vindictiveness towards new Ministers when 

he was one himself, but on checking back I think I found the answer. It is again simply a question of 

envy as he tries to take out his own frustration on us. For those Members who are new to this House, I 

should like to remind you that he has the distinction of being a Minister of the Crown for the shortest 

length of time. He was appointed in November 1962 and discharged from his duties in April of 1964. 

But what proved to be particularly frustrating to him was the fact that he was a Member for ten long 

years before he was even considered for the post of Cabinet Minister and then it was as a last resort. The 

Member for The Battlefords was elected in 1952 along with the Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. 

Willis), Russ Brown from Last Mountain, the Member from Milestone (Walter Erb), who subsequently 

all entered the Cabinet. The Member for The Battlefords was left behind. In the 1956 election, the 

Members from Moose Jaw, Swift Current and Touchwood entered the House. Eventually they too were 

promoted to the Cabinet, but again the Member from The Battlefords was forgotten. In 1960, Sandy 

Nicholson, Ollie Turnbull and the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) joined the Government 

and in their first term of office became Members of the Executive Council, but again the Member for 

The Battlefords was bypassed. So no wonder he was miffed and frustrated to see nine Members that 

were elected after he came to Government move along to the Cabinet benches while he remained in the 

back. This, of course, explains his sensitivity and envy of Cabinet appointments whether by his 

Government or any other. His frustration I suppose will never be forgotten. 

 

I was somewhat surprised at his changed attitude toward Dr. Frazier and the Frazier Report. For a man 

who claimed that he wanted nothing to do with Dr. Frazier and his report he certainly spent a lot of time 

reading from the recommendations. We are pleased at the thoroughness and the forthright manner in 

which Dr. Frazier carried out the job entrusted to him. No 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

914 

doubt his job was made easier by the number of submissions from individuals and organizations who 

were concerned with the Mental Health Program in our Province. However, the Member for The 

Battlefords (Mr. Kramer), was not one of these individuals. No, he chose to ignore the Commission‟s 

request for assistance in the drawing-up and the writing of the Report. In fact he told the CCF-NDP 

Convention last fall that he would have nothing to do with this kangaroo court appointed by Mr. 

Thatcher. Anything he would have to say would be said in the Legislature. This Member then had the 

audacity to stand up the other day and claim that he did not want to make a political issue out of this 

Report. It was clear from the very beginning that his refusal to assist the Commission in getting at the 

facts is clearly a case of wanting to further his political position at the expense of the patients at the 

Saskatchewan Hospital. The only concern that the Member for The Battlefords has for the people of his 

constituency and the city that he represents is that they continue to elect him to the Legislature. If he can 

do this through creating fear and distorting the facts, he is perfectly willing to do so. This, Mr. Speaker, 

becomes a sad state of affairs, however, when you embarrass your own city council to the point that the 

mayor has to make a public statement to correct a deliberate erroneous statement their Member has 

made. As the mayor said, Mr. Kramer is trying to make political capital out of a serious problem. 

 

I was also surprised at the attitude of the Member from The Battlefords toward social functions which he 

attends. I have happened to attend the same functions on many occasions as have other Members from 

this side of the House, and I think they will agree with me that the Member from The Battlefords is the 

first up to the trough and the last to stager away, particularly if the refreshments are free. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to spend a few moments outlining some of the programs 

that were carried out by my Department during the past year and our plans for the coming fiscal year. 

 

For many years prior to the Liberal Government coming into office in 1964, the Department of Public 

Works was ill-financed and inadequately staffed. For these reasons the Department failed, or was unable 

to keep abreast with the expanding requirements of program departments. Space requirements and 

maintenance of existing physical plant had to he dealt with on a crisis basis with the insufficient staff. 

No long-term planning had been done by the former Government, with the. result that construction and 

acquiring of space had to be done with insufficient economic research. My Government has recognized 

this inadequate incapability and has done something about it in the past three and one-half years. 

 

In 1966, following an extensive management organization study, the Department was reorganized and 

additional professional staff obtained. A new Planning Branch was added to the Department to carry out 

studies on Governmental space requirements as well as carrying out all requirement studies associated 

with the capital construction program of the Department. The activities of this Branch will allow much 

more advanced planning of building requirements, provide for better construction 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

915 

scheduling and allow the Government to get more for its money in building construction. 

 

A further objective of the reorganization was to provide for a decentralization of management in the 

interests of the public. The province was divided into six districts with headquarters at Prince Albert, 

North Battleford, Saskatoon, Weyburn, Moose Jaw and Regina, with a supervisor in each. I would like 

to take this time to pay tribute to the hard work and the efficiency of the members of my Department. 

 

Now during. the past year the need for additional services to the agricultural livestock industry was 

recognized and was reflected in the decision to construct a veterinary diagnostic laboratory to service the 

southern Saskatchewan farmers. Construction on this $700,000 project is well underway and should be 

completed by the fall of 1968. 

 

The provision of educational facilities continues to receive top priority from my Department and several 

major projects are under way. During the past year at the Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences in 

Saskatoon, work was underway to provide approximately 300,000 square feet of extensions to the 

existing facility. These extensions were required to extend and improve its existing programs, to provide 

facilities for additional trade and technical courses, to provide space for the newly established nursing 

education program and to improve administrative and general organization of the program of courses. 

Work will be continued on this project during the coming year and the completion date is set for 

February 1969, although, major portions will be completed and put in use by September of this year. 

Also during the past year, extensive renovations were carried out to the Saskatchewan Technical 

Institute at Moose Jaw. 

 

During the past year the construction of schools in the Northern Education District was transferred from 

the Department of Education to the Department of Public Works, in the interests of providing a higher 

level of engineering and architecture to the rationalization of school facilities in the north. During the 

coming fiscal year 18 new class rooms will be provided at Ile a la Crosse, La Loche and La Ronge. This 

work will also involve home economic laboratories, shops and assembly areas as required. 

 

For the Department of Highways during the past year a storage building was constructed at Stony 

Rapids and a warehouse building at North Battleford was completed during the year. Equipment storage 

buildings were provided at St. Walburg, Moose Jaw, Shellbrook and Fort Qu’Appelle, A building site at 

Sutherland was completed and an additional weight scale was provided on No. 1 Highway west of 

Regina. During the coming fiscal year we propose to continue the program of providing facilities which 

allow the protection of valuable equipment during the winter months and also keep the equipment in 

readiness to provide prompt winter maintenance service. Facilities will be provided at Esterhazy, 

Kindersley, Lloydminster, Mile 97 on the Hanson Lake Road and at Whitewood. A new weight scale 

will be installed on the new highway between Yorkton and Melville and preliminary studies and plans 

will be carried out for the construction of a warehouse in Saskatoon, which should start in the late fall. 

 

During the past summer a feasibility study to determine the sewer and water requirements for several 

northern communities 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

916 

was carried out. I am happy to announce tonight that it is proposed during the coming year to provide 

sewer and water development programs beginning in the communities of Buffalo Narrows and Ile a la 

Crosse. 

 

During the past year also a storage and maintenance building was provided at Emma Lake. A store, cafe 

and laundry building was started at Greenwater Lake and construction will be completed and equipment 

installed by June of this year. 

 

Also during the past year washroom facilities, and a camp ground service centre were provided for the 

Moose Mountain Provincial Park. A tree packing and cold storage building was provided for the Prince 

Albert Forest Nursery Station. A new radio station at Hudson Bay and storage building on the main dam 

and the Qu‟Appelle Arm Dam of Lake Diefenbaker were completed. Modern sewage disposal was 

provided for the Fisheries Laboratory in La Ronge, and modern type washroom facilities provided for 

the new camp grounds in the Cypress Hills Provincial Park. 

 

During the coming year, programs for the Department of Natural Resources will include a storage 

building, lunchroom and office building at the Big River Nursery Station to provide for storage and 

packing facilities, a modern change house, complete with showers and toilets at Loon Lake, a new 

maintenance and storage building at Moose Mountain Provincial Park, a park entry and administration 

office at Greenwater Lake Provincial Park and the updating and provision of a modern washroom 

complex at the same park. A staff quarters and storage building will be provided at St. Walburg, a 

change house at Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park and modern washrooms and shower facilities will be 

provided at Echo Lake. 

 

The Department of Public Health requires a large segment of our budget for upgrading and new 

construction for their facilities. As was reported last year during the 1966-67 fiscal year a program was 

commenced to repair the foundations of many of the Saskatchewan Training School buildings. 

Deterioration of the foundations had resulted in structural problems arising in the interior and exterior 

walls of the various buildings. During the past fiscal year these repairs to the foundations were 

completed to the remaining buildings where acute problems existed. During the coming fiscal year we 

propose to complete the foundation repairs to the cottages. 

 

For the same reasons as mentioned earlier, roofing repairs were needed on these buildings and a 

program of work was undertaken last year, and this too will be completed during the coming fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that we have had to spend nearly $750,000 to repair these buildings bears out what 

I said earlier about the lack of planning and construction supervision by the former Government and by 

the former Minister of Public Works, who is the MLA for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies). He suggested 

that the Minister. of Highways (Mr. Boldt) leave architectural style to those who know something about 

it. Well it wouldn‟t be the former Minister of Public Works that would be called in because his lack of 

knowledge in this regard has already cost the people of this province $750,000. He asked us last night 

why there were no buildings at this particular area in Moose Jaw. The answer is evident, if we didn‟t 

have to spend $750;000 fixing up his effort which fell apart, we would have had some money 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

917 

for new buildings for that facility. That institution was built in 1953 at a cost of approximately $4 

million. Within two years after construction, roof failures occurred, foundations have failed on nearly all 

of the buildings at the institution which was a result of poor design and inadequate construction 

supervision. In some instances the structure shown on plans available is different from the actual 

construction. These items are absolute proof of the poor level of construction supervision provided by 

the Department of Public Works under the former Minister from Moose Jaw. We will continue to pay 

excessively high maintenance and rebuilding costs as a result of his inefficiency. 

 

During the past year, the general renovation program at the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford 

was continued. Wards 3A and 3B were upgraded to meet the desired standard of accommodation. This 

renovation program will continue during the coming fiscal year with two more wards scheduled to be 

done. During the past year also studies have been carried out in regard to the provision of adequate 

dietary facilities at the Saskatchewan Hospital and during the coming year, we propose to completely 

renovate the centre block basement portion of the hospital and add 3,000 square feet additional space to 

the dietary area. A feasibility study was conducted during the past year to deal with the problems of the 

North Saskatchewan River bank to the south portion of the sewage lagoon. We propose to construct a 

new sewage lagoon with a necessary connecting pipe. 

 

During the past year, several projects were carried out at the Saskatchewan Training School, Prince 

Albert. Summer space has been converted into year-round space, complete re-wiring of the institution 

and provision of new light fixtures were completed and new gas-fired boilers were placed in the power 

house to provide a more up-to-date, efficient and less costly operation. During the coming year, several 

minor projects will be carried out. 

 

Finally, last year for the Department of Health extensive renovations were undertaken in the Wascana 

Hospital. 

 

During the past fiscal year, the landscaping, roadways and paving projects were completed for the 

Correctional Centre, the Saskatchewan Boys‟ School and for Dales House in Regina, and the Pinegrove 

Correctional Institute for Women in Prince Albert. In the coming year, work is scheduled to be 

completed for the renovation of the kitchen, dining, storing areas in the Prince Albert Correctional 

Centre and further work in parking areas, roadways and access roads to the Pinegrove Correction Centre 

also in that city. The continuation of site work will be done at the Correctional Centre and Dales House 

in the city of Regina. 

 

Now I would like to turn to a few projects which come directly under own Department of Public Works. 

Last summer, two unused pavilions were renovated and put into use to accommodate the Arts Board‟s 

summer program at Fort San. Studies were undertaken during the year to determine means of utilizing 

several other surplus buildings in order to accommodate the summer school of Fine Arts. At the 

Sanatorium in Saskatoon, work continued in the renovation of the third and fourth floors of the 

institution. During the coming fiscal year, we propose to carry out a major renovation program to meet 

the required changes in patient treatment and the increase in patient population associated with the 

eventual patient transfer from Fort 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

918 

Qu‟Appelle. Renovations to the Legislative Buildings will continue. I will not go into any further details 

here since they were well outlined during the Throne Speech debate. 

 

Last year several employee houses were constructed for ferry operators and other departments. A similar 

policy will be followed this year. 

 

For many years the city of Melville had requested the former Government to provide a Provincial 

Government building in that centre. This fell on deaf ears, therefore our Government was pleased, last 

fall, to let the tenders to construct a building in Melville to accommodate several Government 

departments, agencies and Crown corporations. This will realize the desired goal to consolidate all 

Government and Crown corporation offices at one location in the city of Melville. The project will 

commence this spring and will be completed by the end of the year. 

 

During the past year, lengthy studies were carried out and plans were prepared for the renovation of 

space in the SEDCO building to be used by Government agencies. Renovation and construction in this 

building is expected to start shortly and be completed by the end of the year. 

 

During the present year, renovations will continue in many buildings throughout the province. This is 

part of the program to upgrade existing space to an acceptable standard and to get away from the 

substandard space that was characterized by the former Government. Work will also continue during the 

current year to establish an underground irrigation distribution system in the Legislative grounds. 

 

The final program that will be carried out by my Department in the coming year will be the construction 

of Phase III of Saskatchewan‟s Centennial Auditorium. I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to congratulate the city of Saskatoon on the successful completion of their auditorium. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — They are to be commended on their efforts, and I am looking forward with great pleasure 

to their official opening on April 1. The other day, the Mayor of Regina (Mr. Baker) started to comment 

on the auditorium in this city, but I guess he thought better of it because he said very little before he 

changed to another subject. He tried to place the blame on our Government for his own miserable 

failure, but it was his Government that determined how the Federal Government grant would be 

distributed in Saskatchewan, and it was his Government that decided that Regina should not get the full 

grant. After almost two years of difficulty and floundering around·, the Department of Public Works 

took over the project on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan to ensure that the people in southern 

Saskatchewan would receive the same facilities that Saskatoon has provided for the northern part of the 

province. Even though the design of this building was committed, our Department after many hundreds 

of hours of study was able to save the taxpayers of the province some $2 million. We were also pleased 

that when bids for Phase III came in they were some one-half million dollars lower than we had 

estimated, proving that the construction firms had more faith in the Premier of this Province than they 

had in the Mayor of Regina to see that the 



 

March 12, 1968 

 

 

919 

project would be completed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Construction for this phase of the auditorium is expected to commence this spring, with 

scheduled completion date of March, 1970. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see that it is almost 10:00 o‟clock. I have some comments here on the Municipal Airstrip 

Improvement Program and the Assisted Passage Program as well as some of the work of the Water 

Resources Commission and Water Supply Board, as well as a few comments about the speeches made 

by the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), therefore I would 

ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


