



















































Hansard: March 19, 1969


1401 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

32nd Day 

 

Wednesday, March 19, 1969 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the House 

students from Haultain school who are here today with their teachers Mrs. Hogg and Mr. Street. These 

students are, I understand from The Leader Post, Mr. Speaker, from the fastest growing city in Canada. I 

am sure that the other Members of the House join with me in welcoming these people this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce through you, and 

I am not sure whether they are here yet but they may come later in the afternoon, a group of students that 

will come from Saskatoon Mayfair constituency. They will be located, I understand, in the east gallery. 

They are from Sion junior high school and they will be accompanied by one of their teachers, Mr. 

Mooney. I hope that when they do arrive that they enjoy their stay in the Legislative Chamber this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, I have a very pleasurable duty to perform this 

afternoon in introducing a group of grade eight students from Grant Road school on Grant Road in Grant 

constituency in the Regina south. These students are accompanied by Mrs. Newman. They have had a 

tour of the buildings and we welcome them this afternoon and wish them a very enjoyable stay. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 
 

Additional House Sittings 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): moved, seconded by the Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart): 

 

That notwithstanding Standing Order 2, this Assembly shall, commencing Friday, March 21, 1969, 

meet at 



 

March 19, 1969 

 

1402 

10:00 o’clock a.m. each sitting day, and that there shall be a recess from 12:30 o’clock p.m. until 2:30 

o’clock p.m.; and 

 

That on Wednesday, March 26, 1969, and on each Wednesday until the end of the Session, Standing 

Order 5 (2) be suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:30 o’clock p.m. 

until 10:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, when I gave notice of this motion I discussed it with the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd). I think that he was agreeable. I indicated at the time that, if Crown Corporations had not 

finished when Friday arrived, we would not proceed this Friday. However I would like the Motion 

passed in its present form. 

 

The Attorney General (Mr. Heald) introduced two very minor Bills today. I also gave notice of a minor 

one, and I hope that this will be the last bit of legislation that is introduced. I don’t know of anything 

else to come in. Indeed we have told our appropriate officials that we hope no additional Bills will be 

introduced. I hope I can persuade my colleagues that this is a wise course. 

 

Personally I would like to meet this Saturday but I understand that the Leader of the Opposition does not 

feel such a sitting is needed. But we most certainly will propose a motion to sit next Saturday and 

subsequent ones. We will also be sitting this Friday evening. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. 

Snyder) wants to know what we are going to do on Sunday. The Premier overlooked a perfectly good 

day. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will try and arrange it if you will agree. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I think perhaps you would. Mr. Speaker, as the Premier said we had indicated general 

agreement with the resolution. It is of course true that Crown Corporations haven’t finished and I would 

think there is at least one full morning left there. We could arrange this, of course, when we get to that 

point on Friday, if that is the only way open. I understand that tomorrow morning is not open because of 

one of the other Committees meeting. 

 

I want to say with respect to next Saturday, I think there is no difficulty to us agreeing to a meeting at 

that time as well. It might be useful if we get to next Thursday or Friday and see what the schedule looks 

like for the following week. We might be able to avoid a Saturday meeting and still finish 



 

March 19, 1969 

 

 

1403 

up before the Easter Thursday. I hope that the Government might carry this in mind. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — One question. Did I understand the Leader of the Opposition to say that - I hadn’t 

realized that Crown Corporations would not be sitting tomorrow - did I understand him to say that the 

Opposition might be agreeable if it held its meeting some other time than Friday morning? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I did not mention that point at all, Mr. Speaker. The Crown Corporations will not be 

sitting tomorrow because the chairman told us that Private Bills Committee is meeting tomorrow, so that 

Friday morning is the day on which ordinarily the Crown Corporations would have proceeded and 

hopefully might have finished its work at that time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, if I may be out of order for a moment. The students from 

Saskatoon Mayfair constituency and the fastest growing city in Canada have arrived and they are in the 

east gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:32 o’clock p.m. 


