



















































Hansard: January 31, 1969


9 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, January 31, 1969 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day, I would like to read the following communication: 

 

Lieutenant Governor‟s Office 

Hotel Saskatchewan 

Regina, Saskatchewan 

May 13, 1968 
 

The Honourable J.E. Snedker, MLA 

The Speaker 

Legislative Assembly Office 

Legislative Building 

Regina, Saskatchewan 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 

 

I want to thank you most sincerely for you letter of the 22nd ultimo and the certified copy of the 

Resolution passed unanimously by the Legislative Assembly on April 16th. I would appreciate it if you 

would convey to the Members of the Legislature the thanks and appreciation of my daughters and 

myself for their kindness and sympathy. 

 

I should add that the delay in acknowledging your letter is because of the fact that I have been fighting 

the flu for the last three weeks. 

 

Yours sincerely, 

 

R.L. Hanbidge 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

APPOINTMENT OF CLERK ASSISTANT 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to inform the Assembly that Gordon Leslie Barnhart, Esquire, has been 

appointed Clerk Assistant of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to bring your attention and to the 

attention of the Members of the Legislature that seated in the east gallery are a fine group of 19 students 

from the Dover school. They are grade eight students and are accompanied by their History teacher, 

Miss Woods. On behalf of the Members of this Assembly I extend to them a warm welcome and I 

express the hope, Mr. Speaker, that their stay this 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

10 

afternoon will be both informative and educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to draw your attention to a 

fine group of 30 grade eight students from my constituency from Queen Elizabeth school in Moose Jaw 

North. These young people are accompanied by one of their teachers, Mr. Andrews. Mrs. Andrews is 

also with them. I would like to take this opportunity to extend on your behalf and on the behalf of the 

Assembly a cordial welcome and trust that their stay will be informative and that their trip home will be 

pleasant and safe. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

RADIO BROADCASTS 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if the Premier 

or the House Leader could inform us which radio stations in the province are carrying the broadcasts this 

year and whether arrangements have been made to advertise this? 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — I would be pleased to give the Hon. Member that information on 

Monday. I haven‟t it off-hand. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I have another supplementary question. I understand that list or the number of stations 

carrying the broadcast is restricted as compared to, say, last year? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would be pleased to answer that on Monday. I would rather not without looking up 

the matter. 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — moved, seconded by Mr. T.M. Weatherald 

(Cannington): 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as Follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE ROBERT LEITH HANBIDGE 

Lieutenant Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan, 

May it Please Your Honour: 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in session assembled. Humbly that Your Honour for the gracious Speech which Your 

Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne, I would 

like to express my sincere gratitude for the honor which has been bestowed upon me and on the 

constituency of Saskatoon City Park-University, which I very proudly represent. 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

11 

 

 

This is a constituency which is truly typical of every aspect of the vibrant, successful and happy 

atmosphere which prevails in our great city of Saskatoon. This is a most interesting and challenging 

constituency to represent because it is made up of people from all walks of life. Working people and 

tradesmen from our many services and secondary industries, highly skilled technicians employed in the 

potash industry, farmers, clergymen, doctors, lawyers, engineers, teachers, university faculty, and a very 

large number of students. A cross section exposes a diversification which I am sure is at least equal to 

that of any other constituency of our province. And these people serve as a pulse for what is happening 

in our province. 

 

When a disaster, such as our present damp wheat problem, strikes, our people feel it — our retailers, our 

contractors, our shops, our implement people — right down the line. We feel our wheat problem very 

keenly, very directly, and naturally we are very concerned that the efforts of all those who are working 

on this problem, federally and provincially, will result in favorable solutions for our farmers. 

 

When we look at the physical make-up of this part of Saskatoon involving the beautiful South 

Saskatchewan, the thrilling expansion of downtown Saskatoon, the midtown plaza, the Centennial 

auditorium, the many new high-rise buildings, the lovely residential expansions with their schools and 

parks, the thriving industrial area and the very lovely sight of the beautiful and bustling University of 

Saskatchewan, we realize that we are looking at the efforts of all these people who represent the great 

spirit of Saskatoon, the spirit of free enterprise which has built our great city. 

 

In considering the state of affairs in our province and the pending legislation outlined in the Speech from 

the Throne, I think we are well advised to look around us, to look beyond our borders and to consider 

the situation generally that provinces besides ours are facing. In this way we are able to appreciate better 

the fact that our Province of Saskatchewan is well managed by a government which doesn‟t just pretend 

to be concerned about its people but actually is concerned; and the welfare of our people is becoming 

more and more a fact because our Government has created an atmosphere which is attractive to private 

enterprise, which is offering incentives for the development of our resources — a government which at 

the same time believes in Crown Corporations and utilities of a suitable kind in their proper place, and 

above all a government which realizes the importance of a balanced budget in these particular times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Take a look at the other provinces and you will see that they are facing doing now 

what we in this province did four years ago. We can be thankful indeed for good management in our 

affairs — and as a Government we are very proud of our record which, in spite of the inflationary 

tendencies of our times, shows that, while we have been operating within our means, we still have the 

lowest rate of unemployment in Canada, and our standard of living is one of the highest. 

 

In comparing notes with the other provinces I would like to refer to the Premier‟s Conference which was 

held during this past summer at Lake Waskesiu. It was my good fortune to attend 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

12 

this conference as an observer, and this was indeed a very rare privilege for me. This was a highlight in 

my political experience because here we had some of the great men of our times in Canadian politics. 

They spoke of their mutual problems in plain matter of fact terms because it was behind closed doors 

and there was no need for flourish to impress anyone. These men, Campbell of Prince Edward Island, 

Smith of Nova Scotia, Bertrand of Quebec, Robarts of Ontario, Weir of Manitoba, Manning of Alberta, 

and — outstanding in his capacity as chairman — Ross Thatcher of Saskatchewan. They discussed the 

provincial matters that we are most concerned about as common problems to all Canadians. These 

discussions took place without any sign of party bias. Certainly some discussions left a deeper 

impression than others and I think this is because of their very serious nature. Those on health and 

education particularly were a sober reminder. This is certainly not the only province where these two 

items take up two-thirds of the provincial budget and the scary part of it is that no one seems to be 

prepared to face the answer for stopping the spiraling costs. There is the realization that even the 

wealthiest of our provinces are not able to cope with this situation. Surely it is obvious that our 

Government of Saskatchewan is wise in its policy of pay-as-you-go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — During the discussion of health plans there was unanimous commendation given to 

Saskatchewan for the factual approach it has taken by insisting on patient participation in our health 

program. And it is interesting to note that the three provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta 

have agreed to consult together on health plans and that they are mutually agreed to the need of patient 

participation. We have seen the benefit of utilization fees to our health program, and because they have 

been established long enough now to make some assessment we are pleased to note that a family ceiling 

will be introduced. 

 

In spite of the prohibitive costs involved in our health plans we are facing up to the need of supplying 

the very high standards in cases that must be considered as minimums in these times. Our Minister of 

Health (Mr. Grant) performs a most difficult and thankless task and we would like him to know that his 

efforts are appreciated. Once a standard is set in this field there is no looking back, no stepping down, 

and we face many dilemmas that force us to go on. If we take the simple example of the kidney machine 

that was developed in Saskatoon, here we had a team of dedicated medical men under Dr. Mark Baltzan 

who figured out a machine through which they could accomplish kidney transplants. There was a great 

jubilation when this machine was first put to use at St. Paul‟s Grey Nuns‟ Hospital. Certainly this 

jubilation was justified, and from there the machine went into regular use. But a complication 

developed, patients in need of kidney transplant were referred from all over Saskatchewan and a waiting 

list developed. So they figured out a way to treat two patients simultaneously on the machine. But then 

instead of two patients there were five and now the problem was, in simple terms, which three of the 

five must be condemned to die, because this kind of patient has a very limited time and cannot be left 

waiting. The cost of a new machine and extra personnel now becomes a priority matter against other 

needs. So the need for facilities and equipment 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

13 

 

is not one that is simple to decide. Where to cut back and where to expand have been weighed very 

carefully. 

 

The addition to the University Hospital in Saskatoon and the New Base Hospital in Regina are very 

major projects indeed. While they are going ahead, we are aware that they must be kept within the 

means of out people. Very recently the plans for the addition to the University Hospital in Saskatoon 

were presented and because of the magnitude of this project the priorities of the stages of construction 

are now being considered. Our Government is proceeding with both the Regina and Saskatoon projects, 

and they will enable us to continue to serve our people with the finest health services in Canada. 

 

While considering our health program there is one area of concern that I would like to refer to. Again, at 

the Premiers‟ Conference under the topic of Social Problems, this was agreed to be a most serious 

problem in Canada, and what a shocking impact to see this topic introduced b Premier Alex Campbell of 

Prince Edward Island. Many of us, I am sure, have always thought of this province as a sanctuary of 

virtue as compared with the rest of the provinces. But here with a total population of only 120 thousand 

their number one social problem was referred to as alcoholism and drug addiction. Well, it brings home 

very forcefully the fact that we cannot hide from this problem with its very far-reaching and disastrous 

effects. Certainly our Government is very much aware of the situation here in Saskatchewan, and we 

have in force a very effective program especially in the area of the treatment of alcoholism. During the 

past year a commission of interested and competent citizens was established, and there is no doubt that 

the Bureau of Alcoholism will benefit a great deal from their experience and advice. One of the 

members of this commission, Mr. Tommy Myers of Houghton, passed away very suddenly a short while 

ago, and we were very saddened indeed by the loss of this very highly regarded and respected citizen of 

our province. 

 

While we have an excellent program and the results are certainly encouraging let‟s not kid ourselves 

about the magnitude of this insidious blight on our society. When we look at our broken homes, our 

unemployment, our juvenile courts, our jails, our welfare cases, our highway massacres, time after time 

we are looking at the results of alcoholism. While the rate of recovery is encouraging, in too many cases 

the treatment is a follow-up of social disaster in some form or another. What a pity there is no easy 

approach to the alcoholic, some way to get the compulsive and abnormal drinker to face himself as he is 

before so much damage is done. We can only do our best to see that people who suffer from this vicious 

malady, alcoholism, are aware that we have an answer for them. They need only enquire and certainly 

they do not have to wait till they have literally ruined their lives. 

 

Now how much is this problem compounded by the use of drugs? Whether we like it or not we are into 

an era where marijuana, speed, and LSD are considered by the in-crowd to be harmless because they are 

supposedly non-habit forming. During the early part of this winter I was interviewed by a University of 

Saskatchewan student who was doing graduate studies in sociology. It was concerning my views on the 

use of pot and LSD and stuff of this kind. Needless to say I am very firmly opposed to the lifting of any 

of the restrictions presently imposed. The final question by this student was a very interesting one. It 

was based on earlier questions about our period 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

14 

of prohibition of alcohol and I had declared myself in favor of the lifting of prohibition and the free use 

of alcohol. So the question was, “How do you consider the prohibition of alcohol to be any different 

from the present prohibition of marijuana?” Certainly a question of this kind must cause us to think. Let 

me assure you that we are aware of the situation and will continue to cope with this problem with the 

best know techniques of the day. Pray God that this generation will not destroy itself with its own 

ignorance which it tries to disguise as superior intelligence. 

 

In the field of education this Government has a record that it can be truly proud of. Here gain because of 

the very high standards that have been set, it is not easy to keep the effective level of demand from 

outstripping our resources. The effort to stay within our means is best seen, I think, in the University of 

Saskatchewan. The co-operation between the Board of Governors and the Government has resulted in a 

very practical and satisfactory result which assures the continuation of a full program for this institution. 

In line with the two-campus development the General University Council has come into being and will 

ensure the effective co-ordination of the academic programs. 

 

This Government is very much aware of the dominant role our University will play in our future and it is 

continuing to co-operate with very substantial amounts in order to ensure that the planning for numbers, 

the planning for excellence, and the planning for public service will continue according to the 

projections. Where the present enrolment is 12,600, by 1975 it is expected that this figure will be 

20,000. Reasonably detailed plans have been drawn up to cover the next seven or eight years. And 

through this time we will be looking at an average total building rate of $15 million a year. To this must 

be added an operation budget of approximately $35 million per year. 

 

When we look at the activity, the buildings being completed or started on the two campuses, a large 

education building on each campus, the veterinary college, the medical science college, the student 

residences, and so on, we know that this is only a part of a program that will in the end permit the 

accommodation of more that 10,000 students on each campus with properly coordinated academic 

programs. In planning for the future we are very impressed with the importance which is being placed 

on graduate studies, not only in the areas of science but also in the humanities and the social sciences. 

 

The Saskatoon campus is fortunate in having a number of non-university laboratories and institutes such 

as the Dominion Biological Research Laboratory, the PFRA Laboratory, the National Research Council 

Regional Laboratory, the Saskatchewan Research Council Laboratory, the Cancer and Medical Research 

Unit, and so on. But provision has also been made for a parallel on the Regina campus; and planning for 

the future must also include such things as a Graduate Library, a good museum, institutes such as a 

potash institute, a mining institute, and institute for Indian and Métis studies, and so on. This is what is 

required if we were to continue to attract first-rate scholars to our University. During the 1967-68 

session the number of students enrolled for post-graduate degrees totaled 660 at Saskatoon and 157 for 

Regina. Close to 200 of these were for doctorate. About one-third of the investigations are on matters of 

current concern to the economic and cultural welfare of Saskatchewan, and we have witnessed many, 

many instances of 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

15 

 

their end effect on the economy and the general welfare of the people of this province. About one-third 

of the post-graduate students are from other countries. This is desirable because over 50 per cent of these 

students find employment in this country and in this way add to our highly trained labor group. This 

Government is certainly proud of the part it is playing in the program of our University. 

 

During this past year we have experienced a great deal of student unrest. We have been faced with the 

new term „Student Power‟, and of course this has caused us to stop and look and try to understand, 

because, while this is generally speaking a matter for the University, it is at the same time a matter that 

concerns all of us. I can tell you that members of this Government have had discussions through the year 

with student committees and I think that these have been fruitful meetings. I would like to comment that, 

while the great majority of students are seeking what is reasonable, there is a radical minority which is 

making a farce of university education. The members of this group do not have specific professional 

goals; they openly seek to destroy the establishment and because of them we can expect a very stinging 

back-lash from the taxpayer. Our University is supported by many thousands of taxpayers in modest 

jobs, many of them unable to provide university education for their own children, and you can be sure 

that they are fed up to the ears with the trouble-making radicals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — On the other hand, sitting on the platform at the convocation held last fall at the 

Saskatoon Centennial Auditorium, the most impressive part of the ceremony was the smart appearance 

of the graduates and the look on each face, the look of pride in achievement as each one knelt to receive 

his or her degree. 

 

At about the time the fall term started last year a committee was set up by the Minister of Education 

(Mr. McIsaac) on the Canada Student Loans Plan. The committee is made up of three senior members of 

the Department of Education, three student representatives — two from the Saskatoon campus, one from 

Regina — and a representative of the Government, besides the Minister, who in this case was myself. As 

you know through the news media there was a great deal of publicity given to some of the difficulties 

encountered with the Student Loans Plan. We think very little publicity was given to some of the 

reasons, such as the postal strike, and the large number of students who returned applications without 

actually reading properly the printed instructions on the forms they were filling out, and so on. 

 

As a result of this committee, however, I am pleased to say that general satisfaction has been expressed 

by both sides, and recommendations have gone forward which we hope will further improve this very 

important scheme. For those who have been so highly critical of the administration of this scheme, may 

I remind you that the total amount of loans in the year 1968 was in excess of the amount for 1967. The 

total number of loans is higher, the average loan per student is higher and we have reached a total 

amount of almost double that of our basic provincial allotment. 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

16 

While we have generally a very healthy picture in our University, we must remember that 80 per cent of 

our students do not have the benefit of a university education so that simultaneously this Government is 

continuing its interest and commitments in all other parts of our educational system, including the 

rapidly expanded post-secondary colleges of applied arts and technology, a very major undertaking in 

itself. 

 

An example of one other aspect of education serving the entire province is the school for the deaf. This 

school is located in Saskatoon. I would like to mention the attention that is being directed toward this 

very important institution whose needs are perhaps not always recognized because of its very special 

category. For example, a number of students from this school go on to university, and they go to a very 

special university for deaf people. They go to Gaulladet College in Washington, D.C. Our students were 

found to be at a disadvantage in one particular area because in our school we did not have a proper 

chemistry laboratory. And so during this past year a new laboratory has been added. If you want to see 

real appreciation you should pay them a visit and see their eyes sparkle over this one item which would 

simply be taken for granted by others. This Government is also setting aside an amount each year that 

will create a fund which will allow for a suitable addition in the foreseeable future. 

 

In industry in our province, we are still witnessing a very stable picture ahead. Because of the inviting 

atmosphere which this Government has established for private enterprise and capital investment, 

generally we have many more new ventures started, and as well there is a very healthy growth in those 

already established. This in turn is having a very noted beneficial effect on our utilities and Crown 

Corporations. Our incentive programs are continuing to attract investment capital from all over the 

world, and this is creating a very real diversification in the development of our primary resources. Our 

industrial development approach is completely different to that of the NDP Socialists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — We believe in private enterprise. Socialism says, “The means of production belong 

only to the state.” We believe private enterprise, with rules set by government, is the best method yet 

devised to develop the needs of our people. Socialism says, “We will not rest till the incentive drive and 

potential of the individual are destroyed.” Socialism is dedicated to the absolute destruction of capital. 

Socialism condemns absolutely foreign investment. We welcome it. When foreign capital comes to our 

province it is invested under our laws. Any company operating in Saskatchewan must be incorporated 

under our laws, it pays taxes under our laws, it pays royalties on our resources, it provides employment 

for our people. It brings top quality new citizens to our communities. 

 

During the fall of 1968 through ideal arrangements made by you personally, Mr. Speaker, many of the 

members of this assembly spent two full days visiting six of the potash mines in the vicinity of 

Saskatoon — some still under construction and some in production. We saw the refineries from top to 

bottom and some of us had the privilege of going underground at two of the mines. It was indeed 

impressive to experience 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

17 

 

firsthand the magnitude of this industry which represents three-quarters of a billion dollars investment 

from Germany, from France, the United States and Canada. Socialists of course disagree that this is 

good for our province. They refuse to recognize how much this industry with its huge investment of 

private capital means to the stabilization of our economy. In one mine we went for two miles in a 

straight line underground and were able to compare the techniques of one mine against the other and see 

how competitive free enterprise develops the most in efficiency, the very heartbeat of industry that 

Socialism seeks to destroy. 

 

In October we witnessed the opening of the Prince Albert Pulp Mill, the largest single industrial 

employer in the province. The mill itself represents an investment of $65 million using the most 

advanced ideas including its huge 220-foot high percolator-type converter. The total capital investment 

including the mill, the woods operation and other factors amounts to about $80 million. This very major 

industrial complex represents the employment of seven to eight hundred people and a tremendous 

revenue will be pumped into our province each year by the over-all operation, not the least of which is a 

$10 million payroll which is pumped right into this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — But then as we move further north we see the most exciting picture of all. Because 

of the incentive program provided by this Government we have had some 120 companies prospecting as 

far north as the North West Territories during this past year. Many of these companies are very major 

companies. They declare very clearly that the reason they came to Saskatchewan was because of the 

Pre-Cambrian Incentive Program established by this Government. And their efforts have certainly not 

been made in vain. Many exciting discoveries have been made. This coming season will bring more 

exciting news as some of these discoveries are properly evaluated. 

 

The very rich uranium discovery of the Gulf Minerals Company at Wollaston Lake has focused the eyes 

of the mining world on our province. Besides this there are indications that the present Eldorado Mines 

has made a very rich discovery. Presently mining at 4,000 feet they indicate that an additional shaft will 

likely reach 7,000 feet in stages during the next few years. 

 

Besides uranium there are very encouraging finds in other minerals. Consolidated Skeena, as one 

example, had an extremely successful season in the Uranium City area and has now started an extensive 

drilling program to prove the extent of their discovery of a very high grade silver and copper vein. The 

Anglo-Rouyn Mine at Waden Bay is continuing to prove a profitable operation and to provide valuable 

employment. Since December 1, more than 130 permits covering over 20 million acres have been issued 

and some $15 million will be spent in exploring during the coming summer. $10 ½ million will be spent 

for uranium search alone. There are now operating in Saskatchewan 175 companies. Under Socialism 

we drew a complete blank. 

 

Some Hon. Members: - Hear, hear! 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

18 

Mr. Charlebois: — All of this development of primary industry Is having a very noticeable effect on 

the well-being of our secondary industries and the people involved. 

 

The most notable item of legislation to affect the business atmosphere to be introduced at this session of 

course is the estate tax. In the past we have concentrated on inviting investment and the result has been 

obviously successful. But now we are introducing a remedy for losing our successful people and they 

are becoming more and more a sizeable group. We are setting up a very real incentive for our people to 

remain in this province after retirement instead of looking to the Coast, to the Bahamas, or to Alberta, 

and at the same time we are also taking real steps to make it possible for businesses to continue on from 

one generation to another. 

 

Our Indian and Métis program is being helped by industry. Socialism claims we are not concerned about 

the welfare of our people - a most despicable and completely false charge. Let‟s take a look at our Indian 

and Métis program, which we are indeed very proud of, and compare it with the absolute-nothing 

program under the Socialists. 

 

Very recently our Government announced that is its setting up a separate Department of Indian and 

Métis Affairs. Because of our increasing concern for the welfare of these people we have improved our 

program this year by setting up what is known as the Task Force, made up of leaders of industry, 

government, education, and members of Indian and Métis communities. Sub—committees have been set 

up for the private sector, the public sector, a selection committee — one for education and one for 

housing. As a result of the committees a very systematic survey has been made of job opportunities, 

employable Indians and Métis, training facilities and suitable housing where gainful employment is 

available. The aims and objects of this Task Force has had a tremendous effect on prospective 

employers in industry and government. The special projects already under way in our program are 

continuing to thrive and to do their part of a welfare state. I refer to the agricultural projects at 

Cumberland House, Nipawin, Carrot River, Ile-a-La-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, La Loche and Green 

Lake, and certainly not least the wild rice project in the far north. We are making every effort through 

our Indian and Métis program to make this province a good place to live in for all our people. 

 

We are continuing to make Saskatchewan an attractive place to live in many ways besides those already 

mentioned. WE have the relief of provincial tax for newly weds on their first $1,000 of furniture, and 

our people are encouraged to settle here by the Homeowner Grant, through which some $9 million was 

turned back to the homeowners last year. Our cities are attractive to live in and we are helping them to 

be forward-looking centres be schemes such as our Urban Assistance Highways Program. Now we are 

introducing financial assistance for the control of water pollution, which will encourage centres like 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert to proceed with badly needed sewage disposal systems. This legislation 

will have the long-term effect, too, of encouraging capital expansion and updating of existing facilities 

in other centres. Municipalities will certainly welcome the Municipal Loans Fund which is being 

introduced at a most opportune time. Our industrial expansion is having a very noticeable impact on 

Sask-Tel where again in 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

19 

 

Saskatoon a complete new storey is being added to the existing main building in order to house the 

equipment required for the very rapid growth in this great city. 

 

During the summer we visited the Couteau Creek Hydro Power Station. This is going to be added to the 

line along with the Boundary Dam addition at Estevan. We are also now starting on a project that will 

double the size of the Queen Elizabeth Power Station in Saskatoon, and our province will require an 

addition of this size at least every two years in order to keep pace with the growth in our province. Quite 

recently our Government announced the formation of a Saskatchewan Power Corporation subsidiary — 

Northern Saskatchewan Power Corporation quarters in La Ronge — with special interest in the North, 

Indian and Métis people, and other northern residents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the very drastic wheat situation in our province, our diversified economy is 

allowing us to continue with full programs, and all of this expansion, prosperity and enthusiasm for our 

great future is caused purely and simply by free enterprise, and a Government which is doing a good 

sound job. Don‟t let anyone try to tell me, Mr. Speaker, that the ambition and the incentives of the 

individual developed by private enterprise should ever give way to Socialism. Free enterprise is what 

makes a country great, and we are proving it here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. T. M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege today to have the opportunity, 

on behalf of the people of the constituency of Cannington which I represent, to second this motion. 

 

I would like to, Mr. Speaker, congratulate my colleague on presenting a forthright presentation to this 

Legislature of what the Government has been doing in the past and some of its intentions for the future. 

He has given an adequate presentation of many of the programs that are now just beginning to pay off 

for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech has in genera terms outlined the program and intentions of the 

Government that will be put into operation and carried out at this session. However, Mr. Speaker, 

coming from a rural constituency and having always been a farmer and particularly interested in 

agriculture, it is to this more specific area that this afternoon I would like to direct the bulk of my 

remarks. 

 

The constituency of Cannington is primarily an agricultural one. However, Mr. Speaker, it is also one of 

those areas in our province that has a relatively diversified economy. In much of the constituency of 

Cannington the livestock industry ranks equal with that of grain production. The oil industry has also 

provided a considerable amount of wealth. Tourism, due to the good luck of those of us who live there, 

the Moose Mountain Provincial Park, Kenosee and Carlyle Lakes, has brought many tourists to that 

area, with the ultimate result that the economy of many of the towns which surround these lakes has also 

benefited from the tourist influx during the summer. This mixture, Mr. Speaker, of industry and tourism 

has resulted in a number of thriving towns and villages, I might add, steadily making progress over the 

years, despite the many varied problems 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

20 

which confront us all both as individuals and collectively. I think that all of the citizens are proud of the 

achievements which have been made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having had the opportunity in my earlier years to study economics and having been a 

farmer all my life, I gave attempted to assess the problems confronting agriculture not only in terms of a 

practising farmer but in the terms of an academic subject as well. It has often been shown, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that the two are very far apart. The solutions probably and very often advocated by the 

professional economist and that feasible to the practicing farmer have been very frequently different. 

Not always, Mr. Speaker, but far too often they have been so. 

 

For as long as I can remember we have heard of the cost-price squeeze in agriculture. Not long ago a 

friend of mine showed me a newspaper that he had picked from an old file. The headline was 

“Agriculture in Cost-Price Squeeze.” This paper was 20 years old. Te same headline could be printed 

today. Despite the low net income position, however, Mr. Speaker, of many producers and the obvious 

shortage of cash, the standard of living of those in agriculture has steadily progressed, and actually in 

recent years has dramatically improved. The water and sewage system, electricity, better housing have 

all improved farm living. There is now greater time for leisure and better roads for most rural residents. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, despite the obvious difficulties in agriculture today, great progress in living 

standards has been made. Even those people, Mr. Speaker, today who are in the most difficult positions 

in general terms have a much higher standard of living than many people that were modestly well off 

say 20 years ago. 

 

It is not this, Mr. Speaker, that I quarrel with. However, what I do suggest is that we are in a serious 

situation because those engaged in agriculture relative to other people, to other working people, are 

falling behind. And when I say relative, Mr. Speaker, I make direct comparison between the person, who 

is living on a family farm and earning his income, and an industrial worker, which I think is a 

comparable level. He finds himself in a deteriorating position income-wise. His net income is not rising 

as rapidly as is the other person‟s, it is very obvious. What is of greater concern is that if the present 

trend continues we are developing to a large extent a two-class society, a society in which many engaged 

in agriculture will economically be at the low end of the scale. 

 

Powerful unions for working people, the various associations for teachers, for lawyers, for tradesmen 

and doctors, have all been able to extricate large salary and wage increases for their own benefit. The 

farmer, Mr. Speaker, has not been able to do this and it is very unlikely that he be able to in the 

foreseeable future. In other words, Mr. Speaker, his relative position has been deteriorating. His one 

great hope, I suggest, is strong government leadership which helps control inflation, one of his worst 

enemies, and helps control unwarranted wage or profit gains. In this respect I suggest that the 

Government of Saskatchewan has had an excellent record. 

 

I would like to take just a moment to look at this record. For example, Mr. Speaker, in this province 

wage gains have been kept to reasonable levels, as have profits. The Budget has been balanced, Mr. 

Speaker, to help reduce inflationary pressures, 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

21 

 

inflation being one of the factors contributing greatly to his deteriorating position. The Government has 

also, Mr. Speaker, worked diligently at controlling its own expenditures and therefore holding tax 

increases to a minimum. All three of these factors, Mr. Speaker, have been good for agriculture in this 

province. The great plans, Mr. Speaker, often advocated by the Opposition of increased expenditures to 

a great extent are not in his interest. The Opposition would like to have us believe and often tell us that 

great wage increases have no effect on costs. Their leader at the national level has tried diligently to 

convince us all at various times that no amount of wage increases will have an effect on costs to the 

consumer. This, of course, is complete nonsense. And I want to show you an example which shows, I 

think adequately, what actually happens when large increases are paid to wage earners or to any other 

professional person. Take, for example, Mr. Speaker, the settlement of the grain handlers last summer at 

the Lakehead. Scarcely was the ink dry giving a substantial wage increase to employees than the 

elevator companies asked for an increase in their charges for handling grain, the demands being 

presented for consideration to The Board of Grain Commissioners. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, normally the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) would have told us with a great 

hue and cry that the largest companies were gouging us all but not this time, because the very companies 

that were asking for the rate increases were the United Grain Growers and the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool, both farmer-owned co-operatives. They in truth could no more absorb the increased wage cost 

without passing them on to the consumer, in this case the farmer, than can any other large company. In 

this case the person paying the bill was the farmer. It has always been in the interest of agriculture that 

costs be controlled as much as possible, and I think that the Provincial Government, Mr. Speaker, can 

stand proudly upon its record in this regard. 

 

I wan to now speak or say a few words about the Economic Council of Canada. As we all know, it 

recently issued a report and a section of it dealt with agriculture. And I must admit that I have always 

had admiration for the Economic Council of Canada. It is probably one of the highest bodies of its kind 

in this country. It has an illustrious group of people appointed to it. But to say the least I was very 

disappointed in what it said about agriculture in this country. Its conclusions, I can only be convinced, 

are both ill-founded; and upon reading the report I have to say that the research was haphazard at best. It 

falls back on the same old cliché and solution used by so many that agriculture must become more 

efficient. True, like any other industry, it must work toward efficiency as any industry should. However, 

that is not the source of its problems today. What other industry, may I ask you, is operating on a price 

level which, give or take a few cents, has not changed in over 50 years? This is the case with our wheat 

industry, it reached a peak price. I looked back in the records just recently at a peak price in 1919. Since 

that time the price of wheat per bushel has never been as high as it was at that particular time. No other 

industry in this country to 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

22 

my knowledge could even come close to operating on a price level that dates back to even less than it 

was in 1919. 

 

The Economic Council makes a great issue by comparing Canadian productivity with that of the United 

States. Net value, the Economic Council says, per worker production, net value in agriculture in the 

United States is approximately 25 per cent higher than it is in Canada. It is also said in other reports that 

on the average in every other industry net production per worker is approximately 25 per cent higher. 

What I think is disturbing and is left out is that in the United States, where the 25 per cent higher 

production actually exists, American farmers relative to other people in their society are worse off than 

our Canadians. The increased productivity that the Economic Council so proudly points to has not 

increased their welfare but has deteriorated it. It has tended to depress many of their commodity prices 

even further and resulted in lower net incomes. It is most interesting on a comparison in statistics to note 

that most Canadian grain and livestock prices even with the subsidies paid to Americans, that is, in 

recent years in Canada, have been higher than have their American counterparts. 

 

Still on the subject of efficiency, not long ago, just within the last few months, Denmark said that 

agriculture there was producing far more than could be consumed and overburdening the market. It can 

be equally said, Mr. Speaker, that there is a demand for these products at various places in the world. 

But until the politicians of the various countries are able to solve the distribution problems, increased 

efficiency and production without a market would only continue to burden the market that presently 

exists for many of our products, resulting in lower prices and lower net incomes. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, what is obvious is that many of the prices for agricultural products are simply too 

low. The proportion of the wage earner‟s salary going to food has been steadily dropping. Governments 

at all levels have perpetuated cheap food policies. For most products, the price going to the producer is 

at too low a level. People and consumers in general have fought for higher quality, better service, and 

more attractive stores and at the same time demanded exceptionally low prices. On the point, Mr. 

Speaker, that the services added in between are costing too much, I think is very debatable. The Meat 

Packing Council said last year that the approximate profit per pound of meat which was processed was 

bout one-quarter of a cent. Even if this was totally removed it would have very little effect on the price 

to the consumer. The Opposition has often and particularly since the Batten Report came out has alleged 

that the chain stores are making fantastic profits. The only question that comes to my mind is that if this 

is absolutely true, then why is it that many of our own consumer-owned co-operatives are not. At least if 

they are, they haven‟t been saying that they were. 

 

The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that, if agriculture is to survive on a flexible and profitable basis, the 

producer will have to get more for the primary production that he is producing. I look forward to the day 

when at least a few politicians will have the courage to say that the consumer will simply have to pay a 

little bit more for his agricultural products. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

23 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes on some of agriculture‟s more 

pressing problems. Firstly, it is the damp grain situation. There is no doubt that in Saskatchewan we 

have great quantities of damp and tough grain. All of the various surveys have indicated this. These 

surveys have indicated that much of our grain will probably deteriorate as warm weather comes and that 

we are drastically in need of doing something about it. It is my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that the actual 

surveys themselves have greatly exaggerated. They have indicated a great deal more damp and tough 

grain than actually exists in Saskatchewan today. I don‟t wish to minimize the problem. I think there is 

certainly a problem, but I know that in my own area I have on the map a number of areas showing 

500,000 bushels of damp and tough grain, but the elevator agent tells me there isn‟t 500,000 bushels of 

grain there altogether, counting dry grain, tough grain and everything else. In the statistical reports that 

have been presented, I think that many of them are not very accurate in their assessment of how much 

damp and tough grain there exists. I do accept the fact there is a considerable amount, and I would like 

to deal with what some of the organizations have said about it and what the Government has been doing. 

It is no question that grain in good condition is a national asset, regardless of whether we have a market 

for it today or not. As long as it is in condition it can be kept for a great number of years. Governments 

and various leaders of farm organizations have all resented a great number of solutions and all of them 

mostly very, very expensive ones. I refer, Mr. Speaker, now to the announcement that the Province and 

the Federal Governments made together, that the Federal Government would provide interest—free, 

cash grants up to $600 for the purpose of drying grain. Just for the purpose of clarity, Mr. Speaker, this 

policy meant that the farmer was able to get a maximum of $600 to assist him, if he was short of cash in 

drying his grain. It is interest free and would be repaid as he delivered the grain to the elevator. Now 

many farm organizations have criticized this policy. The Opposition has criticized it, saying the 

Government should be making direct handouts of actual money in terms of dollars, not-to-be-repaid, 

interest free. I suppose that it would just be some type of cash assistance to get the grain dried and to 

help the producer out of a difficult situation. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t accept this for one minute. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I think that the Minister of Agriculture in Saskatchewan (Mr. McFarlane) who 

made presentations to Ottawa to come up with the present program deserves a great deal of credit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — However, Mr. Speaker, I will also say that I believe that Ottawa has not lived up to 

the expectations . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . and in that respect I don‟t mean the policy, I mean the slowness with which it 

passed the legislation. 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

24 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, I would lay criticism at the feet of the Federal Government for not 

passing the legislation more quickly than it has. I understand that today in all likelihood it will be 

passed. I scarcely can think of any excuse for it not having passed it sooner, but I do suggest that the 

policy that it is passing is a good one. 

 

I want to go into a little depth, Mr. Speaker. On why I a convinced that the present policy is a good one 

and why we should reject the idea of just giving outright cash to those people who have damp and tough 

grain. I accept the fact, Mr. Speaker, and most farmers accept the fact, and know that there is a low net 

income in Saskatchewan on farms today. And it is true that this is putting many people in a position of 

being short of cash. However, I want to make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that the low net-income position of 

many farmers should be dealt with in a different manner than the problem of damp and tough grain. 

They are not problems which should be confused with each other. There are many farmers in this 

province and many who live in my area, due to frost and due to drought, that had exceptionally poor 

crops this year — three and four bushels to the acre. There are many farmers in this province this year 

receiving PFA payments. These farmers only wish that they had some damp and tough grain. And yet 

the opposition and many farm organizations have come out and said that we should give the fellow who 

has got 5,000 bushels of damp and tough grain $300 or $400, just hand it to them. Mr. Speaker, where 

does this leave the man who has no tough and damp grain? It leaves him in the worst position as far as 

his net income is concerned. He is in a worse position than the man who has 10,000 bushels of damp and 

tough grain, because he has no grain no matter what he does. The low net-income position of our 

farmers today, which I believe does exist, is certainly a separate problem from dealing with the damp 

and tough grain situation which we have today. One farm organization for example suggested that we 

should spend $30 million on damp and tough grain. I would probably agree that this would get the tough 

and damp grain dried but certainly will not help those who have damp and tough grain, but it leaves the 

other fellows that are in a difficult position completely out in the cold. And most of these farmers who 

don‟t have any damp and tough grain don‟t see any particular reason why that other people who happen 

to have some should be getting a hand-out from the Government. I completely agree with them, Mr. 

Speaker. I think this policy of the Federal and Provincial Governments recognizes that we will make the 

money available to those with damp and tough grain, and we are assisting them because they need 

assistance but we are not making handouts to people who have this asst on their farm. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I am wholeheartedly in favor of what has been done, and I think that the Federal Government 

and the Province and Provincial Government have taken a realistic stand in this regard. 

 

In summary, I think tat the low-income position of many farmers in Saskatchewan is a separate problem 

and needs to be dealt with as a separate problem and should not be confused with the shortage of cash 

for drying the damp and tough grain. I am convinced that a great many farmers in this province today 

know exactly what they are going to do about their damp 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

25 

 

and tough grain. They are receiving criticism that they are not using dryers, that they are not doing a lot 

of things, but most farmers that I know, Mr. Speaker, are pretty good businessmen and they have figured 

out for some months ahead precisely what they expect to do and what their intentions are. As their days 

lengthen and the weather gets a little warmer, I think that much of our damp and tough grain problem 

will be solved by those people who have it on their farms. If there is any income assistance to be given, 

whatsoever that is not to be repaid, then this should be given to all farmers and not to just a select special 

group. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that a second matter presently of great concern to those involved in farming today 

is the proposed changes in the estate taxes. As recently as today a number of changes have been made 

and have been reported in the newspapers. I have done my best to familiarize myself with what effect 

this would have. So I am at somewhat of a disadvantage this afternoon as these changes are so recent 

that I could possibly be in error on one or two points. I think, Mr. Speaker, that the proposed changes 

would be very serious for many small farms. In most cases the present proposal is totally unfair because, 

Mr. Speaker, the old adage exists that too many of those involved in agriculture today live poor and die 

rich. It is the truth and the reason it is the truth is that in order to pay for assets, in order to pay for land, 

many people cut back on their standards of living, with the result and effect that they have a low 

standard of living for much of their life. Yet they have been forced to save and end up with a substantial 

amount of investment of money in land. The high estate tax, when this farm is passed on to someone 

else in the family, will perpetuate this situation. I would have no quarrel whatsoever with the present 

estate tax, if the return on the investment in agriculture was at a realistic level; but the return, as most 

surveys and studies have shown, is usually in the area of about four or five to six per cent on investment 

— and this is without taking out wages. With our present grain quotas today it would be very realistic to 

expect, with nothing to the owner in terms of wages, that a person with $100,000 investment on a grain 

farm might make $4,000 or $5,000. It certainly doesn‟t give him an income in any manner to enable him 

to pay for assets, if he is trying to buy a farm or to pay a substantial estate tax, if it is inherited by that 

person that takes over the farm — it is a family farm. The result is, Mr. Speaker, that on many of these 

farms, passed from one generation to another, he is unable to make enough income from it to have a 

satisfactory standard of living and to be able to pay a large estate tax and to be able to pay his father or 

whoever else in the family had it to be able to pay for the land. They simply can‟t make enough income 

to be able to pay for $100,000 in assets. The income level is too low. The exemption, Mr. Speaker, that 

has been placed on estate taxes is drastically in need of being raised. I realize today that it has been 

raised $50,000, but this is still not sufficiently high enough. There is still too large a contribution going 

to be made by a person inheriting land. As I have said, Mr. Speaker, I would have no quarrel with this 

whatsoever were the return from the land, that the person will inherit, or the farm assets reasonably high 

as it is in some other businesses; but the return from the tremendous investment in agriculture today is 

just simply too low. Many families will be put in a position of having to sell their assets because they 

will simply never be ably to pay off their real estate taxes and have a reasonable standard of living. I 

think that those whoa re concerned about this, as I 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

26 

know many in this province are, should write to the Minister of Finance, Mr. Benson, outlining their 

reasons. I think the family farm and those businesses that are dependent upon it will find the proposed 

estate tax on the inheritance of the family farm or business very onerous so that in many cases they will 

just decide to sell it, to get out of it and go into something else. To inherit a farm that is worth $150,000 

and maybe pay $20 — $25,000 in estate taxes and to try to pay this off from his earnings, he would be 

far better to take another job, get himself an education and to go into some other endeavor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say just a few words about the Government‟s crop insurance program. Our crop 

insurance program has in recent years greatly expanded and improved. All this crop insurance is now 

economically feasible for practically all our farmers. Contributions to premiums are both made by the 

Provincial and Federal Governments, and this program has been particularly helpful to young farmers. 

Often young farmers have both had the assets to be able to pay their operating costs in the coming year 

after a poor year. The feature that has been recently introduced of having the premiums decreased to the 

individual, if he does not collect crop insurance, is certainly a good principle and gives encouragement 

to efficient farm practice. In case of crop failure of course the plan has been backed by both the Province 

and the Federal Government. I know, Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne that the Government 

has indicated that is would increase the crop insurance in this province, and I think that those involved in 

agriculture today will be pleased that this is being done. 

 

Now scarcely could I speak on this subject, Mr. Speaker, without saying at least a few words about 

diversification. I think that this is so important to our farming community that I want to spend a few 

moments on it. I think this year that the need for diversification is even more abundantly clear than ever 

before. However, at the same time we must recognize that much of our province does not lend itself to 

other than grain production. The wide open prairies are simply not suitable for livestock enterprises. The 

prospects for grain sales, I would suggest, will vary widely in the coming years. World grain production 

will always be an important part. An aggressive sales policy which I believe is being followed is needed 

and will help to improve the situation. However, we must face the fact that we simply cannot sell grain 

if we have no customer that really wants it. All countries in the world are striving toward 

self-sufficiency, and I‟m sure that were we one of these underdeveloped countries which are the growing 

and bigger markets un future years, that were we one of these countries, we also would strive towards 

self-sufficiency. This fact plus the fact that these markets are largely poor countries will keep our grain 

exports under pressure from time to time. It will be increasingly difficult and it is already difficult to be 

able to sell our grain at a price to these countries that our farmers can produce it for. Most of these 

countries are buying the most pounds of food at the lowest cost per pound. Naturally so, Mr. Speaker, 

because their problem is starvation. Not quality of food but quantity. Therefore, we are confronted by a 

market which insists on the lowest possible price. I think our greatest hope in this regard will be to 

attempt to work towards the reduction of agricultural subsidies that are being particularly promoted in 

the United States and in Europe, in the hope that we may eliminate some of the inefficient production. 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

27 

 

While we aggressively follow a policy of attempting to sell as much grain as possible, I think that many 

of our farmers today will have to simply concentrate upon livestock. Firstly, the livestock market is 

based on the North American basis, and as our price level rises in North America, as it does for most 

products, then I‟m quite convinced that the price for livestock will rise. Consumption is rising and the 

possibility of exports in the future to many foreign countries, such as Japan, is already a possibility. 

Much of this province is suitable for livestock production. The parkland areas especially so. Whatever 

our production in this province, Mr. Speaker, is, I think that we need to have a little concern because this 

production, whatever it may be, will be only a very, very small part of the North American supply. The 

Provincial Government under the leadership of the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) has been 

wisely following a course of promoting diversification into livestock products, particularly in giving 

cash grants towards hog enterprises and in building community pastures for cattle and calves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — The work at the Gardiner Dam, Mr. Speaker, to develop our irrigation will be 

suitable to the production of various specialty crops. The joint projects as for community pastures for 

sheep, for ARDA, with ARDA and PFRA are only beginning to pay off. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that, despite the effort and work that has gone in by the Provincial Government, we still fail to get 

across to many people in farming the need of going for more livestock. I think that we fail because we 

have not proved to them the economics of a good livestock operation. Most people in agriculture are not 

willing to accept just a statement that we should diversify. They like to be shown in cold facts why they 

should. The economics of many of our livestock operations, despite great effort by the Provincial 

Government, have simply not got through to many of our producers. 

 

I want to say just one word on research in agriculture. This is an area that for too long we have not given 

enough encouragement to. Being a province that has more interest in agriculture than any other province 

in this country, we should be putting more money, and the Provincial Government has been putting a 

great deal of money, into laboratories, research projects at the University, into our budgets for research. I 

think it is an expenditure, that all of the citizens of Saskatchewan, regardless of what their livelihood 

may be, can reap great rewards from in an economic and social sense. So I would suggest that, although 

we have been doing a good job in regard to research, if the Province of Saskatchewan would like to 

specialize in one particular area, that agricultural research makes the greatest amount of sense if we are 

going to make a contribution in science in any particular way. 

 

I think that I could scarcely talk about these subjects without saying a few words at least about 

conservation. Mr. Speaker, achievement has always been one of man‟s greatest desires. In agriculture 

this has usually meant the attempt to control the environment. In essence, to remove the trees and drain 

the water and to change the original natural resources. The greater and greater need for efficiency has 

placed heavier pressure for drainage and for land clearing. I think, Mr. 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

28 

Speaker, that in many cases the generations to come and even possibly the present one, will come to 

regret at least some of the work that has been done by both governments and individuals in this regard. 

Saskatchewan as a province has been endowed with great beauty and abundant wild life. These have 

been shared by all citizens regardless of their economic position. The aesthetic value as well as tourist 

value in attracting sportsmen will increase tremendously in the next few years and in Saskatchewan for 

those who are fishermen or hunters are practically unequalled anywhere else on this continent. In this 

essence I am convinced that the Government must ensure that habitat continues to survive because I 

think it would be very regrettable, Mr. Speaker, if the epitaph that appeared on television dealing with a 

species of wildlife many years ago — the epitaph that recently appeared on television programs “And 

then there were none,” may become a reality in some respects in this province as far as our wildlife 

resources are concerned. This is something that I would certainly never want to see happen, and I think 

that there are very, very few people in Saskatchewan would ever want to see happen. I think that in 

order to conserve these resources sportsmen and governments will have to become ever more willing to 

compensate farmers for the preservation of this habitat. Because of the economic pressure that is being 

placed on farmers, land clearing and drainage is taking place in a great many respects. They must be 

compensated for this by both the sportsmen who are interested in our natural resources and by 

governments because of the revenue that they will receive increasingly from the tourist business in the 

future. 

 

I think also that in the near future we will have to compensate farmers for crop damage that is done by 

wildlife. We in this province are not short of land and the land presently under cultivation has an 

absolutely tremendous potential for producing all of the food and fibre that we can actually sell. 

Therefore I suggest that it makes sense that at least a large proportion or at least a goodly portion of our 

present land and water for wildlife for aesthetic and recreational purposes be conserved in the state. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that I would be remiss in speaking a number of rural 

problems without saying a few words about our municipal road system. And again I think that the 

Government has a very commendable record in improving our highway system and in increasing grants 

to the municipalities for municipal roads, for feeder roads, grid roads and for increasing snow removal 

grants and in the general way in assisting the rural municipalities. However, poor municipal roads are 

still a reality for many rural people. This fact along with heavy snow fall this winter is making it very 

difficult for many many rural young people to attend school regularly. I can think of absolutely nothing 

which forces people to leave farms or sell them quicker than poor roads. It creates educational problems 

for the family, it reduces their social and economic life to very little in the winter months. I urge the 

Government, Mr. Speaker, to make every effort to provide a least, practically all, because there may be a 

few exceptions, at least practically all as soon as possible, every rural resident with at least a road that he 

will be able to drive on most of the time, winter and summer. I suggest this because, although 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

29 

 

municipal roads are municipal responsibility, the municipalities simply do not have the funds to be able 

to undertake this project. Their revenues certainly now have reached a point at which they are unable to 

levy any degree more of taxes and it means that, it we are to accelerate this program, the increased 

money will simply have to come from the Province in the form of grants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in supporting the Speech from the Throne, I have outlined what I believe are a number of 

problem areas today and I have dealt largely with those of agriculture, because I feel that other Members 

in this Assembly will deal with many other problems that confront us. I have given many reasons why I 

believe the present Government is coping with these problems. Some of these problems are outside the 

Province‟s control, but I am also convinced that the present Government, Mr. Speaker, offers the best 

solutions to the problems it faces, particularly their tough financial policy on Government expenditures, 

their attempts to control inflation and their attempts to keep at least profits, profit gains, salary and wage 

gains somewhat within reason. These I think have been in the best interest of those involved in 

agriculture today. Surely that which is in the best interest of agriculture has to be in the best interest of 

Saskatchewan. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, I would say that as any other individual, I have not 

always agreed with everything the Government has done and I intend in the future to voice this criticism 

within the confines of our own caucus meetings. However, I wish to make it clear that in general 

principle I believe the Government of Saskatchewan and under the leadership of Ross Thatcher is doing 

an efficient and businesslike job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in seconding the Address—In-Reply 

to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, when you led us through our preliminary 

exercises to the new session today, you were thoughtful enough to introduce the new officials in the 

Legislature. I refer to those who will be serving us as pages. Let me join with you in welcoming them 

and expressing our apologies in advance for the times when we will work them too hard or rush them 

too much. 

 

I want to also join in the welcome to the new Assistant Clerk. Our only regret in welcoming him is that I 

understand it means that sometime we will have to be saying goodbye to the present Clerk who has been 

with us for several years. I‟m sure we will have an opportunity to ay due appreciation to him for those 

services. I‟m glad that the Assistant Clerk has such a good teacher to prepare him for very difficult 

duties and that he can have one who has not only knowledge but feeling for this institution and the 

principles of parliamentary procedure to help him help us in the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I join in the way one usually does in congratulating the mover and the seconder on 

their loyal comments with respect to the Speech from the Throne. I felt the mover of the resolution 

exhibited a very proper pride in his city. He exhibited a pride somewhat less proper in my opinion with 

respect to the accomplishments of the government. But one 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

30 

expects those things. My main impression after listening to both of them was this: that I though the 

Speech from the Throne was a pretty anaemic document, but I didn‟t know that it impressed them so 

much that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I‟ve listened here now since a quarter to three. I‟ve heard neither of them say hardly 

anything about the Speech from the Throne itself. Neither one of them was talking about benefits which 

are going to accrue from any of the astounding measure that were put before us in this astonishing 

document yesterday. As a matter of fact it seems to me that the mover and the seconder should really 

have got together in another way. I listened to the mover say in effect only one thing has to happen and 

all our problems can be taken care of and that one thing is to have a government that believes in free 

enterprise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — It really seems to me that the boys ought to get together and find out which camp they 

are in and which camp they want us to be in. I listened to all of the alleged great developments in the 

province — money invested and money taken out — we‟re happy to heart about those. Well something 

has surprised me. I listened to that and then I contemplate the Speech from the Throne. I would have 

thought, if there had been so much financial greatness going on in every aspect of the province except 

agriculture, they could have found a little money to do some of the things that badly need doing. I‟m 

surprised that with all of this alleged tremendous development, the Government couldn‟t find a single 

solitary penny to help the farm population with this tremendous added burden of millions of bushels of 

damp grain. The only contribution we got from the mover or the seconder with respect to this is that the 

seconder says, “Wait until the sun shines, boys, close your eyes and it will then have gone away.” I‟m 

surprised with all of this alleged development in the province we would have to stop at a family 

maximum with respect to deterrent fees. Surely if things are as good as we are led to believe, we no 

longer need to tax sick people because they are sick before they go to a doctor. We will get a little 

ceiling on here but nothing of any great benefit. I would have thought that, if all of this alleged 

development was so real and valuable, the Government would have been saying, “You know we will be 

able to put enough money into education so that university fees won‟t go up again for the fourth time in 

a row.” But there was no mention of that whatsoever. I would have though, if things had been so 

wonderful as we were led to believe, particularly by my friends the mover of the resolution, it would 

have been possible for the Government to say now in the clearest tones to our school boards and the 

taxpayers, “There will be enough money for education that the mill rate will not go up again this year”, 

but this we did not hear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other things I want to say with regard to the Speech 

from the Throne. Before doing that I want to say a few words about the very unfortunate 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

31 

 

happenings in the Province of Saskatchewan yesterday. I now that everybody in this Legislature and a 

great many of people outside will be profoundly shocked and saddened and discouraged by the tragic 

happenings yesterday in the little Saskatchewan community of Buffalo Narrows. We will all join in 

expressing sympathy to the friends and relatives and indeed to that entire community. To contemplate 

the feelings and the fears of many people that area of the province today is not a pretty thing at all. All 

of us should be profoundly disturbed for another reason. Violence of this nature is I submit seldom an 

isolated matter. It is seldom something which arises from conditions which occur just at that particular 

moment. More frequently it has very deep roots. More frequently it has been long in the making and the 

event itself is just the poison behind the boil coming to a head. And all of us we have to admit bear so 

responsibility for such conditions. I‟m sure that this event has been one of great concern and 

considerable discussion for the Government. I hope the Government will consider some such measure as 

the appointment of a special and specialized committee to investigate fully. This I think is correct to say 

is a device which has been used with some effect in the Unites States on occasion and probably in 

Canada. My understanding is that his device has been useful in producing and presenting to the public 

and to the Government some of the causes and some of the remedies of these unfortunate situations. I‟m 

not of course suggesting that this is to be fore the purpose of fixing guilt on any individual or 

community. That lies elsewhere. I do suggest we need to dig deeper into the root causes of violence. WE 

need to be better prepared than most of us are at least in introducing remedial measures. Let me assure 

the government of our complete support in actions of this kind which it may propose and proceed to 

undertake. 

 

Let me now turn to some of the statements in the Speech from the Throne and to some that aren‟t there. I 

will touch rather quickly on a number today. Many of my colleagues will develop both the criticisms 

and present alternate proposals at greater length. I will of course deal with them more when I hopefully 

have the permission of the House to pick up the debate on Monday. 

 

I think we must be factual about the way people in Saskatchewan must have felt yesterday afternoon and 

last night. I think there were a great many people who went to bed very sadly disappointed last evening 

after having read or heard the contents of the Speech from the Throne. Take for example the farmer 

looking out in 30 degree below weather at piles of damp grain. He‟s probably thinking at the same time 

of the piling up of interest on borrowed money. Many of them had hoped at least for a word of support 

for their position. Some of the more optimistic would have hoped that the Government would be saying, 

“We‟ll make some financial contribution toward the cost of drying grain.” What he heard instead was, 

“We‟ve had the seventh largest crop in our history and little else.” 

 

Take the merchants in our communities. Many of them would have hoped there would be some 

suggestion here that the Government was interested in their problem, a problem which arises because 

many of them have a lot of credit outstanding, a problem which many of them have because they 

anticipate sales dropping and they know sales have dropped. Much of this happens because of the 

slackening in the rural economy. There was nothing there to help them or to even encourage them to 

hope. 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

32 

Take the consumer and particularly the low or middle income consumer. Many of them had been hoping 

there might be something in this program of the Governments to give some protection from increased 

and increasing prices. Based on the statement of the Dominion Bureau of Statistics just a few days ago, 

many of them are acutely aware particularly of increased food prices. Particularly aware of it because 

this statement pointed out that these prices are higher here than in most other parts of Canada. They had 

a right to hope for some action because almost a year ago now the Government received the report of the 

Batten Royal Commission. It was a report from the Commission which they had appointed. They have 

had almost a year to do something about it. Nothing has been done and there was nothing in the program 

announced yesterday to relieve the consumer of some of his burdensome difficulties. 

 

Or take the trustee or the teacher or the parent or the student, many of these had looked for some lead or 

some leadership out of the confusion and frustration which is mounting in education. There was nothing 

there for that. 

 

Take, Mr. Speaker, the working man of our province. Take particularly those who are on the minimum 

wage. They could have had some reason for hoping to hear, as they have heard in some previous 

speeches, that there was going to be an adjustment in the minimum wage. They might have at least been 

entitled to hear that the Minimum Wage Board would be asked to meet and consider the situation. There 

are many who would be hoping to hear something definite about changes in Workman‟s Compensation 

benefits. They heard instead only that there would be “Amendments to the Trade Union Act.” Hearing 

that they would recall that almost every time the Government said that, it has resulted in the reduction of 

rights and responsibilities for working people in this province until these are now substantially below. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — You know, what they were previously in Saskatchewan and below what they are in many 

other provinces as well. 

 

Or take, Mr. Speaker, the young person at university or the technical institute. Or perhaps one who was 

hoping to go to the university or technical institute. There is a mighty small comfort, knowing the 

circumstances which exist now with regard to space and finance, mighty small comfort from the 

statement that there will be increases in spending at all levels for education. There undoubtedly will be 

and the same thing has happened in every province in Canada for at least the last 20 years and every 

year of those 20 years. Maybe among the people who were listening were some of those who are unable 

to get to our technical institute last year because the doors were shut in their face, there being no room 

inside. Maybe there are people who last year were unable to finance their attendance at university or a 

technical school last year. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I admit that in looking at the Speech from the Throne, all is not lost. There is a 

great hope for many people I‟m sure, when they hear that in three or four lines in the Speech from the 

throne we are assured that we are going to amend The Vital Statistics Act and The Marriage Act for 

“certain administrative needs.” I‟m sure there is going 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

33 

 

to be some real spice in that for the legislative diet and a lot of people went to bed happy knowing that 

this was going to take place. 

 

I think it has to be admitted, and I think the mover and the seconder admitted because of the way they 

avoided talking about the Speech from the throne, that the program shows a lock of initiative, that it 

lacks any enthusiasm whatsoever. It sparks no hope for the people of Saskatchewan. Perhaps even worst 

of al it fails to admit that there are any problems here, and where there are problems we are advised on 

occasions to shut our eyes and they will go away. 

 

Members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, will welcome some of the provisions in the Speech 

from the Throne. WE will welcome the fact that the Government says it is going to introduce a family 

maximum with respect to deterrent fees. This will be a big help. But while welcoming it, let‟s not forget 

to admit what this proves. This is simply an admission by the Government of hardship and injustice it 

caused by the imposition of deterrent fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A little bit of mitigation of the harm done does not remove the fact that this is the worst 

form of taxation possible. It is a poll tax, it is a tax taking no account of ability to pay or anything else 

and is bad for that reason. Not only that, but it is a poll tax for which one qualified by being sick and in 

that sense the tax is doubly damned as a method of taxation. Not only that it is of course an exceedingly 

poor health measure. Mr. Speaker, it is only as a result of removal in its entirety of this deterrent tax that 

the integrity of our medical and hospitalization plans can be restored. This year as last year, the 

Government is looking at only one method of protecting the use of our health dollar and that method is 

to punish people who get sick and to punish them by making them pay a fine for being sick. But I think 

the important thing for the people of the province to note and the important thing the people of the 

province are noting is this: this simply illustrates an old fact and that fact is, you can‟t trust programs of 

this nature to governments who don‟t believe in them in the first place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The fact remains this program is carried on largely by the Government of the day 

because for the sake of its political hide it doesn‟t dare to erode the benefits too openly or too far. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

34 

Mr. Lloyd: — One other aspect of the Speech from the Throne which I welcome and wish to comment 

on, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the extension of irrigable land in generally the Broderick area. I am 

pleased to hear that this program is continuing and developing. It seems a long while now since a 

Federal Minister of Agriculture, the former Mr. A. Hamilton, and the Premier of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Douglas, signed the agreement for the development of water on the South 

Saskatchewan River System. It is a long while. You know it is even four years, Mr. Speaker, since the 

Liberal Government cut the scene of the signing of that agreement from the film depicting the 

development of the project. That is four years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — May I suggest this: that before we are asked to vote money in regard to further 

development here, the Premier should make available the report of an advisory committee which has 

been studying this development. I hope that the advisory committee has made a report available to him, 

a committee made up of representatives of Saskatchewan citizens. Certainly this Legislature is entitled 

to have the benefit of their study before we are put in the position of voting money for it. 

 

The second suggestion I would make with regard to the irrigable land development is this: the 

Government should develop some very solid guide lines with respect to the amount of irrigable land 

which any one user can control. As I understand it and I‟d be happy to be corrected if I‟m wrong, there 

are no such limits presently in existence. Now if that statement is correct that there are no limits, there is 

obviously a danger of one or more users, perhaps corporations getting control of very substantial acreage 

of this irrigable land. And if this does happen, it would mean that we would have spent very large 

amounts of public money for the benefit of a relatively few operators. The time for us to prevent that is 

now rather that later. It is obvious I think that because of the capital necessary to develop this land, 

development is easier for corporations that individual farmers. This whole matter of corporate ownership 

of farm production is a growing threat, not only in Saskatchewan but in other parts of the country. It is a 

threat not only to the producer, it is a threat also I submit to the consumer. More will be said about that 

from this side of the House during this session. We need measures and I submit we need them at this 

session to protect against this in the development of the irrigable land in our province. I hope the 

Government will have some positive proposals with respect to such limitations during this session. 

 

The only other topic I want to welcome and mention this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is with respect to the 

setting up of certain legislative committees. Earlier this afternoon the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) put 

before us a motion which he intends to move next weeks with respect to studying the electoral system. I 

can‟t help but note that last year from this side of the House, two resolutions were presented which were 

aimed in this same general direction. One was moved by the Member from Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). 

It said: 

 

That this Legislature recommends to the consideration of the Government the immediate establishment 

of an 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

35 

 

Inter-sessional Committee of this Legislature, with such powers and authority that may be necessary to 

review and recommend to this Legislature amendments to The Election Act. 

 

Last year the Government didn‟t see fit to move on that. I recall the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) 

saying that is we had suggestions to make that he would be happy to talk with us. And he is always 

happy to talk with us, I will admit that. 

 

I am glad to see the change or conversion or whatever one calls it in the space of less than one year. And 

at the same session the Member from Mayfair (Mr. Brocklebank) moved: 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the introduction of legislation 

to establish an independent electoral boundaries commission. 

 

I hope or presume that this Committee will be looking at this possibility as well. And we will certainly 

urge them to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — We could extend some more references for the Committee in respect to other things we 

hope to see done as well. We welcome this procedure which the Government appears to be proposing 

this year. 

 

One other resolution or one other bit of legislation which is proposed, Mr. Speaker, is the establishment 

of a Municipal Finance Corporation. I again draw attention to this House that the Member from Regina 

South East (Mr. Baker) last year moved: 

 

That this Assembly recommends that the Government give consideration to the establishment of a 

municipal Finance Corporation to assist local governments with capital projects by providing the means 

whereby the local governments may market debentures without having to depend exclusively on the 

open market. 

 

Again we congratulate the Government on being converted or being willing to take some action in this 

respect. 

 

There is also reference to the establishment of a Committee to study the procedures in the Legislature. 

Mr. Speaker, I had reference to this in a press statement quite a number of months ago. I think that it is 

time that we as a group sat down and deliberated on whether there are better methods of making use of 

our time and whatever abilities we have. I hope that the Government isn‟t conceiving this Committee in 

a narrow sense. I hope that it isn‟t considering looking at just the rules. I hope it is considering looking 

at bursting open some of the rules and making it possible for Members and people of the province 

generally to have a bigger part in influencing ultimate decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a great deal more that I want to say, but at this time I would ask leave to adjourn 

the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

36 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of three former 

Members of this Assembly and express its grateful appreciation of the contributions each made to his 

community, to his constituency and to this Province. 

 

Louis Henry Hantelman, who died on January 5, 1969, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Kindersley constituency from 1934 to 1938 and Elrose constituency from 1938 to 1944. He was born in 

Dubuque, Iowa in 1884 and he moved to Rouleau in 1906, where he farmed. He served with the 46th 

Battalion in France during the First World War. A member for the Board of Governors of the University 

of Saskatchewan from 1945 to 1954, he was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree by the 

University in 1955. He was a member of the Canadian Seed Growers‟ Association, the Royal Canadian 

Legion and the Masonic Order. 

 

Honourable William Ferdinand Alphonse Turgeon, who died on January 11, 1969, was a Member of 

this Legislature for Prince Albert City from 1907 to 1908, for Duck Lake from 1908 to 1912, and for 

Humboldt from 1912 to 1921. He was born in Bathurst, New Brunswick in 1877. he received his 

primary education in New York City and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree from Laval 

University, Quebec City in 1899. He studied law in Saint John, New Brunswick and was called to the 

New Brunswick bar in 1902. He came to Prince Albert in 1903 and was the crown prosecutor of the 

judicial district until 1907. He was Attorney General of the Province from 1907 until 1921. In 1921, Mr. 

Turgeon was appointed a judge of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and was Chief Justice of 

Saskatchewan from 1938 to 1941. He was a member of the Queen‟s Privy Council for Canada. From 

1941 to 1956, he was in the Diplomatic Corps serving as Canadian Ambassador to Argentina, Chile, 

Mexico, Belgium, Ireland and Portugal. Mr. Turgeon served on many Royal Commissions investigating 

various aspects of Canadian economic life. In 1967, he was awarded the Medal of Service of the Order 

of Canada. 

 

Herman Kersler Warren, who died on May 27, 1968, represented Bengough constituency in this 

Legislature from 1929 to 1934 and 1938 to 1944. He was born in Hamiota, Manitoba in 1883 and 

received his education at Brandon Collegiate. He served with the South Saskatchewan Regiment during 

the Second World War. He was Chairman of the Provincial Mediation Board for 12 years. He was a 

member of the Rotary Club and the Masonic Order. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathies with members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to second the motion which the 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

37 

 

Premier has put before us and to add some comments of respect with respect to the former Members of 

the Legislature who have died since we last met here. I did not know personally the Hon. Mr. Turgeon. I 

know him only as a figure of some substance in Saskatchewan‟s early history. His career of legislator 

and of diplomat, and that in the wider field of public service in the field of chairmanship of Royal 

Commissions has earned for Mr. Turgeon very proper and considerable place in the history of our 

province. 

 

I did know in a limited sense, but not well at all, the late Herman Warren who is also one of the 

Members who have died since our Legislature last met. 

 

Particularly, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to refer to Mr. Hantelman, who I did have the pleasure of knowing 

rather better than either of the other two. I think that it is correct to say that Louis Hantelman was one of 

Saskatchewan‟s really great men. His service in this Legislature was not of the kind which frequently 

earned for him headlines in the papers nor was his service elsewhere of this kind. But if you talk to 

people who served with Louis Hantelman in the Legislature, or if you talk with people who served with 

Louis Hantelman in the Armed Forces Overseas, everything that they say reinforces my earlier 

statement that Louis Hantelman was one of Saskatchewan‟s, one of Canada‟s, really great men. I don‟t 

know how well some of his actions with respect to the University are known, but I think that it is well 

that it should be placed on the record of the House. Mr. Hantelman admittedly was one who in a 

financial sense was very successful. I know that for a number of years he used to go to the President of 

the University and leave with him a considerable sum of money. He would say, “There are good 

students around here who if they don‟t have some financial help which isn‟t available in a formal way 

are not going to be able to continue. Will you please take this money in trust and use it as you will to 

support whom you will.” Year after year, students got supported by Louis Hantelman in that way. I think 

in most cases they didn‟t know who was providing the money and in most cases I am sure few people 

outside of the President of the University knew it. I say only again, Mr. Speaker, that he was a great 

man, a generous man, and I join with the Premier in his expression of deep regret in regard to his death. 

 

Mr. A. Mitchell (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of being the representative in this 

Legislature of Bengough constituency, the constituency which the late Mr. Warren represented in this 

House for two legislatures — 1929 to 1934 and 1938 to 1944. Although I did not know Mr. Warren 

intimately I recall having met him during the election campaign of 1938 in that constituency. I am sure 

that during his term of office he served his constituents conscientiously. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

join with other Members of this Legislature in extending condolences to the surviving members of the 

Warren family. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to join the other Members of the Assembly in 

expressing sympathy to the families of the three deceased former Members and in particular to Dr. 

Hantelman‟s family. He was first elected to this Legislature in 1943 and represented the then Kindersley 

seat. In 1938, after redistribution, he represented the new, larger Elrose seat. I had met him several times 

but I know him far better by reputation. I 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

38 

agree with the Hon. Member for Biggar that many people did not know of many of his good works. 

However, everyone that did know him had great respect for his ability, for his generosity, and for his 

fairness. He was particularly interested in the University and anxious that its benefits be extended to all 

the citizens of the province. I did not realize that he had been a donor to many of the students, but I am 

not surprised. 

 

As Dr. Hantelman was a representative for part of the Kindersley-Kerrobert seat, the present Member 

for that constituency joins me in expressing sympathy to the family and gratitude for his services. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, may I also be permitted to 

associate myself with the mover and the seconder of the motion and to pay respect to three former 

Members of this Legislature. Personally I was not acquainted with any of them but I know of them and 

of their work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would particularly like to give condolences to the family and relatives of the late Hon. W. 

F. Turgeon. I think that it is my duty to record the respect and the esteem in which the late Justice 

Turgeon was held by my constituents in Prince Albert East-Cumberland. May I also express our sadness 

to the family for the loss of an honored and highly respected citizen. Like many other people I have, as I 

said, some knowledge of Justice Turgeon‟s works and career. He had excellent qualifications and ability 

to serve on the Bench and in the Public Service. He did show a deep sense of responsibility and 

understanding and it was for this reason why he was elected on a number of occasions to sit in 

Parliament and also chosen to be an ambassador for our country and on various Royal Commissions as 

well as in other investigations which were necessary for the public weal. People tell me that he was 

honest and wise. I know that he will long remain as guide to others called to undertake similar 

responsibilities. He was loved in Parliament and he was loved by the people. We think of him more as a 

pathfinder and a leader of the highest order. I am proud to honor him today because he was one of 

Canada‟s finest men and one of the best citizens. His deeds, I submit, have become Canadian history. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, H.K. Warren who passed away during 1968, 

last May, served this Legislature for approximately 12 years as both a Member of the Government and a 

Member of the Opposition. During one term he served as Deputy Speaker. Herman Warren I knew best 

as Chairman of the Provincial Mediation Board. Each year he made a visit to the Legislature to advise 

and to criticize and to meet his friends on both sides of this House. And for another reason, to be seated 

once again on the floor in his Legislature where he had represented his constituents. He was very fond of 

this Chamber and the pride with which he described his activities here clearly enunciated to us his 

admiration and his appreciation for those whom he represented and for the democratic form of 

government in which he participated. 

 

Herman Warren lived a full life and he had very many interests. He took part in many activities — mink 

rancher, farmer, manager of a baseball team, army officer, school teacher, insurance agent, civil servant, 

race-horse owner, football and wrestling fan, philosopher — but he was happiest as an elected 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

39 

 

representative. There were no people of whom he was more fond than the people from Bengough, the 

south country, as he called it. When he spoke of them, whether they were from Bengough, Ogema or 

Amulet or Bures, when they came to visit him regardless of their background, or whether they wore 

overalls or a bowler hat, it was obvious that these people were his special friends. 

 

Like many of the Hon. Members, Herman Warren‟s philosophy was stated in many ways regarding his 

fellowmen. For instance he would say, “I never saw a man I didn‟t like.” “If you tell the truth you don‟t 

have to remember what you said.” “You can‟t build a home for yourself by tearing someone else‟s 

down.” “You don‟t need friends when you are ahead, you need your friends when you are in trouble.” 

“Only one who has had a toothache knows what it feels like.” 

 

As a mediator, Herman Warren had few equals. Many times when he was chairman of the Mediation 

Board he settled problems that would have stalled Solomon. Being associated with him one could easily 

tell that he would never amass a fortune for he was constantly mailing money to friends who needed 

help. His generosity in an economic was matched by his generosity when he spoke of friends or 

opponents. Recently I leafed through a report Herman Warren made to his constituents in the 1930s. It 

spoke of courage, sympathy and hope. And it spoke of his people in his riding with pride. 

 

In electing this man to the Legislature the people of Bengough chose a colorful, personable, generous, 

loyal advocate of their province. He often said of others, and it was the highest compliment he could pay 

a friend or an opponent, “He likes people and they like him.” Herman Warren liked the people that he 

represented and the people of Bengough and of Saskatchewan liked him. His wife, his son and his 

daughters mourn a person who was in every way a true son of Western Canada. 

 

Members of this Legislature and the people who worked with him in any endeavor, but particularly in 

the Provincial Mediation Board, will, I am sure, join with me in expressing to Mrs. Warren and her 

family our sympathy and also the appreciation of the Province for the services of H. K. Warren. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I desire to associate myself with all of those 

who have spoken before me in joining in the motion of condolences before the House at this time. It was 

not my privilege to know Mr. Louis Hantelman personally. I did however learn from time to time and 

particularly in the latter years of his close association with and involvement in the affairs of the 

University of Saskatchewan, I was interested to hear the words of the Leader of the Opposition this 

afternoon in a personal way about some of the things he did for the students at the University o 

Saskatchewan which haven‟t thus yet far been well known to the Members and the public in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. I knew Louis Hantelman only by reputation as a very fine, outstanding 

citizen and pioneer of the Province of Saskatchewan. I knew quite well in a personal way Mr. Herman 

Warren, concerning whom the Member for Regina North West has spoken so well. I remember Mr. 

Warren when I was a practicing lawyer. I used to appear before the Mediation Board on many occasions 

when Mr. Warren was the chairman of that board. I came to respect very much his good judgment, his 

acute sense of fair 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

40 

play and social justice and, as the Member from Regina North West has indicated, his ability to grasp 

and cope with the many difficult problems and situations which came before the Board during his term 

as chairman. 

 

Many Hon. Members will remember that the problem before the Provincial Mediation Board a number 

of years ago, because of the rent control which we had and the accommodation control which we had 

during the last World War and immediately thereafter, resulted in many, many more cases and many 

more problems coming before the Mediation Board than happily is the situation today. So it was the lot 

of practicing lawyers in those days, in the late 40s in particular, to appear before the Mediation Board on 

many occasions. I want to pay tribute to the memory of Mr. Warren and to associate myself with the 

condolences to the members of his family. 

 

I would like to say something about the Hon. W.F.A. Turgeon who held the position which I presently 

hold in this Province as Attorney General for longer I believe than any other man. He served as Attorney 

general of the Province of Saskatchewan for a period of 15 years and he became Attorney General two 

years after Saskatchewan became a province. Those of you particularly who are lawyers and certainly all 

Members of the Legislature I am sure will realize the kind of problems and challenges that would face 

an Attorney General in a new province with practically no laws at that time. Earlier in the proceedings 

as I was thumbing through the Indexes of Statutes I realized that we have between 450 and 500 statutes 

now in our Revised Statutes. Just think back for a minute and contemplate the problem of an Attorney 

General an of course of all Members of the Government when you didn‟t have any laws and when you 

were starting to make laws for the Province of Saskatchewan. So the Hon. W.F.A. Turgeon was 

involved in a great majority of our Revised Statutes in the first instance during his period of Attorney 

General and he did an outstanding job. The majority of the laws that are still on the statute books of our 

Province were placed there under the aegis of Mr. Turgeon when he was Attorney General. 

 

I think that it is generally accepted, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Mr. Turgeon was probably the most 

distinguished member of the Judiciary in the Province of Saskatchewan and that‟s not my judgment. 

That is the judgment of successors in the office of Chief Justice who have given that opinion to me, that 

here was a man who had clarity of judgment and the ability to grasp the points of law and the facts of the 

cases that came before him. His judgments, I believe, will remain as shining beacons for future law 

students, lawyers, judges and the public at large. These judgments of his are there fore everyone to read 

and will attest far more eloquently than I can to the degree of judicial brilliance which he attained as a 

member of the courts of this province. In addition to that of course, as has been indicated, he served all 

Canadians with great distinction abroad in the capitals of the world for a period of over 15 years and of 

course demonstrated in his capacity as ambassador, his other great talents separate and apart from his 

talents as a lawyer and a judge. For about a half a century, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. W. F. Turgeon served 

the people of this province, the people of Canada, as an agent of the Attorney General, as a lawyer, as 

Attorney General of the Province, as a member of the courts for 20 years, as Chief Justice of the courts 

for several years and then as an ambassador for 15 years. He was truly one of the great citizens 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

41 

 

of the Province of Saskatchewan, and I know that you all join with me in extending to the members of 

his family our most sincere condolences on his passing. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with others in paying 

tribute to the Members who have passed away since we last met and who were Members of this 

Legislature. I would especially like to say a few words about the Hon. Alphonse Turgeon who I was 

privileged to know and was privileged to visit with just a few days before he passed away. I found that 

this remarkable man even after he had passed the age of 90 was still keenly aware of what went on 

around him, what went on in the world and keenly interested in all current events. He spent the last few 

years of his life in retirement living in Prince Albert. Every time that I visited with him I came away 

enriched and further impressed with his keen mind, his tremendous grasp of national and international 

affairs and his great humanity because with all his other attributes he was a very human individual. In 

fact it has been stated here that Mr. Turgeon really had four careers, in this Legislature where he left his 

mark, and as the present Attorney General pointed out many of the statutes that he wrote are still on the 

books today. His record on the Bench and in the field of foreign affairs is equally outstanding. I am told 

that he served as chairman of more Royal Commissions than any other Canadian. In fact he was well 

over 70 when he was asked by the Government of Manitoba to be a one-man Royal Commission and he 

rewrote the entire statutes of Workmen‟s Compensation for that province. There is no question that he 

was one of the great Canadians. He had a great mind. He was an outstanding citizen and he was a real 

link along with Mr. Martin who is still alive and who we hope will be spared for many years, in fact one 

of the last inks with the first Legislature of this Province. I join with others here in paying a tribute to 

Alphonse Turgeon and passing that tribute, respect and condolence on to his family. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the words 

of sympathy and respect which have been addressed in respect to the predeceased Members. I was going 

to say something of a more extensive nature about the Hon. Mr. Justice Turgeon. Because of the 

eloquent and informative tributes which have proceeded mine, I will confine my remarks pointing out 

one or two things about Judge Turgeon. This man had an altogether outstanding career. We have already 

heard of his service in almost every conceivable field of law in the province. He started at 23 as a crown 

prosecutor and city solicitor at Prince Albert and at 30 was Attorney General. He went on to become the 

Judge of the Court of Appeal and then Chief Justice. Then the lengthy and distinguished service in the 

Diplomatic Corps. I think the qualities of industry and intellectual capacity of the man are illustrated by 

the number and the diversity of the Royal Commissions which he headed. These were as diverse as an 

investigation of the grain trade, of the coal industry, of the textile industry, of universities. And as has 

been mentioned by the Member for Prince Albert West, at about 80 he undertook an enquiry into the 

Workmen‟s Compensation laws of Manitoba. This indicates a mind which was brilliant and incisive and 

one which was in great demand. It should be noted of course that these Royal Commissions were by no 

means restricted to the Province of Saskatchewan or indeed of Western Canada. Many of 



 

January 31, 1969 

 

 

42 

them were Federal Royal Commissions. There can, I think, be few men in Canada‟s history who have 

served their country in so many capacities and with such distinction — a truly great Canadian. 

 

Mr. W. Ross Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 

Speaker 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:10 o‟clock p.m. 


