



















































Hansard: March 20, 1969


1404 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

33rd Day 
 

Thursday, March 20, 1969 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, through you, Sir, it is my pleasure to introduce to 

all Members 60 alert young citizens from the grade five class at Sherwood school in Regina North West. 

They are in the Speakers gallery and are accompanied by their social studies teacher, Mrs. Nancy Hill 

and her assistant, Mrs. Carol Caswell. All Members I am sure join me in congratulating the teachers of 

this group for their interest in parliamentary procedure and expressing the wish that their stay here with 

us this afternoon will be informative and pleasant. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

through you to the Members of the Assembly a group situated in the west gallery, a group of students 

from Bishop Klein school in Saskatoon Mayfair. They are 36 in number and I believe that they are 

accompanied by Mr. Orosz and Mr. Gruending. I am sure that all Members of the Chamber will hope 

that they have an educational and a pleasant day here today and wish them a safe journey back to 

Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Provincial-Municipal Conference 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I should like to make an 

announcement which I think has some importance. I wish to indicate that a Provincial-Municipal 

Conference will be held in Regina Monday, June 16 and Tuesday, June 17. It will be held in these 

Chambers. 

 

The Government is inviting the following organizations to send six official delegates and a maximum of 

six observers: The Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association; the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities and the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 

 

At the conference which we held some years ago there were ten representatives. We have reduced that at 

the request of 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1405 

the Association. In addition we are inviting the Saskatchewan Hospital Association to send two voting 

delegates. About 15 other organizations will be invited to send two observers each if they wish. The 

latter group will include such organizations as The Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, The Saskatchewan’s 

Farmer Union, The Chamber of Commerce, The Teachers’ Federation and The Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour and so on. 

 

All Members of the Legislature, of course, will be invited as observers. This will be the first conference 

held since Dec. 1965. The main purpose of the gathering will be to discuss all aspects of 

provincial-municipal relations and particularly as they pertain to financial matters. 

 

We hope in this day of tight money that this will be a particularly useful conference to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Recalling of Defective Vehicles 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day may I direct a 

question to the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), the Minister in charge of the Highway Traffic Board? 

 

In view of the shocking information carried by the local press that the world’s largest auto manufacturer 

is recalling 1,100,000 vehicles suspected of defective brakes, can the Minister advise us what steps the 

Government or the Highway Traffic Board or any agency of the Government has taken to advise the 

owners of these vehicles of the dangerous defect? 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — I haven’t heard the report, Mr. Speaker. We will certainly look 

into it. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could direct a supplementary question to the Hon. Minister. 

What representations, if any, has the Government made to the Federal Government to prevent a 

repetition of this shoddy manufacturing, since another 4,900,000 vehicles were recalled by this same 

company in February of this year for defective exhaust and carburettor systems? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Well, I think that it would be a normal question. If you submit the question in a normal 

way it will be answered in the normal way. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, if I may answer. In the same news report it also 

stated that GMC was advising the motorists that had these cars to bring them in. If the Member had read 

the 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1406 

full report he wouldn’t have needed to ask this question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, again to the Minister. Can the Minister assure us 

because of this situation that special consideration will be given to school buses in that category? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Sir, I said that we would look into it. 

 

Establishment of a Counter-Missile System by U.S.A. 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I want to 

direct a question to the Government. The question arises out of information, very disconcerting 

information, for the last several days that the Government of the United States was going to establish a 

counter-missile system. I know that the Government of Canada is in consultation with them. The point 

of importance to Saskatchewan people is that the base for this system is to be established at Great Falls, 

Montana and Grand Forks, North Dakota, which will put Saskatchewan directly in the fly-way or 

course-way. I wonder if the Government has or will consider indicating to the Government of Canada 

the very considerable concern of people in the Province of Saskatchewan at this very worrisome 

situation? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have enough problems dealing with Provincial 

matters. This does not come under our jurisdiction in any way. Now, I admit that we have to take steps 

to protect ourselves against the Russian Socialists and the Chinese Socialists, but still that is the duty of 

Ottawa and not the duty of this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 101 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return 101 

showing: 

 

1. Prior to the introduction in the Legislature, in 1968, of the Employment Agencies Bill, whether 

there was any communication or consultation with respect to the subject matter of this Bill between 

the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its Departments or Agencies, and (a) the Federal 

Government or any of its Departments or Agencies; (b) any labour organization or organizations ; (c) 

any employers’ organization or organizations, 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1407 

employment agency or agencies, or any person or persons interest in, or wishing to promote or 

establish, any fee-charging private employment agencies. 

 

2. With whom and when any such communications or consultations took place. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, the question asked here is asking for 

something that is impossible to answer. For example, how do I know and remember in the previous five 

years the number of consultations which I have had in my office, what they were about, or whether they 

were about the Workmen’s Compensation Board, or unemployment or any facets of that. Some of the 

correspondence that I may have had, much of it is of a confidential nature. So under those circumstances 

I feel that I am not able to give the answer and I would ask this Legislature to turn this question down. 

 

Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I want to draw to the attention of this House and to the Minister of Labour 

who has just spoken that this question does not refer to incidental or casual conversations that have 

taken place over a long period of time. The Motion asks respecting the period prior to the introduction in 

the Legislature in 1968 of the Employment Agencies Bill, whether there was any communication or 

consultation with respect to the subject matter of this Bill. It goes on to say, “between the Government 

of Saskatchewan and any of its Departments or Agencies and (a) the Federal Government and any of its 

Department or Agencies” and so forth. It doesn’t cover the range of matters that the Minister of Labour 

has rung in, in his usual vague fashion, may I add, without reference to the Motion before us. 

 

There should not be here any question of confidentiality. I think we have a right again to know whether 

conversations of this kind were held, and whether the Government in introducing this Bill did consult 

with employer organizations, employees organizations, or with the Federal Government that has a very 

evident interest in this kind of legislation; whether, indeed, the Department proceeded out of the blue 

with respect to this legislation, or proceeded after having some information from those people who are 

acquainted with the Bill that the Minister in 1968 after some discussion withdrew in this House. 

 

I say that none of the reasons that the Minister has given us apply to what we are talking about. I point 

out again that we are talking about what happened prior to the introduction of this Bill in 1968. If the 

Government uses its majority again, as it has done so many times during the course of this Legislative 

session, to deny information, not only to the Opposition but to the people of this province, it will be yet 

another indication that the Government is hiding information from the people who have a right to know 

about it. 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1408 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 15 - Saskatchewan Code of Human Rights 
 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale) moved, seconded by Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the 

Opposition): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the immediate passage of 

legislation to enact a Saskatchewan Code of Human Rights to be administered by a Human Rights 

Commission of Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the motion that I am going to be moving concerns itself with human rights in the 

Province of Saskatchewan and the proposed Human Rights Commission for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I am sure that I am not alone when I say that this Resolution is a very important Resolution, one that I 

think should be of particular importance and interest to us, the Parliamentarians of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, human rights are one of the most important touchstones of our democratic society. They 

are much talked about - regrettably, often, though they are not followed in our society. All Members of 

this House, I am sure, will agree with me that we judge the degree of concern that a Government has for 

its citizens by the type of human rights legislation that it enacts. This Resolution is prompted by my 

belief that the Saskatchewan Government and this Legislature should act now to implement a human 

rights legislation program worthy of the needs of the 1970s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, the term human rights can be used to cover a wide range of individual 

freedoms and obligations of the province or of the state toward the citizens of the society. It can, 

however, be also described in rather simple terms, such as life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness, as we 

are all familiar with in the Declaration in the United States. Human rights can be comprehensively stated 

as they were in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Whatever way human rights 

are stated to be, they should be guaranteed for the citizens of the Province of Saskatchewan and this, Mr. 

Speaker, is the intention of the proposed Resolution. 

 

Now before proceeding further, it should be brought to the attention of the Members of this House that 

the Province of Saskatchewan has been the leader of human rights legislation 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1409 

in the past. The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights was passed by the former CCF Government back in 1947, 

and I might add that in many jurisdictions it still remains as a beacon of human rights legislation 

throughout Canada and much of North America. This Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, which is still in 

force, is one of the most extensive statutes on civil liberties. It deals with fundamental freedoms of 

speech, press, assembly, religion, association, commonly called as the political civil liberties. It also 

prohibits discrimination with respect to accommodation, employment, occupation, land transactions, 

education, business and enterprises. It also purports to binding the Crown, the gentlemen sitting 

opposite, and every servant and agent of the Crown, as it ought properly to do. It can be seen by a quick 

perusal of the human rights legislation in Saskatchewan that, at one time, this Province was the leader of 

human rights legislation in Canada. 

 

My Resolution is presented as a result of my belief that the times now demand a broad and new 

approach to human rights legislation in order to update such bills as the Saskatchewan Bill of Human 

Rights. We can be rightfully proud that Saskatchewan passed this Bill in 1947. However, I now call on 

Members of this House to seriously consider the Resolution for a new Bill of Rights for tomorrow. 

 

One of the main reasons for the introduction of this Resolution is that the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights is 

enforced through a penal sanction, that is the imposition of a fine. The major flaw of the Saskatchewan 

Bill of Rights is that there really is no provision for the administration or enforcement of that Act in a 

manner other than through application of another statute of this province. For example, if there happens 

to be a violation, it has to be enforced through provisions of another statute such as The Liquor Act or 

The Vehicles Act of the Province of Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights is sort of 

quasi-criminal in that it declares certain practices to be illegal and sets out certain sanctions. 

 

This type of protection is subject however to a number of weaknesses, it is, of course, better than no 

form of protection whatsoever, but as I have stated it is subject to a number of weaknesses. An example 

is that there is reluctance often on the part of a victim of discrimination of Saskatchewan to initiate 

criminal proceedings. Often, there are difficulties in proving the offence according to the standards of a 

court of criminal law. And further, I am sure that there is a reluctance on the part of the judiciary to 

convict in these types of circumstances, probably reflecting our view that a discriminatory act is 

probably not in the same category or nature as a quasi-criminal act or a criminal offence. 

 

Also, I feel, that the Legislators of Saskatchewan must have known, at the time of implementation of the 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, that the provisions were somewhat inadequate because they also saw fit to 

implement such statutes as The Fair Employment Practices Act, The Fair Accommodation Practices Act 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1410 

and so on. These statutes, I am sure, were designed to provide for a mechanism whereby penalties could 

be imposed on violators and trespassers of human rights. 

 

What I wish to stress here, Mr. Speaker, is that the legislation as presently set out in the Statute Books of 

Saskatchewan, although adequate in its day, now requires a further and more effective form of 

supporting legislation. Well, some Members will probably want to question why the increased concern 

or interest in civil liberties. I feel that there are probably many reasons for this, but very briefly, I think 

four main reasons highlight the concern for civil liberties generally. Firstly, since the Second World 

War, it can be said that the level of conscience has, I think, in the society as a whole been greatly 

increased. This is probably directly due to the international shock that we received through experiences 

in death camps in the Second World War and the like. As has been stated by one writer on Human 

Rights, he said, “That particular bruise on our moral reserves likely will be there to discolour conscience 

for a long time to come.” Secondly, people in Saskatchewan are beginning to appreciate the role that 

human rights ideas play in the contemporary movements of the last 10 to 15 years. Many movements in 

the world which are based on so-called self-determination and similar purposes are nourished by some 

form of ideals or sympathy for human rights. Often in the world, Mr. Speaker, political alignments and 

social policy and the type of conflict that goes on in social structures have been greatly shaped and 

moulded by the attitudes and the actions respecting human rights by other peoples in the world. Thirdly, 

the singularly most important reason for the rise of concern for civil liberties is the confrontation of 

colour that is being witnessed by our people and in the United States and elsewhere in North America. I 

think this confrontation of colour is dramatic. We see here a majority of mankind in the world who 

emerge now in a non-white situation in a confrontation of colour. We see in many states of the United 

States a struggle for political and economic equality of a black minority. We see massive psychological 

and physical changes for the underprivileged in many of the states in the United States and our friends to 

the South. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, also that this confrontation of colours is taking place in subtle ways such as in the 

United Nations, for example, where there is growing concern over apartheid. I feel that there has also 

been no more singular reason for concern on civil liberties and human rights than, as I have termed, its 

confrontation of colour in the United States and other parts of North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I say that this problem also poses itself here in the Province of Saskatchewan. A few 

days ago we heard our Premier talk about a time bomb in the Province of Saskatchewan. He was 

referring to a particular Saskatchewan problem, perhaps not peculiar to Saskatchewan but primarily 

based here. Although it is not a confrontation of colour, in the sense that I have described, the Indian and 

Métis situation in Saskatchewan 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1411 

does present to the people of Saskatchewan a confrontation crisis. There is growing concern, a growing 

awareness by the people of our province in human liberties as a result of the recent developments in 

Saskatchewan relating to our native people, and so there should be. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, fourthly, another reason for the increase in human rights is what is often called the 

revolution of rising expectations. This phrase is attributed to Adlai Stevenson and I think is a classic 

description of the phenomenon of the developing countries. This phrase reflects the concern of many of 

the poor nations of the world and the poor people of this province and of this country to improve their 

living and working standards so that the term human rights may really mean something, so that the term 

human rights may mean to them better living standards in all regards. These terms, as I have said, are 

not restricted to faraway places. The revolution of rising expectations applies to all Canadians. It applies 

to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan and it is as applicable to the native people of this 

province as to the city dweller of Saskatoon or Regina who happens to be living in one of the slums of 

our cities. 

 

This revolution, Mr. Speaker, is applicable to the farmer of the Province of Saskatchewan in many areas 

who is forced now, because of the cost-price squeeze and other arguments aired in this Chamber during 

this session, to struggle for economic survival and economic equality. So, Mr. Speaker, one can see that 

there are many reasons for this increased interest in human rights, why there is an increased interest in 

the Human Rights Commission and the institution of a Human Rights Code. I have simply attempted to 

illustrate four of the reasons for this increased interest to illustrate the concern in human rights 

legislation. I think these four reasons are sufficient in themselves to provide for the establishment of a 

Human Rights Code for Saskatchewan which would enshrine and define forever our basic and alienable 

social and political economic rights for the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — These are reasons which, Mr. Speaker, are sufficient in themselves to provide for the 

establishment of a Human Rights Commission to enforce with strength and with vigour the case against 

racism and inequality and poverty in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have taken the liberty of preparing a draft Bill respecting the establishment of a 

Saskatchewan Code of Human Rights and the means to provide for the administration of this Code of 

Human Rights. I am going to, with your permission, Mr. Speaker, table a copy of the draft Bill with the 

Legislature. I have as well photocopies that I should like distributed sometime at the convenience of the 

staff to the Members of the Legislature. I am not going to take the time 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1412 

of the Members of this House to review in detail the relevant provisions of the proposed Bill. As I said, I 

am going to table it. It is going to be present on the desks of the Members of this House for their perusal. 

 

Essentially though, the following are the major aspects of this legislation. It is drafted in the basic 

recognition that there is inherent dignity and equality and inalienable rights of all members of the human 

family as a general statement of principle. The Bill also states that it is the public policy of 

Saskatchewan that every person should be free and equal in dignity and rights without regard to race, 

creed, colour, nationality, ancestry or place of origin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — This Bill also states that no person shall publish or display or cause to be displayed 

any notice, signs, symbols, emblem or other representation indicating discrimination. Further, it 

prohibits discrimination with respect to accommodation services or facilities available in any place to 

which the public is customarily admitted. The Act further prohibits discrimination in the occupancy of 

commercial units which includes space used for such things as stores, offices, warehouses and 

manufacturing establishments. In the field of employment, no employer or person by this proposed 

legislation, no person or employer acting on behalf of an employer shall refuse to employ or to continue 

to employ any person who discriminates against another individual with respect to race, creed, colour, 

nationality, ancestry or place of origin. And I think in the field of employment special emphasis should 

be placed here. As, I said the other day, the Premier was asked on television about possible 

discrimination respecting hiring and placement of native peoples of our province. He indicated, 

according to my recollection of the newscast, that no instance of discrimination had been brought to his 

attention. I am sure that one of the reasons why discrimination had not been brought to the attention of 

the Government is probably the simple reluctance on the part of the native people to institute action. 

Further, I am sure that there are many occasions where Indian and Métis people are interested and 

concerned in launching proceedings against discrimination and against a person who violates human 

rights but simply do not know where to begin in order to start to initiate proceedings. This provision on 

employment is not only designed for Indian and Métis people. It’s designed with respect to all working 

people of the Province of Saskatchewan. It’s based on the underlying assumption that each and every 

one of us in this province, no matter what age, colour, creed, ability, political belief, has the basic human 

right to a decent job with decent working conditions and wages. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — This Act also suggests that 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1413 

no person should circulate any application for employment or publish any advertisement in connection 

with prospective employment, which in any way, directly or indirectly, places a limitation or 

specification or preference or in any other way delineates as to race or colour or the other matters that 

I’ve talked about with respect to job placement. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, the legislation is intended to be administered by a Human Rights Commission. In 

order to ensure that all of the above matters that I’ve talked about are followed and carried out, a Human 

Rights Code in order to be binding on the Government should be administered by a Human Rights 

Commission. This proposed Commission must have teeth in order to prosecute violations. In the draft 

Bill that I have tabled, it’s a three-man commission, with the power of the Executive Council to increase 

its numbers as required. Members will note that the draft Bill also provides for staff and other essential 

material for the completion of the duties of this commission. 

 

Above all, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s most important that Members place a high emphasis on the strength 

and the independence and the value of this commission to administer human rights in Saskatchewan. 

These people must be placed at the level of a Deputy Minister at least and must be given freedom and 

autonomy and freedom from influence of the government of the day. They must be given freedom and 

independence as I’ve stated. They must be responsible to no Minister, to no political party, to no vested 

interests, to no employer or other group in the Province of Saskatchewan. They must have freedom to 

circulate into government offices short of the Cabinet Chamber and into employers’ records, if need be, 

to search out possible acts of discrimination. To me this is the singularly most important improvement of 

any legislation respecting human rights that we have to date in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As I’ve said, the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, laudable as it is, is lacking this type of enforcement 

procedure. This proposed Bill is by no means the best in the area. It’s merely a suggestion along the 

lines I would want this Legislature to consider and possibly proceed with. One other observation, Mr. 

Speaker. I said that the Bill is by no means the best or the most exhaustive in the field. I want to 

underline the fact that there is great interest in human rights in the Province of Saskatchewan. I 

personally regret that there are only about 10 or 11 Government Members opposite on the other side 

listening on this matter. I want to tell Members of this House that without any initiative on my part or by 

anybody on this side, four young people from the Province of Saskatchewan took it upon themselves, at 

their own expense, to take a day off from their classes to be present today to hear the presentation on 

human rights because that’s how important they felt this matter was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I had never met these people 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1414 

prior to today. I had casually spoken to one of them when he approached me as the result of the notice of 

motion. They’re so interested, Mr. Speaker, that I’m going to table another copy of a draft Bill on human 

rights that this student organization prepared with the assistance of older people in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I think it’s another form of bill that should be looked at for the consideration of the 

Members and I’m now going to table it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And to put their concern in proper perspective, there are four people who .are 

present here today. Two are from the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon campus. One is Mr. 

Warren Caragata and the other is Miss Dawne Peterson. They’re both sitting in the speaker’s gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. From grade 12 at Evan Hardy Collegiate in Saskatoon, David Hosking and John Greer are 

present. Four people, and these young people are members of an organization that is called the 

Saskatchewan United Nations Organization for Students or for short SUNOS. All of these students, 

about 380 of them, in the Province of Saskatchewan are debating this question of human rights and I 

think these young people must be congratulated for coming to Regina to partake in this debate and their 

members must also be congratulated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And so, Mr. Speaker, with leave of the House and permission of yourself I should 

like to table for the record the hard work that is embodied in the proposed bill by the people from 

SUNOS. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would interpret . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — . . . I would interpret and I’m sure all Members in this House would interpret that the 

passage of either Bill or a combination of both of the statutes would mean acceptance of the broad terms 

and principles of the Human Rights Code, as I have enunciated. No stone should be left unturned to 

ensure that discrimination, wherever it may exist in our Province, should be eliminated. There are other 

methods, of course, to promote human rights. The emphasis must be placed on publicity of the existence 

of legislation. Stress must be placed on education of the needs for human rights and hopefully there will 

be a trend away from vigorous enforcement of the provisions of the proposed statutes, simply because 

the people in the Province of Saskatchewan have grown to accept the principles which likely won’t have 

to be enforced with vigour with respect to these acts of discrimination. 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1415 

In all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I should like this Legislature to consider in debate the possibility of 

enacting this new additional civil rights legislation. The time is long overdue. The Province of Alberta is 

now instituting it. Ontario has had this Bill on the Statute Books for approximately five to six years. 

Perhaps there should be appropriate legislation written in various labour statutes which would set out 

better and with greater particulars employment criteria. The Legislature could consider a provision 

perhaps whereby parties who enter into contract with Government agencies would be bound by a 

provision in that contract which forces the other party to comply with the provisions of human rights 

legislation. A display of the Human Rights Code in all places of public accommodation is probably 

another avenue of approach. 

 

Above all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we must place emphasis on education of our people in the province. 

Education of basic human rights which should be respected should begin with our children at the very 

earliest age. It should be followed by us, the Legislators of this Province, in debate in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Education of human rights should be continued at ethnic schools and schools for 

new Canadians. I can speak very personally here. When my parents, of Ukrainian background, came to 

Canada they received rudimentary instruction on their basic political freedoms in this country, in this 

province. This is a wonderful thing. It instilled these people with hope and with courage and I’m sure 

that applies to every person in this Legislature and to all the people of this province. Education can be 

carried out, as I’ve said, by the conduct of the Members of this Legislature in debate and our other 

activities. 

 

I think it’s most important that the statute is not deteriorated by being a pious but ineffectual declaration 

of human rights. This statute should be perhaps a Magna Carta for Human Liberties for the people of 

this province. It should be the beginning of the Province taking new leadership nationally in this field. 

As I’ve said human rights legislation in Saskatchewan has long been overdue. This Resolution and the 

proposed Bill are based on a recognition of the sameness of all men. It’s based on the recognition that 

there can be no real dignity of any man unless society dedicates itself to ensuring dignity of all men 

everywhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And as has been stated, in today’s so-called global village more than ever the 

question who is my neighbour cannot and must not be answered with qualifications as to race, colour, 

creed, religion and political beliefs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1416 

Mr. Romanow: —:Therefore. Mr. Speaker, because the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) has had a 

long-standing concern, I know, in this field I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition that this 

Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the immediate passage of legislation to 

enact a Saskatchewan Code of Human Rights to be administered by a Human Rights Commission of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, my first words must be words of congratulations 

to the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) for the very forthright and scholarly way in 

which he conducted himself in the course of his remarks . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — . . . in introducing this Resolution. I would also like to say a word on behalf of those of 

us on this side of the House in joining with him in welcoming the people from Saskatoon who are so 

vitally interested in this matter of human rights in the Province of Saskatchewan. I congratulate them 

and I commend them for their interest. 

 

I am going to have quite a bit to say about this Resolution at a later date but I would like to make a few 

observations at this time, Mr. Speaker, before begging the leave of the House to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) remarks did refer to certain specific legislation 

which is on the Statute Books of this province and he referred, of course, to The Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights Act, The Fair Accommodation Practices Act and The Fair Employment Practices Act. I would 

like to spend a few minutes speaking about other Government programs that I feel are in a broad sense, 

they’re in a broader sense perhaps, than, the context used by the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale, that 

they also are civil rights programs. I think of programs such as the Indian and Métis Branch program 

which was put on over the last two or three years. Legal education courses conducted by my Department 

in conjunction with the Department of Natural Resources, the Indian and Métis Branch. This program 

was started on a very modest scale. I hope that it will be extended considerably by the new Department 

of Indian and Métis Affairs which will be under the jurisdiction of one of our Ministers. This has been a 

good program. It’s the kind of information that should be given to the people, the Indian and Métis 

people, who took part in this program which was held in Prince Albert and Regina and in different areas 

of the province. It’s a good program and it is going to be continued. That, so far as I’m concerned, is 

also a human rights program. I think you will agree that my definition is perhaps wider than the context 

used by the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1417 

because traditionally the expression “civil rights” or “human rights” has meant the exercise by a 

particular group of rights and powers that theoretically belong to all but have not been exercised by all. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that this definition of human rights is now undergoing change. At the present time 

certain conditions, certain rights, certain prerogatives are formulated in society and in the public eye, 

and the next step is the acceptance that the exercise of these conditions, rights and prerogatives by all in 

a society constitutes justice. And I would refer here to the trend or growing public opinion for example 

that a university education or any other higher education is now being regarded not as a privilege but as 

a right, not only for young people but for all people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — I would like to say that I have some misgivings regarding the effectiveness of programs 

under the statutes referred to by the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). Historically 

since they were passed, and I think they’re good statutes, but since they were passed the activity under 

these statutes has been minimal. A few prosecutions have taken place. I am referring now to the Bill of 

Rights and The Fair Accommodation Practices Act and The Fair Employment Practices Act. A few 

prosecutions have taken place and a number of investigations have been made under the powers 

provided in the legislation. However, prosecutions and investigations presuppose an awareness of rights 

and an awareness on the parts of administrators of circumstances that might be matters for their attention 

under the Act. It’s evident to me that unawareness on the part of the public of rights and duties under the 

legislation is nullifying the benefits to be gained by the legislation. I am of the view that publicity 

outlining the features of existing human rights legislation has to be increased. Presently there is some 

publicity in this regard being conducted through the Indian and Métis Branch by the lectures that I 

referred to, but the scope of this publicity at the moment is only directed to one certain group and of 

course that is not completely satisfactory. There should be far more public participation and public 

involvement in this kind of information, and there should be more dissemination on the part of all of us 

in respect to the kind of legislation that’s there. 

 

In many cases those who discriminate do so, I suggest, because of ignorance or because of the lack of 

understanding of the situation faced by those being discriminated against. At the present time I am in the 

process of considering ways in which a more extensive educational program can be carried out, so that 

the basic requirements and rights in our legislation can be brought home to the public. I think a number 

of governmental departments will be involved in this consideration. I think the establishment of an 

education program with respect to existing human rights legislation is one step that will have to 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1418 

be taken. Another step that has already been taken by my Department is in respect to the conciliation 

provisions of The Fair Accommodation Practices Act. You will recall that The Fair Accommodation 

Practices Act makes provision for an inquiry by an officer into a complaint made under the Act in an 

endeavour to effect a settlement of the matter complained of. This course of action has been used 

recently with, I think, moderate success. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that conciliation procedures are the most effective procedures under this Act, and 

maybe they haven’t been used as often in the past as they might have been. Additionally, I’m not sure 

that all attempts at working out the most satisfactory solution have been made. By and large in the past, 

few personal contacts of interested parties have been made during conciliation actions taken under the 

legislation. Complaints in the past have been investigated by means of correspondence and through 

investigating agencies such as the police. This was the practice when you gentlemen were the 

Government of the day. We have changed that. The facts were found second-hand by the officer and 

settlements were made in the absence of that close and direct contact that I certainty feel is necessary for 

the most satisfactory settlement. Indeed personal contact by the conciliation officer concerned will often 

provide an opportunity for rational discussion of the issues, and this will lead to an appreciation of other 

points of view often leading in turn to a dissolution of the difficulties. Towards this end, Mr. Speaker, I 

have instructed the present officer appointed under The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, Mr. 

Holtzman, of my Department to conduct personal interviews when complaints are received and during 

his inquiries to bring the disputing parties face to face if at all possible; and we’ve done this in a number 

of cases. I’ve also instructed this officer to conduct follow-up attendances with the parties involved in 

the dispute to cement settlements made or to prevent the disputes from renewing. By these new 

approaches I hope that disputes that have arisen will be settled more satisfactorily than in the past and 

that further action such as prosecutions will not be required. 

 

I think all Hon. Members will agree with me, Mr. Speaker, that prosecutions are, for the most part, the 

least desirable and effective method for providing protection under our civil rights legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Bill of Rights Act, The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, and Fair Employment 

Practices Act, these are the Saskatchewan statutes that are directly concerned with human rights in our 

province. I would suggest to you also that in addition to these Acts there are other Acts which are on the 

Statute Books of our Province. In 1967 it was my privilege and honour to introduce The Criminal 

Injuries Compensation Act. I know you will agree that this legislation filled a need in our society, the 

need to compensate persons who have been the innocent victims of criminal acts. The Saskatchewan 

program, as I’ve told you before, was the first of its kind in Canada and it’s the most comprehensive in 

North America. 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1419 

I would like to say a word, Mr. Speaker, about the philosophy of this program in that I think this 

program does fall squarely within any human rights or civil rights discussion. Basically in the case of the 

criminal act, society has directed all of its activities and energy toward the perpetrator of that act. 

Elaborate police agencies exist for the purpose of preventing and detecting the commission of crimes by 

citizens of the state. When a crime is committed, the police agencies are charged with the responsibility 

of apprehending the offender and bringing him before the courts, which of course is an institution 

established for the purpose of determining the innocence or guilt of these persons. During the course of 

this determination, welfare agencies, public and private, conduct studies into the history of the offender 

to find out the reasons for his actions. Rehabilitative measures are considered and recommended and we 

can thus see that from the time of the commission of the offence, until a sentence has been served and 

even afterward, police agencies, the judiciary, corrections officers and rehabilitative officers, and 

voluntary societies are all actively engaged in providing attention to the offender. Except in a very few 

instances, Mr. Speaker, an innocent victim of a crime had no right to look to the state for recompense for 

the loss he had suffered as a result of the crime. 

 

There is no provision in the criminal law which requires a person to pay to an injured person 

compensation for injuries suffered. Administrators, legal philosophers and others have asked the 

question: why does the state direct all its activities towards the offending party and leave the injured 

party to his own resources to secure redress? So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this is within the broader 

context of human rights legislation. I suggest also that our very extended legal aid program is also 

human rights legislation. You will shortly be asked, when the estimates of my Department come before 

the Legislature, to vote a very substantial sum this year for counsel for indigent persons - $120,000 

which is considerably more than it was a few years ago. These are all matters of human rights. These are 

all matters that have to be considered in the context of the Hon. Member’s (Mr. Romanow) Resolution. I 

want to say more about this at a later date. Before I sit down today I would just like to remind you and 

perhaps report to the House at this time on the discussions at the Constitutional Conference in respect of 

the constitutional entrenchment of a Bill of Rights in the Constitution of Canada. As all Hon. Members 

will know, the Prime Minister of Canada is vitally concerned and interested in having a constitutionally 

entrenched Bill of Rights. Many of the rights that were discussed by the Member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale and many of the rights that I have mentioned here today, I think before long will be 

entrenched in a Bill of Rights for all Canadians so that they will be the inalienable rights of each and 

every citizen in our society. 

 

So I want to say a little bit more at a later date, Mr. Speaker, about the Constitutional Bill of Rights. I 

want to say a little bit more about the Resolution insofar as it recommends the immediate constitution of 

a Human Rights Commission 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1420 

in the Province of Saskatchewan, and I would accordingly beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Resolution No. 6 - Provincial Housing and Urban Development 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina 

North West): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the establishment of a 

provincial Housing and Urban Development Authority, to: 

 

(a) provide housing for low-income groups; 

(b) develop a financial program to make money for housing available at reasonable rates; 

(c) establish the long-term and short-term housing needs of rural and urban people in Saskatchewan; 

(d) study ways and means to lower construction costs; 

(e) project long-term regional planning and land acquisition for urban development and 

home-building. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, last year’s Resolution on this general area 

of concern was passed by this Assembly in an amended form. The Hon. Members opposite amended by 

deleting a section calling for the establishment of a provincial housing authority. In its amended form 

that Resolution urged the provincial Government to enlist the support of the Government of Canada in 

developing a program particularly for low and medium-income families which would include the 

following: (1) Provision of funds at a low interest rate for home building; (2) Establishment of research 

facilities to develop new and less costly techniques for the construction of homes; and (3) The 

development of a program which will guarantee the construction of a minimum yearly quota of housing 

for each province in Canada. 

 

What was the result of that Resolution passed unanimously by this House last year? The interest rates 

continued to reach for new highs; I am not aware of any results of an aggressive research policy in this 

area; I am unaware of any programmed guarantee of a minimum yearly quota of housing for each 

province. The amendment offered by the Members opposite deleted the portion of the Resolution which 

came nearest the recommendation of the Batten Commission in its housing section. That report called 

for a provincial Mortgage and Housing Authority. The housing situation will remain out of control as 

long as the Government continues to apply a piecemeal approach to solving the problem in housing. 

 

The Federal Government’s abandonment of winter works program has had an indirect effect on 

municipalities which will 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1421 

increase property taxes, which in turn will compound the housing problem. The vacuum caused by that 

Federal Government action can be filled, to a degree, by the favourable consideration of this Resolution 

that I am seconding. 

 

I am concerned because the housing construction costs in my city are the highest on the Prairies 

according to the CMHC figures in 1967. Those costs have risen considerably since then. 

 

In order to bring another point of view to bear on this subject I would like to quote in part from pages 7, 

8, 9 and 10 of the brief from the Saskatoon Labour Council to the Hellyer Committee on Housing. 

 

The Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation was formed in 1946, one of its main purposes being 

to assist low wage earners in getting mortgage money in order to buy houses at lower rates of interest 

than that offered by private lenders. In its submission, the Saskatoon Labour Council pointed out that 

in this respect CMHC has completely failed in one of its main objectives. 

 

In 1957 with a National Housing Act mortgage rate of 5½ per cent the maximum mortgage available 

was $13,000. A qualifying salary of $4,638 a year was necessary but in 1957 the average wage in 

manufacturing was approximately $3,500 a year. Since then in 1968 with National Housing Act 

mortgage rates at 8½ per cent, the maximum mortgage available was $18,000. The qualifying salary is 

almost $9,000 a year. But the average manufacturing wage in 1967 was about $5,000 a year. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, in 1957 a wage earner would have to make over $1,000 a year more than the 

average wage in Canada in order to qualify for an NHA mortgage, but in 1968 the wage earner would 

now have to make $4,000 a year over the average wage in Canada in order to qualify for an NHA 

mortgage. 

 

In 1966 over 12 per cent of NHA borrowers had incomes of over $10,000 a year while 30 per cent 

were above $8,000 a year. The result, therefore, of CMHC policy has been to assist those people who 

don’t need assistance while their own regulations deny assistance to the very people that the CMHC 

was established to assist. Michael Harrington in his book, The Other America refers to this as 

“Socialism for the rich and private enterprise for the poor.” To put it another way, if you can prove 

you don’t need assistance then you can get it. On the other hand, if you do need assistance you are 

barred by the regulations from getting that assistance. 

 

The other part of the Government policy that has been a failure is, of course, in public housing. 

According to figures available to us, from 1949 to 1966, less than one 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1422 

per cent of total housing starts was public housing or about 21,000 units. In this respect we should 

commend the Saskatoon City Council for finally moving in this direction. However, even what they 

have done is totally inadequate. The Saskatoon Labour Council submits that, even if every 

municipality in Canada were to take full advantage of public housing, this would not solve the housing 

crisis. 

 

According to information put out by the city of Saskatoon with respect to public housing, no one making 

over $400 a month can qualify, so this still leaves all of those people who make too much money to 

qualify for public housing but too little money to qualify for an NHA mortgage to buy their own home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the situation described here is analogous to a situation that exists in Saskatchewan in the 

field of health care. Many Saskatchewan citizens are too poor to pay the Government’s deterrent fees on 

medical and hospital plans but too rich to get on welfare where the fees would be paid by the 

Government. I have no hesitation in saying that both these situations are undesirable and I respectfully 

submit that more equitable solutions can be arrived at in each case. 

 

Quoting again from the Saskatoon Labour Council brief on Housing: 

 

Failure to come to grips with the housing problem and the reluctance on the part of governments to 

give it the priority it deserves have allowed the situation to deteriorate to such an extent that the 

trouble is not just a shortage of housing, but extravagant costs and rentals that have priced homes out 

of the market for the majority of the people who need them. We therefore call on all three levels of 

government to work out a coordinated program designed to meet the immediate and long-range 

housing needs of the people of Saskatchewan, with particular emphasis on the requirements of the 

low-income and fixed income groups. 

 

Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to bring further opinions on this matter from a different source, to the attention 

of Hon. Members, from the bulletin on the Canadian Conference on Housing, May 1968, a section 

entitled Housing Progress Report. I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the title itself is rather ironic in that it 

uses the word, “progress” when referring to the housing situation in Canada, as follows: 

 

An adequate housing policy must seek account of many factors, but two problems stand out above all 

others. One is the problem of production, to generate and maintain a level of house-building activity 

adequate for the requirements of a growing population. The other is the problem of distribution or, 

more specifically, the problem of ensuring that those in the low-income group share 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1423 

in the improvement of housing conditions. The two problems are related. The more effectively the 

problem of housing production is resolved, the easier is the problem of distribution. But when housing 

production falls short of requirements, the housing problem of those in the lower income groups 

becomes even more acute. 

 

Even if the output were to match the estimated potential demand for new housing, the benefit for those 

in the lower income groups would still be very limited. A more equitable share in the improvement of 

housing conditions for low-income people depends inescapably on greater public initiative. The record 

of public aid to low-income groups is not impressive, 2.8 per cent of all housing starts assisted in this 

way since 1948, or the equivalent of 1.4 per cent of all occupied dwellings. This proportion rose to 5 

per cent of all starts in 1967, but most of this increase was accounted for by Ontario where the 

proportion was almost double the national average. Nearly 80 per cent of all low-income housing 

initiated in Canada in 1967 was in the Province of Ontario. 

 

The Resolution, which I am pleased to second, suggests goals to be reached by planning. It is directed to 

the area of the most serious shortcoming, that is housing for low-income groups. It serves to strengthen 

the Resolution which we presented last year which was eventually supported unanimously. It reflects in 

part the Batten Report, the Saskatoon Labour Council’s report to the Hellyer Committee, and other 

interested groups. I call upon all Members to unanimously support the Resolution directed toward the 

housing problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, the Resolution which we have 

before the House at the present time simply calls for a creation of a housing authority in order to carry 

on the very aspects of housing which we are carrying on in our Housing Branch at the present time. 

 

The Province of Saskatchewan in its Housing Program, Land Acquisition Program, and other programs 

relating to housing, relies upon the co-operation which we have with CMHC. I might say at this time 

that, since I have been Minister of Municipal Affairs, co-operation has been excellent. We have simply 

for the asking a great deal of research which has been done by the CMHC together with the advice of 

their experts, which has been accumulated over a period of years. 

 

Certain speakers who have spoken on this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, have rather deprecated our efforts in 

the field of public or low-rental housing. I would just like to point out that while our efforts may not 

satisfy some people, we will in the period of 18 months ending in June of 1969, virtually 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1424 

double the number of low-rental public housing which we have in the province. I am not including in 

that figure those houses which we have constructed for any particular segment of the population or 

economic rental, or those houses which we have purchased in co-operation with CMHC for immediate 

occupancy. While some people may sneer at our housing efforts to date, I just want to tell this House 

that we have accomplished what we have in the field of housing with a permanent staff of four people. 

The Province of Ontario - assume it is 10 times our population - has a group of 525 civil servants, as of 

the last count, running the Ontario Housing Authority and doing exactly the same work which we are 

doing in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to turn for a moment to what we are doing in the field of land acquisition, as this is referred to in 

the Resolution which is before the House. We have this year for the first time purchased raw land, on 

behalf of the city of Regina. We have relieved the city of Regina of that land by paying out between 

ourselves and CMHC 95 per cent of the purchase price. In other words, only 5 per cent of that purchase 

price has to be paid directly by the taxpayers of Regina. We have told the city of Regina that we will 

purchase more land as you bring it along. Anyone that has read the Hellyer Report knows what the 

Hellyer Report says about the city of Saskatoon insofar as land purchase in concerned. It leads all of 

Canada. We have in our land bank nearly 1,000 acres on behalf of the city of Saskatoon and have made 

a commitment to purchase more land in 1969. We are also developing lots. The biggest project which 

we have under way at the present time is at Uranium City, where we have undertaken to develop within 

a fixed period approximately 140 lots; and we have had to give a firm commitment to Eldorado that we 

will have 40 of those lots available for building in the spring of 1969, and we will have those lots ready. 

I just want to point out to you that since January 1, Mr. Speaker, we have announced, and tenders have 

been called in many cases for, certain projects which will get under way within the next month or six 

weeks. In Regina we will build 60 units initially which will be spread around the city. We have 

announced a project for Biggar, Unity, Prince Albert and Lloydminster. There will be another large 

project in Saskatoon, and we will be building I would say in the vicinity of between 500 and 600 houses 

during the forthcoming year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in addition to what I have said about housing, I want again to mention this program 

of purchasing older houses. When I spoke on the Speech from the Throne Debate, I said that our initial 

experiment would involve the purchase of 50 houses. We have already purchased 50 houses in 

Saskatoon, Regina and Prince Albert, and are now out to increase that number to 100 houses. The 

Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) made this statement, “No houses for rent or purchase in 

Regina.” I just want to tell him that we have purchased houses in Regina, not one exceeding $15,000 in 

value at the rate of about two or three per week. It is all nonsense to say that there are no houses for sale 

in the Province of Saskatchewan. Indeed, I hope that when we come back into this House 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1425 

next year we will be able to say that this project has reached 200 houses. 

 

Now I want to say something about the specific accomplishments in housing in Saskatchewan, in the 

broader field than that of simply government. The final CMHC figures for 1968 are now out and 

available to anyone in this House. In 1968, the number of housing units completed in Saskatchewan 

exceeded by 41.8 per cent the number of housing completions in 1967. Manitoba which had a Housing 

Authority had an increase of 13.9 per cent, in 1968 over 1967. Alberta which had a Housing Authority 

only had an increase of 38 per cent. Mr. Speaker, this idea of creating a grandiose housing authority or 

any other kind of housing authority won’t build one more house in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Estey: — I want to point out further, Mr. Speaker, that the total units completed, that’s completed 

in Saskatchewan in 1968, amounted to 4,729. In 1967, the figure was 3,034. Now the question arises: is 

this tendency of increased housing which has been going on since 1966 being carried on into the future? 

The CMHC have recently released their figures for January 1969, as compared to January 1968. In 

January 1968, the completions in Saskatchewan amounted to 296 units. I want to point out to the two 

speakers who have spoken on this Resolution that in January 1969 that figure was virtually doubled, 

when we had 521 housing completed in a month when the climate was almost the worst in history. 

 

Now, what about housing starts? This is most significant I submit. In 1968, in January we had only 116 

housing starts. But in January 1969 we had 430 housing starts in the Province of Saskatchewan. I am of 

the opinion that this Hellyer Report may take away from the provinces that have a Housing Authority 

one of their most important activities as of this date. I have met with Mr. Hellyer and I feel that he is 

quite determined that an amendment will be brought in, I would think within the next two or three 

weeks, in the House of Commons, whereby loans for acquiring and developing land will be made 

directly to a municipality. In other words, the cities of Regina and Saskatoon will I believe, maybe even 

for the 1969 construction season, go directly to CMHC. Off-hand, I do not think the Province will have 

any objection to this procedure, so long as the borrowing is within the Local Government Board 

supervision. I am one of those who would like to see cheaper money for housing. I think in the Hellyer 

Report that they have struck on one source that might reduce the interest rate on housing. That is the 

assets of our Pension Funds. It is rather interesting to note that of the Pension Funds examined by the 

Hellyer Report only two had significant investments in housing mortgages. Those two were Air Canada 

and Canada Packers. Only two large pension funds in Canada received any credit in the Hellyer Task 

Force Report. I would suggest to those Members opposite, who are in 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1426 

a position to be on the board of pension funds controlled by labour organizations or by organizations of 

a combination of labour and management, that they see to it that the absolute maximum, permitted by 

law and regulations of the funds under their control, goes into housing mortgages. If you are limited by 

any statutory provision, I am quite certain that that limitation can be removed in view of the present 

feeling of the Government of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) referred to the high land costs. 

Certainly in the history of the city of Saskatoon, we have not what you would call high land costs. But in 

any event, assuming that cost of land is high, we have at this session of the Legislature brought in 

legislation - the Member concerned should know - whereby any city in this province can lease land to an 

individual on which the individual can build a home on such terms as that municipal corporation deems 

advisable. We are not in any way limiting the rights or power of the municipal corporation to lease land. 

Then the Member for Regina North West referred to construction of homes being at a standstill. I submit 

that statements like those are hopelessly exaggerated and add nothing whatever to the housing situation 

in Saskatchewan in the way of making a contribution. 

 

The question of research has been referred to. I submit that there is no province or housing authority in 

Canada, even in the wealthy province of Ontario, which can attempt to build a research organization that 

could even touch that presently found in CMHC and in our National Research Council. I might add, as I 

said before, we can use every bit of the research of CMHC, and they are only too glad to make it 

available. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose the following amendment to this Resolution, seconded by the 

Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald): 

 

That all the words after “That” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

This Assembly commends the present housing and development programs of the Government and 

recommends that such program be continued with emphasis on the following aspects: 

 

(a) that the Government continue the construction program for housing under The Housing and Urban 

Renewal Act and The National Act; 

(b) that the Government endorse the recommendations of the Task Force on Housing and Urban 

Development to have pension funds controlled by labour unions and management channelled into 

mortgages for housing construction; 

(c) that the Government continue its program of land acquisition and land development; 

(d) that the Government encourage Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation and the National 

Research Council to continue research into housing construction with a view 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1427 

to decreasing the construction costs; 

(e) that the Government continue its consultations with urban and rural municipalities concerned with 

questions of regional planning so that an effective program for regional planning may be instituted in 

those areas where required; and 

(f) that the Government in co-operation with Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation continue its 

program of purchasing older but suitable homes in our urban centres. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I have first of all a comment with respect to the 

amendment that is now being given to us by the Minister of Municipal Affairs. It is of course an 

amendment which seeks to bypass as an alternative the motion that was submitted by my friend, Mr. 

Whelan, and would prevent the centralization of efforts in a more effective way as has been suggested 

by the original motion. Also the amendment endorses the Hellyer Task Force recommendations 

apparently in their entirety because there is nothing in the amendment to suggest otherwise. This, if I 

may say so, I find quite unpalatable as will I think other Members on this side of the House, and perhaps 

on the other side of the House too. I don’t think that we should endorse holus-bolus a series of 

recommendations that are a rehash in many ways of suggestions that have been made by the large 

financial institutions of this country, that presume to proceed on the basis of higher interest rates and in 

the end make housing no more available than was the situation before. In fact in my opinion, it will 

place housing even further beyond the reach of many people in average or middle circumstances. 

 

Now, my friend the Minister of Municipal Affairs has talked about the pension funds of various 

organizations being made available for purposes of creating more housing. In a general way I think I 

would agree that these concentrations of money where they exist should be made available. I notice his 

reference, however, to trade unions and employer bodies. In many instances, trade unions don’t enjoy 

effective representation on pension plan administrations. Where they do have representation they don’t 

have that controlling voice that would make them real significant partners in getting more money to 

spend for the purpose of creating additional housing. I think that we should realize the situation for what 

it is. That is, that most pension plans in Canada are controlled by the employer even where there is 

labour union representation on the trustees’ boards of pension plans. It is representation, but not the 

controlling interest. 

 

I say this because of the way in which the Minister had posed the question; and while I certainly don’t 

disagree with the proposition that pension plans should be used as he has suggested, I don’t believe that 

the labour union organizations in this country have the controlling voice that would be most 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1428 

useful in getting this exchange under way. 

 

Now, the Minister of Municipal Affairs has talked about the fact that we have had an increase over the 

last year or so in the number of housing starts; and so we should have had, because in recent years, Mr. 

Speaker, we have had a very bad record of housing starts and housing finishes in this province as 

everybody knows. It is possible to take any given years and get some fantastic figures on percentage 

improvements for the next yearly period, because of what was not done during the previous year. He has 

used this, of course, in justification for the argument that we don’t need a Housing Authority in 

Saskatchewan; because he says Manitoba and Alberta have housing authorities, but in a given 12-month 

period, their percentage of housing starts were less than in Saskatchewan. I don’t think this proves 

anything, it is a complete non sequitur. If a Housing Authority is created and is not used enough then of 

course that simply means that the Authority isn’t functioning in the way that it was planned to have it 

function. Also a percentage of 41 per cent or 38 per cent in increases could mean a great deal more in 

terms of total overall efforts than a percentage increase of 47 per cent. 

 

I don’t think anyone here is suggesting that nothing has been done in the field of housing in 

Saskatchewan in recent years. What is suggested is that what has been done and what is planned to be 

done is not nearly good enough. It is good enough for the people that have needed housing 

accommodation for many years, and it is not good enough for the many new families that are in 

formation now and will be formed in the period ahead of us. The Resolution that has been proposed tries 

to itemize those things by which we will get a real acceleration of effort under a Housing Authority that 

is equipped to do the job. I think that the amendment that has been given to us by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs will simply not accomplish the objective that we must reach in this province if we are 

going to satisfy existing needs and needs of the future. I say, Mr. Speaker, that the matters that are in this 

Resolution are among the most pressing and urgent in Canada. I think it is a paradox that in the second 

or third wealthiest country in the world millions of people should be in dire need of proper housing. This 

can be denied. The perpetuation of unsatisfactory housing standards, of plain and outright shortages of a 

desperate nature, should be a concentration point for all governments in Canada. Our Resolution of 

course does propose that kind of concentration. 

 

One of the proposals that come out of the Hellyer Task Force on housing is that there would be 

presumably more new homes created by extending the amortization and payment period. I say, in the 

midst of the exorbitantly high interest rates, now current, that this doesn’t constitute any real assistance 

to people; it is just another tax on their income. For the majority of Canadians who earn $5,200 a year, it 

just means a great percentage of their income spent on housing and therefore, for that reason, less money 

to be spent on food, clothing, 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1429 

education and other needs and amenities. Ultimately, of course, it means that an $18,000 home if one 

can be acquired for that sum, will cost well over $40,000 before it is paid for. I say that this prospect is a 

financial nightmare except that it is real and except that it is with us in actuality. 

 

It is well known, Mr. Speaker, and indeed it is conceded by the Federal Government, housing authorities 

and political leaders for that matter, that the average Canadian can’t participate successfully under 

present housing regulations. Some of these officials and politicians have declared that a worker simply 

can’t build a home under today’s conditions unless he has an income in the order of $8,000 a year. A 

more conservative estimate was given by Mr. Ross Lane, the president of the Regina House Builders’ 

Association. This was at the beginning of 1968 by the way. He said then that excluding land costs - and 

they are pretty significant - the cheapest home in the Regina market was being sold for $15,400. In order 

to qualify for an NHA mortgage - and that was the interest rates at that time, slightly lower - a 

prospective home buyer must earn a rock-bottom income of $6,200 a year. 

 

Well this rock-bottom income, so-called, exceeds the average Saskatchewan weekly salaries by about 

$709 or $800 a year. It is clear evidence that the greater part of the employed work force in the province 

is economically segregated in terms of Canada’s home acquisition rules. I want to say in passing that 

these weekly income figures refer only to that portion of the wage-earning population that is employed 

in establishments hiring 20 employees or over. In a province like Saskatchewan where there are 

approximately 24,000 employers, many of them with less than 20 employees, it is evident that there is a 

large portion of workers that don’t come within the official Dominion Bureau of Statistics’ figures. So 

the overall income figures are far less in terms of weekly earnings than I have indicated in the figures I 

have just given you. 

 

As well, the NHA rules say that no one can purchase a home today that exceeds 27 per cent of the 

income of the income-earner. I say that 27 per cent is far too high for people who are making low wages. 

It is a fact also that wage-earners in many cases are paying 30 per cent or more of their income in rent or 

purchase costs. This means that many families are short of proper food and clothing. There are reliable 

reports to indicate that in some cases this borders on outright privation and hardship. In my opinion, Mr. 

Speaker, 20 per cent of income is the maximum that should be paid out or invested, especially by the 

young family in which there are usually two or more children. There is no real justification for the 27 

per cent figure at all. This figure has simply grown like Topsy. In the mid-forties, the Professor Marsh 

Report said that in no case should the payment for home acquisition cost exceed 20 per cent. That was 

an outside or maximum figure. Now of course it is far beyond that. I say again, and I want to emphasize 

it, Mr. Speaker, that upcreeping costs have posed the kind of inflation that has inflicted genuine hardship 

in 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1430 

payments. 

 

Of course there are other kinds of hardships and financial troubles that are inflicted by the straight lack 

of accommodation and these all too evidently cause an immense amount of harm. Everybody knows 

about these perhaps - the juvenile delinquency, the physical and psychological disorders, the twisted 

lives and the social and personal ill-health of a very significant and alarming degree in society today. 

 

We need, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey), a housing policy that will fit 

the needs of the 1970s. We don’t have that policy at this moment. We don’t have one that even begins to 

be acceptable and satisfactory. The kind of organization that is contemplated in the Resolution that we 

have placed before this House is one that would bring about that kind of desirable housing policy. 

 

We’ve got at this moment 74 per cent of all Canadians living in urban areas of 1,000 or over; and we are 

told that in a very few years this will be 80 per cent. Apart from these significant figures there is the 

need of the rural areas. One has only to take a short visit to the country and to look at the farm side and 

our villages to realize what a large part of our citizens in this province have to live in. I say it is, as many 

have said before us, straight substandard accommodation. 

 

Half of the dwellings that we have now in Canada pre-date 1945. One million people in this country live 

in substandard housing accommodation. Even the modest housing goals that have been set by the 

Economic Council of Canada have not been achieved. All of these of course are reinforcements to the 

arguments that we have put before this House with a Resolution we’ve asked the House to adopt. There 

is also the question of parts of our population, such as senior citizens and students. Housing needs here 

are quite desperate and they should be met by the kind of provincial planning that could be achieved 

through a Central Housing Authority. 

 

The Canadian Welfare council has said that 50 per cent of Canadian families need some kind of 

assistance in obtaining decent shelter. In all of Canada there are only about 50,000 publicly owned 

low-rental units. This is estimated to be about one per cent of all of the dwellings in Canada. This is an 

outrageously small figure. It is evident that we simply have to increase the number of units that are built 

by public authorities. While I am on this question, and since it is raised from time to time, I want to 

point out that there are reliable figures to show that the proportion of labour costs in homes has actually 

declined over the last decade. It is the high land, interest, and associated costs that are the real burden. 

The real trouble today lies in bringing these housing costs down. But, as well as that, of course, it is also 

a question of home design and homebuilding methods. This is where we need some real research. This is 

where we are not getting action either by CMHC or any other housing body in Canada today. 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1431 

Some people reply to statements like this to the effect that they couldn’t abide to live in a mass-produced 

home. Mr. Speaker, people now live in accommodations, which I suggest are singularly much of a 

muchness and dull and uniform. Just fly over any part of Regina and Saskatoon in the new districts, the 

suburban districts, or those of any other city in Canada in the kind of housing areas built since the 

Second World War. The ranched-roof prospects that spread out in unrelieved sameness across the 

horizon hardly suggests to me that present housing is built through the application of imagination or 

very much architectural vision. I say there is no reason why public investigation and research should not 

do something to provide not only more economical patterns of building, but more exciting and more 

liveable in designs. More public involvement should bring about better homes in the function context as 

well. 

 

Now, as I understand it there are about 1,000 rental units, that were subsidized with rent related to 

income that were in operation, or being built in Saskatchewan in 1968. This type of housing evidently 

suits the needs and the pocketbooks of a very vast portion of our population. It has to be stepped up in a 

very substantial way. I accept what the Minister says that there has been some improvement. It is clear, 

however, that not nearly enough has been done and much more needs to be done. As a proportion of the 

total housing figure in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 1,000 public housing rental units is far, far too small. 

A land acquisition through the public aegis is undoubtedly needed. That is the aim of the Resolution 

before us. It advocates a sound means to accomplish it. We need not only to acquire land for future 

housing needs, Mr. Speaker, but for recreation and park development, If something isn’t done about this, 

we are going to find very shortly that we will suffer for it. Dr. Albert Rose, of the University of Toronto 

School of Social Work, Mr. Speaker, says that Canadians are in the midst of a permanent housing crisis 

in our present policy. I say that the challenge for our Province is to plan and to work for a bright future 

to emerge. We can do it and we should do it. We will do it with the kind of efforts that have been 

suggested by the Resolution proposed by Mr. Whelan. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I apologize for having mentioned when I was putting an amendment to the motion that 

it was moved by the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) when in fact it was moved by 

the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). I apologize for my mistake. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, listening to the Hon. Minister I was under the 

impression that he was building a case with very little evidence, particularly when you look at the 

Estimates and realize that a couple of the entries for example in projects for the Acquisition and 

Development of Land for Housing; this item has decreased from $625,000 to $248,000. Construction of 

Houses for Rental in designated areas has decreased from $500,000 to $7,500. 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1432 

I think the facts are that in this province at the present time, particularly in the cities, we are faced with 

high rents and no homes are available at a reasonable rent for people with low-incomes. I think it is 

particularly significant that the Hon. Minister should talk about a project at Uranium City and say it is a 

big one because there are no big projects in Regina and we could certainly stand some big projects in 

places like Regina. He did not tell us about the size of the group of people that he has in his Department 

who are working on housing. He omitted this completely. He didn’t talk about interest rates. He 

admitted this, he didn’t make any statement whatsoever about interest rates. He didn’t tell us about the 

cost of homes at the present time. He talked about research but he didn’t say that they were doing any 

research here in the province at the present time. I don’t think he would dare discuss these items because 

it would be such a sad case. As I said earlier in this debate, the need in Canada is 250,000 homes per 

year at the present time. Divide this up and you will find that we are not adequately building homes for 

the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. We have nothing more than a jungle in the housing field. 

This Resolution that we are calling for would establish machinery to work on housing, to work on it 

properly. The Resolution as amended would continue with the present chaotic situation that exists. 

Interest rates at 10 per cent, rentals beyond the reach of the vast majority of the people in the province, 

no research facilities, a hit-and-miss planning proposition, people without homes and the construction 

industry in the depths of despair. The original Resolution calls for an organized effort to provide homes 

for low-income people, not just a handful of them, but homes in large numbers, to develop a financial 

program to make money for housing available at reasonable rates, to establish the long-term and 

short-term housing needs of the rural and urban people of Saskatchewan. No evidence that the Minister 

gave us indicated that this is being done or that this will be done, or a study of ways and means to lower 

construction costs. Nothing that the Minister said indicated that this is being undertaken. We have 

waited for many years and there is no evidence that it is available to the people of this province, to 

project long-term regional planning and land acquisition for urban development and homebuilding. 

When one looks at what is happening to the estimates in this area that he has submitted to this House, 

one can only conclude that it is a pretty feeble effort and that we are making progress in reverse. To 

endorse the Resolution as amended would be to endorse an ineffective program. It would put the seal of 

approval on a housing program in this province that is the essence of ineptitude. I cannot support the 

motion as amended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, did I catch you correctly on that? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, you seconded the 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1433 

motion, at least so it says on this one. Unless somebody else seconded it, it has gone through the whole 

process of such now. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 2 - Establishment of a Provincial Consumers’ Agency 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose 

Jaw South): 

 

That this Assembly, believing that action to help and protect consumers is vital and essential, 

recommend to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan the establishment of a Provincial 

Consumers’ Agency, on lines proposed in February of 1968 by the Batten Commission, that would 

develop a full and effective program of consumer assistance, education and protection, in conjunction 

if possible with the Federal Department of Consumer Affairs, and report as often as required to a 

Standing Committee of the Legislature on Consumer Problems respecting their work; the Committee 

to be so constituted that it would from time to time sit to receive representations from the public on all 

matters relating to the welfare of consumers. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned the debate the last time I was speaking on 

this Resolution, I admitted that I have had some sympathy for the sentiments expressed by the Hon. 

Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies). I also said that I found myself strolling up that 

flower-strewn path that he was attempting to lead the Members. I said that I found myself dreaming that 

there might be a day when there would be a Provincial Commissariat to aid and educate and protect and 

report to the consumer. Then I remembered that the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) 

had been a Cabinet Minister in the former Government, that there are Members sitting here who were 

Cabinet Ministers in a former Government and I felt that it might be interesting to find out some of the 

things that they were able to do when they were in power to protect the consumer. 

 

But first I would like to say that all Members know or they should know of some of the great strides this 

Government has made toward the protection of consumers in Saskatchewan. We know this, not only 

from our own experience in the House, but from newspapers, radio, television and periodicals in other 

parts of Canada and the United States. On March 6, The Leader Post carried a small item which I want 

to bring to your attention, headed “Saskatchewan Law Held Example,” Victoria, Canadian Press: 

 

The British Columbia Civil Liberties’ Association would like the province to follow the example of 

Saskatchewan 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1434 

in the matter of compensation for crime victims. 

 

There is more to the article but I recommend it to your attention, Members. As a matter of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, much of our consumer protection legislation has been copied verbatim in other jurisdictions. 

Therefore it irks Members on this side of the House when we have to listen to the Members opposite say 

that the consumer has been forgotten in the last five years and that the consumer needs extra protection 

that we have not supplied. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe this Government and particularly the Minister responsible, the Hon. Member 

from Lumsden (Mr. Heald) in his portfolios as Attorney General and Provincial Secretary should be 

receiving great praise and not criticism from the Members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — Particularly, Mr. Speaker, I would address my remarks to those on the opposite side of 

the House who were Members of the Cabinet or who were at least senior Members of that previous 

Socialist Government. These people know full well the lack of thought and consideration that they had 

for the consuming public. Those former Ministers opposite know that I could cite many cases of 

negligence on their part to make my point in respect to the Socialist disregard for the consumers’ 

interest. But there is one cavalier, highhanded, callous, dastardly example which I feel is sufficient in 

itself, and that is the case of certain commercial cemeteries, which were allowed to be established and 

allowed to be operated in the Province of Saskatchewan during the administration of the CCF 

Government. I want to hasten to add that this doesn’t include all commercial cemeteries, but I think the 

Hon. Members who represented the constituencies of Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney), Moose Jaw South 

(Mr. Davies), Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) and The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) ought to listen pretty carefully. I 

think they ought to explain to the people of their constituencies the reasons for allowing such a situation 

to occur. I think that their constituents would like to know some of the answers to why they were 

allowed to flourish. 

 

Now the Hon. Member that moved this Resolution was at one time a member of the Moose Jaw city 

council in 1949-56. He was a Member since 1956, he was re-elected in 1960, 1964 and 1967. He was 

Minister of Public Works, and he was appointed August 1, 1960. He was Minister of Public Health, 

appointed the 7th of November, 1961 and he was the Minister of Public Works again from the 7th of 

September, 1962 until their defeat. 

 

In 1954 and for some years previous, the Province of Ontario had serious problems with promoters of 

pre-arranged funeral contracts, operated for gain. As a result, a Royal Commission was appointed within 

that province which investigated the situation and as a result many persons were put out of business. The 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1435 

combination of the Royal Commission Report and the public exposure by such persons as Pierre Berton 

by way of radio and the press caused these fast-buck artists to leave Ontario. But where did they go? Mr. 

Speaker, they came to the haven of the fast-buck artists. They came here to Saskatchewan with the 

apparent blessing of the Socialist regime of that time. I would like to quote from Pierre Berton’s book 

entitled The Big Sell, pages 192, 194, 195 and which reads as follows: 

 

I, Mr. Wesley Chowen, president of Archmount Memorial Services, joined the Archmount family 

because I saw the possibilities of accomplishing everything for which my wife and I had ever wished. 

It was wonderful, rewarding work in which we had the opportunity of growing just as rapidly as we 

wanted to grow. I wish I could describe what our Archmount experiences meant to us. And to us more 

growth and happiness is ahead with all of us working together. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a copy of an ad appearing in an Eastern paper and described on page 23 of Berton’s 

book reads as follows: 

 

Chosen applicant to be trained in special field of family service. This position offers prestige and 

security, sound income on commission, profit-sharing nation-wide organization. Applicants must be 

neat in appearance. Personal interview only. 

 

Now, Mr. Berton translates this to read this as an ad for salesmen to sell cemetery lots for Rest Haven 

Memorial Gardens, door-to-door, high pressure. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suppose it was great and rewarding and a wonderful experience for Chowen and 

Audrey but I can assure you that the people who parted with their money in Moose Jaw - and that 

cemetery by the way is called the Rest Haven Memorial Gardens - Weyburn and North Battleford didn’t 

think it was so great. Mr. Speaker, who do you think took over in Saskatchewan after being chased out 

of Ontario? It was none other than Mr. Wesley Chowen, and I suppose Audrey came too. Mr. Speaker, 

when he was forced to leave Saskatchewan in 1964, he is reported to have said to certain officials in the 

department in the Government that he would never have been bothered if the Government hadn’t 

changed. In light of the facts I have disclosed, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that many people are happy that 

the Government did change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — I wonder if the Hon. Members opposite are aware of the heartache and the fears which 

were expressed by many of our citizens in Moose Jaw, Weyburn, and North Battleford when they were 

told the true position of these cemetery companies in 1964-65. Mr. Speaker, we as a Government did 

what ought to have been done by the previous Government. We said to these 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1436 

people because the Government of that day had failed to protect the consuming public by passing proper 

legislation and enforcing the same, we will take over the companies and guarantee the remaining 

relatives that they will receive that for which they had contracted and paid for in full. Many of our 

citizens lost thousands and thousands of dollars in the first instance and now all the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are paying for the operation of these cemeteries. I think the Hon. Members that I have 

mentioned ought to have known what was going on. They ought to have known because they drove past 

these cemeteries every time they came to Regina from their respective homes. This is a flagrant act of 

irresponsibility. It is interesting to note that these cemetery companies were allowed to act under the 

Securities Commission because The Cemeteries Act didn’t then cover cemeteries then operating for 

gain. Sir, when they did get around to passing The Cemeteries Act in 1956 they failed to protect the 

public by requiring them to set aside monies in a recognized trust for the future delivery of goods and 

services such as opening and closing of graves, markers and vaults. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it 

would be reasonable to say that they were a party to fraud, fraud perpetrated on many good citizens of 

the Province of Saskatchewan due to their inadequate legislation and their callous disinterest in the 

protection of the helpless. Members opposite may say that this was five years ago or six years ago. Some 

of the younger Members opposite say get on to the present and to the future. Well, I want to tell the new 

Members opposite that they have been badly trained and badly taught by the people who sit on their 

front benches. They ought to realize, and they ought to know just what kind of consumer protection that 

previous CCF Government prepared and supplied to the consumers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have further comments to make on this. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTION 
 

Mr. C.B. Koester - Honorary Officer of Legislature 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion with leave of the 

Assembly, then I should like to make a few brief remarks. I want to move, seconded by the Hon. Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That the Members of this House, desiring to record their deep appreciation for the long and 

distinguished service rendered by Mr. C.B. Koester, C.D., M.A., B.Ed., to this Legislature as Clerk, and 

acknowledging the dignity and profound learning with which he has graced this office, designates him 

as Honorary Officer of this Legislature with an entrée to the Chamber and a seat at the Table on all 

ceremonial occasions. 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1437 

Tribute to Mr. C.B. Koester 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members, it is with mixed feelings that I rise on this occasion. It is 

a pleasure to be able to pay a tribute to a particularly distinguished public servant. At the same time it is 

a source of regret to realize that in the near future Mr. Koester will no longer be among us in this House. 

Mr. Koester is a learned man, an outstanding scholar and writer, and an unfailing fount of knowledge on 

parliamentary procedure. He has been a servant of this Assembly for a decade. He has held the difficult 

and demanding position of Clerk since 1961. He is also a family man and I take this opportunity of 

welcoming his children and his wife to the Assembly on this occasion. They are I know justifiably proud 

of him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If there is a single characteristic of Mr. Koester other than his rather remarkable 

efficiency which stands out, it is his ever-present cheerful good nature. And in this House you need that 

characteristic. Mr. Speaker, I am sure that there must have been many times when many of us, even I, 

have stretched our Clerk’s good humour to the limit. Yet, it is always there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Without exception there seems to be no procedural problem, no matter how 

complicated, which can get the better of him. And I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that you and all your 

predecessors who have worked closely with him will agree that if there is such a thing as a man who has 

all the answers, it is Mr. Koester. 

 

The Clerk served his country during World War II and after in the Royal Canadian Navy, having entered 

while in his teens. Before coming to this House he was a teacher and department head at Sheldon 

Williams Collegiate. He has contributed frequent articles to various publications in the two fields in 

which he is a recognized authority - history and parliamentary procedure. While serving this House, Mr. 

Koester has continued his pursuit of learning in his chosen field of history. He is leaving us for a 

university career. I hope he can straighten things out over on the campus, Mr. Speaker. I know he will 

continue to distinguish himself just as he has in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will miss Mr. Koester. All Hon. Members I know will join me in wishing him every 

success and happiness in the days ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1438 

all of us received the news last fall with some dismay that our Clerk, sometimes our “Klark,” had 

decided to vacate his position at our table in this Legislature and transfer his very well-known energy 

and ability to teaching at the University. However, times do change and even Clerks change their ideas 

as to what is the most satisfying occupation from time to time, and we have no alternative other than to 

accept. I want to join very heartily on behalf of all of us on this side of the House and on behalf of 

myself personally with the tribute which the Premier has paid to Mr. Koester. We also join in the 

welcome to Mrs. Koester and members of the family here this afternoon. A couple of them tend to look 

very much alike. There is a very logical explanation for that, and it is good to have them with us as we 

speak appreciation to husband and father on this particular occasion. 

 

Certainly, as the Premier has said, Mr. Koester has displayed during his period here great technical 

competence and great patience. It seems to me, however, that the talent he has brought to his position 

and the contribution he has made to us and the parliamentary institution in which we operate comes 

from much more than just a grasp of the technicalities of the rules and the history and the precedents in 

which they have been applied. It seems to me it comes particularly from an understanding of 

parliamentary principles, his study of them. It comes particularly from some strange sort of feeling, I 

believe, with respect to what these rules mean. I don’t know how one acquires this feeling, I am sure. I 

suspect in part it is a procedure of some kind of osmosis almost, but some people have it and others 

don’t. We are fortunate to have had a clerk who has had this very strong feeling with respect to what 

parliamentary institutions and principles and procedures really do mean. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — It is much more than just a matter of technical interpretation. I might be pardoned I 

suppose by saying that I suspect that some of this came by virtue of the fact of his experience as a 

teacher. Certainly some of it came as a result of his very considerable interest in history. 

 

His work has been made effective in part, of course, because we have had confidence, a well-earned 

confidence, in his knowledge of the use of the rules. In addition to that his work has been successful 

because we have had confidence in him as a person and again one can’t stress the value of this too much 

in a very difficult position such as that which he holds. If I may, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add 

appreciation for the fact and the Premier has made reference to this, while he was here he saw fit not just 

to sit and serve but also to study and extend his experience. As will be recalled he took time to attend 

university, he took time also to broaden his experience by an exchange, which he arranged, which made 

it possible for him to serve in the British House of Commons. This kind of 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1439 

continuing interest in getting more information and better and deeper understanding with the work, I 

think, is a characteristic of our Clerk. 

 

May I mention our appreciation for his services in another way. And that is with respect to his interest in 

the Parliamentary Association. Here I may only say this is an extension of the Legislature in one sense. 

It is a body apart from the Legislature in another sense and the contribution of the Clerk in making that 

more meaningful to all of us is again one of his services. Let me also express to him, Mr. Speaker, our 

very best wishes as he enters into his next career, which is his third or his fourth, I have forgotten which. 

I think it is very fortunate that we do have people going into our universities to teach who have had 

some background in the Public Service. I have often felt that students sometimes get short changed 

because not enough of the university teachers have had an opportunity to work in and get an 

understanding of just what the Public Service is all about. I feel that, if there were more people that had 

that background while teaching, then probably students might in turn have more interest in entering the 

Public Service and the whole public would be better served. Let me just say that we wish him very well 

in his new career. I give my very sincere thanks, Mr. Speaker, to Mr. Koester for all that he has done in 

the past and our very best wishes for every success as he goes to the University to teach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure on this occasion to 

add my words to those of the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition in paying tribute to a man in this 

Legislature whom we have all come to know and respect. The Premier in a light-hearted vein said that 

he hoped Mr. Koester would be able to straighten out the mess at the University. Well, I think he will 

have one good qualification, he will be able to smell political interference when he hears it. Now another 

thing, too, the Premier mentioned, that Mr. Koester had been in the Navy during the last war. I guess 

maybe that is one of the reasons why he has been able to be so successful in this Legislature because he 

has been used to working in deep water. He has not only been able to survive but he has been able to 

teach the rest of us to swim a little bit to get along with our work in this Legislature. 

 

I know that, when I took over as the Speaker of this Legislature a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, and I 

imagine that you had the same experience, Mr. Koester was a source of real comfort to be able to turn to 

and discuss the problems that would arise from day to day, to get help and advice and guidance from 

him. I am sure that all the Private Members of the Legislature, too, have felt quite free, regardless of 

what side of the House they sat on, to go to Mr. Koester and get help and advice from Mr. Koester in 

drawing up the phrasing of resolutions, questions or anything else which they were interested in. It never 

seemed 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1440 

to matter how busy he was, he always had time to take off from his own work in his office to sit down 

and spend a few minutes discussing the problems of the Legislature with Members any time they wished 

to. Also he was able to attend the Committee meetings and help to give help and guidance in the 

Committees. I am sure that that service has been gratefully appreciated. I would like to also congratulate 

Mr. Koester on the beautiful wife and family that he has and to say that we share with them the pride in 

the ability of Mr. Koester and the success he has had thus far and wish him lots of luck in the future. 

 

I only wish to add at this time that, having set up a Special Committee in this House to study the Rules 

and Procedures of this Legislature I sincerely hope that most of this work can be done before we lose the 

valuable service of Mr. Koester to this group and to this Legislature. I wish that we could persuade him 

to stay here but I know with Mr. Koester’s training he wants to conquer other fields, give his benefit of 

time and learning in other capacities. I can say that we wish him well in all of his endeavours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to join with Members on 

both sides of the House in paying a tribute to Mr. Koester and to his family for the help that he gave to 

me when I was handed the job of House Leader. I beat a pretty steady path to his door about a quarter 

after two every day. He would fully instruct me and I would run back here, and in case I would forget it 

he would write it down and hand it to me at 2:30. I imagine he has been a tremendous help to a great 

many people who found themselves in my spot on this side of the House. Mr. Heald and Mr. 

MacDonald and from the other side of the House when they sat here too. So he has been a tower of 

strength and a great institution in this House. I join with others in thanking him and wishing him well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I ask the indulgence of the House in order to add my words to those of others who 

have spoken in connection with this ceremony in honour of our Clerk who has served this Legislature so 

ably and so well throughout the past nine years. 

 

Where people have the priceless privilege of living in a free, self-governing country, where they 

themselves select and elect their own governors, it is absolutely essential that those to whom the people 

delegate power shall have a legislature or a parliament in which to operate. It has been recognized since 

the earliest times that the Legislature must have a Clerk to act as its recording officer. This position 

requires a person capable of paying meticulous attention to detail in order to absolutely ensure the 

correctness of the records. In this 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1441 

regard the Legislature of our province has been most fortunate in having as a Clerk one who so 

completely filled this qualification. 

 

It is reasonable that those that make the laws which govern us should be governed by a rule of law in 

their making and these are the laws of parliamentary procedure evolved over centuries, sometimes by a 

process of trial and error, but more often instituted by logic. The Clerk of the Legislature is an 

important, continuous custodian of this vast mass of precedents and of these great traditions. 

 

Once again, we in this province have been fortunate in having had in the service of the House, in the 

person of our Clerk, a man who devoted many years of painstaking research to this subject, by which he 

amassed a wealth of knowledge, that has always been readily and freely available, both to the three 

Speakers with whom he has worked and to all of the Members of our Legislature. 

 

I pay tribute also to his excellent good humour and good nature, as he met all of the problems which he 

encountered from day to day and of which without a shadow of a doubt I have probably been the worst. 

 

Our Clerk has been accepted throughout Canada, and throughout the British Commonwealth as a master 

of parliamentary procedure and is an authority thereon. 

 

His service to this House as a Clerk and to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association as Secretary 

has been outstanding, and on behalf of the Legislature, and very particularly for myself, I wish to join 

with others in expressing to him the most sincere thanks and the deepest appreciation. 

 

On September next, he will leave the service of the House to return to the teaching profession. He has 

had a distinguished career in the Services and also as a parliamentarian. He is recognized as an erudite 

scholar and an outstanding historian. What this House has lost the field of education has gained. We 

wish to him, to his wife and to his family every success and the very best of luck. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add my words of regret and 

congratulations to Mr. Koester. The only reason I rise is to talk about another ability of Mr. Koester’s 

that I am not sure that many people of this House know he has. 

 

My memory goes back to 1963 when the Province hosted the Canadian Parliamentary Association and 

we had a three-day tour of the province. I was on that tour as was Mr. Koester. One of the treasured 

memories that I will have of Mr. Koester was of 



 

March 20, 1969 

 

1442 

him leading us in folk singing on the bus. He was the leader of the orchestra, he was the leader of the 

choir and he was the life of the party. To me this will be one of the treasured moments that I have of Mr. 

Koester. I wish him great success in his new field. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:51 o’clock p.m. 


