



















































Hansard: March 05, 1969


957 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

March 5, 1969. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to 

introduce to the House another group of students from Brevoort school in Saskatoon who are 

accompanied here this afternoon by their teacher, Miss Holt. I‟m sure it is the hope of all Members of 

the House that this group of students will enjoy their stay with us this afternoon and have a safe journey 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in introducing to you and 

to the Members of the Legislature a group of 33 students from grades seven and eight. They are 

attending the M. J. Coldwell school located in my constituency. Members will know that M. J. Coldwell 

school was named for a well-known citizen of our city, one time an educator of this city, an alderman 

for many years, a well-known parliamentarian who has made a contribution not only to this city but to 

his country. I want to welcome the students to this Assembly today and express the hope that their stay 

here will be pleasant, educational and informative. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure through you to introduce to all 

Members of this House 53 grade five and six students from Gladys McDonald school in my 

constituency, Regina North West. These alert young citizens are accompanied by their principal, Cliff 

Hatlelid and their grade five teacher, Randy Carlson. All Members I am sure join me in welcoming them 

and expressing the wish that their stay with us will be both educational and informative. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, through you and to the Members of the 

Assembly I take pleasure in introducing a rather unusual group of young men located in the Speaker‟s 

gallery this afternoon. They are eight young people from Ranch Erhlo located on the outskirts of our 

community of Regina. They are accompanied by their supervisor, Mr. Bud Stewart. As you know, these 

young men come from all points in the Province of Saskatchewan. Ranch Erhlo has made a very 

important contribution to the rehabilitation, training and so forth of some of the unfortunate citizens in 

our province and most of these young men are making a tremendous stride in the field of education and 

coming back in to be real productive members of our community. It‟s a real pleasure to have them here 

this afternoon. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

958 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to bring to your attention that 

later on this afternoon we‟ll be visited by a group of students from King George school in Saskatoon. 

They are going to be seated in the west gallery, but I believe they have been delayed as a result of the 

other facilities and places that they‟ll be visiting in Regina. I‟m sure Members will welcome them when 

they do arrive and hope that they have an informative and entertaining day. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

DELEGATES TO CANADIAN AGRICULTURAL CONGRESS 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day, may I direct a question 

or perhaps I should call it a request, to either the Premier or the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

which arises out of a reminder in this morning‟s Leader Post that the Canadian Agricultural Congress is 

meeting in Ottawa later this month and that there will be 400 delegates representing Federal-Provincial 

Governments and other groups. A while ago the Government was thoughtful enough to include a 

Member of the Opposition as one of the delegates to the Conference on the Constitution, and I was 

wondering if the Government has considered or if it would consider giving a Member of the Opposition 

an opportunity to be one of the delegates to this Congress. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be very pleased to give the request consideration 

and discuss it with my colleagues. I‟m not just certain what this Conference is discussing. I presume it‟s 

over all Canadian agricultural problems, but I‟ll try and give you an answer within the next two or three 

days. 

 

INQUIRY ON SERVICE STATION OPERATIONS 
 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if I might 

direct a question to the Government. Members may have noticed in the press a day or two ago a lengthy 

story dealing with the commission inquiry on service station operations or the marketing of petroleum 

products in Alberta. Since that time I have had some inquiries from service station operators in Regina. I 

wondered whether the Government can advise whether or not it had in mind any similar type of inquiry 

in Saskatchewan or any particular study of the Alberta inquiry to see whether or not the conditions 

shown by the Alberta inquiry exist in Saskatchewan and require any Government action. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, we have not yet received a copy of the report which was given the 

Alberta Government. As a matter of fact, we‟ve written and asked for a copy. We shall pursue it at that 

time and see what action Alberta proposes to take. After the session is over, when we have some time, 

we shall 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

959 

 

look into the matter thoroughly, and see whether some action might be desirable in Saskatchewan. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 30 — An Act to establish the 

Saskatchewan Indian and Métis Department. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak briefly this afternoon on this particular Bill, because I feel it 

is a rather important one. I believe it is a Bill which can be dealt with in a non-partisan and in a 

non-political way because I know that Members on both sides of the House are vitally interested in this 

problem. The purpose of this Bill of course is to establish within the Government a Saskatchewan 

Department of Indian Affairs. In actual fact, Mr. Speaker, it is much more than that. It is an attempt with 

every means at our disposal to stem a rising tide that threatens to become a major social disaster. The 

tide to which I refer of course is a tide of resentment among Canada‟s native people. There is little point 

in debating the causes of this resentment. The fact is it exists and in my opinion there is very real cause 

for it. I have stated repeatedly that, in Saskatchewan, as far as our native people are concerned, we are 

sitting on a time bomb, and I warn the Legislature again today that the fuse is growing ever shorter. 

Answers must be found which will satisfy the legitimate aspirations of our native people and permit 

them to enter the mainstream of our province‟s development. 

 

Now, violence or anarchy is no answer at all, though they could come. I don‟t think they will but they 

could. With equal emphasis, however, let us realize that apathy and indifference on our part are nothing 

but the other side of the same counterfeit coin. Concrete action by governments and by all our people, 

white and native, can be the only answer. Now, this Bill before us today, Mr. Speaker, we hope, will 

pave the way for a decided stepping-up of an action program. 

 

It‟s now four years since this Government established an Indian and Métis Branch in the Department of 

Natural Resources. We took the original step because we were convinced then that for too long the 

plight of our native people had become desperate. We feel that the Indian Branch has had some success 

in attacking the root problems of our native people, but we also know that we have only made a 

beginning. We also know that probably it‟s a faltering first step. The difficulties which we have 

encountered, to say the least, often have been discouraging and dismaying. Most government problems 

around here you find can be solved if you want to spend money to do it, but this is not the case with our 

native problem. Money, of course, can help, but it is by no means the chief difficulty. 

 

Through the Branch, the Government has gained considerable experience in the placement of native 

people in gainful employment. Since it was commenced in 1965, I‟m informed that the Agency has 

found employment for more than 5,000 native people, but we realize with regret that many of these 

individuals have not remained permanently on the job. In this effort, the Provincial Civil Service and 

Crown corporations have played a major role. In addition, the Branch has done a good job, I think, in the 

private sector by persuading them to accept many native 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

960 

people for employment. I think that the effort to employ natives in Saskatchewan must be continued and 

it must be expanded much more rapidly. 

 

Our experience has shown us that there are countless pitfalls in placing our native people in permanent 

employment. Frequently, for example, we have found it impossible to find job applicants with the 

required educational standards. Time and again native people have taken jobs only to leave them after a 

few months. This of course has been an annoyance to employers who are trying to co-operate. Often 

after employment has been found in urban points or in mining communities, housing is not available. 

Time and again we have found that natives may live in one locality while available jobs are perhaps 

hundreds of miles away. There is a natural reluctance on the part of many Indians and Métis to move 

away from their present homes. But I suggest today, Mr. Speaker, that these difficulties cannot permit us 

to be discouraged. We must continue to seek out employment. 

 

All Members of the Legislature realize that this problem is not a new one. It has been with us since the 

province was formed. Unfortunately a great many of our white citizens have no idea of the abject 

poverty and deplorable living conditions which prevail particularly in many of our northern native 

communities. Many native children for a variety of reasons simply do not stay in school. I wonder how 

many Members of this House realize that in the last five years the number of repeaters in grade one in 

our northern schools among our native population averaged 43 per cent. 43 per cent repeaters in grade 

one. 

 

In many cases housing conditions are still unbelievably bad. I‟ve travelled through many of these 

reserves in many of the native communities. How many realize that there are still hundreds and 

hundreds living in tents and in shacks? Sometimes our winters can be pretty cold. Much of the native 

unemployment is hard core. By „hard core‟ I am not referring to those without steady jobs. I‟m referring 

to those who are not equipped to take jobs of any kind. In short, unemployables. In addition, I know that 

all Hon. Members realize that our native birth rate is one of the highest in the world. Thus, Mr. Speaker, 

I emphasize again to this House that time is running out, if Saskatchewan is to get to the root of the 

problem before it is too late. 

 

Now obviously there is no magic formula or there is no easy solution. At least if there is, nobody‟s come 

up with it that I know of. We‟ve had this problem for 90 years and throughout our history various 

agencies and institutions in Canadian society have attempted to grapple with the issue. The early 

administrators, the missionaries, the traders, many governments, have all made their contribution. Over 

the past four years our own Government has made repeated attempts to alleviate and improve the 

situation, and yet, today, while more Indian people are gainfully employed than at any time in 

Saskatchewan‟s history a rising birth rate has left us in the position where more are also unemployed. 

 

Part of the Indian‟s plight of course must be attributed to indifference, apathy and lack of understanding 

on the part of the white man. But the fault is not all on one side. Far too often we have found that some 

Indians and Métis are not particularly anxious to take permanent employment. Far too often some 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

961 

 

have shown little initiative and have assumed little responsibility for their future. If any real solution is 

to be found improvement must rest on a strong desire among all Indians and Métis to change their 

present condition. I am convinced that the great majority, however, want the opportunity to earn a 

decent living. They want an opportunity to see their children receive a decent education and they want 

an opportunity to leave welfare behind. 

 

Because of the terrible complexity associated with the problem, the Government has sought out the 

advice and assistance of others in our society. This we did through the establishment a few months ago 

of the Saskatchewan Task Force on Indian Opportunity. As Hon. Members know, on this Task Force are 

representatives of business, industry, mining, the University of Saskatchewan, the teaching profession, 

co-operatives, labor unions, the churches, representatives of the Indians and Métis themselves, and as 

well we have had representatives from the three levels of government. To this date the Task Force has 

met several times. I think it‟s making progress. The next meeting will be on Friday, March 28th, again 

here in Regina. 

 

Essentially, the Task Force functions through five subcommittees or working groups. First of all there is 

a subcommittee whose task it is to find additional jobs for natives in the Civil Service and the Crown 

corporations, as well as in municipal governments, school units and hospitals. Mr. Dave Furlong has 

headed this committee up and really has done a magnificent job, in my opinion. 

 

Then there‟s a second subcommittee whose job it is to locate additional employment for natives in 

private industry and this is headed up by Mr. Scotty Cameron. 

 

The third group is to seek out Indian and Métis candidates who wish to take employment. After all 

there‟s not much use having jobs if we can‟t find the natives to fill them. 

 

Then there is a fourth committee whose task it is to study and recommend improvement in housing 

opportunities for our native people. 

 

Then there is a fifth committee which is to recommend ways that we can improve educational upgrading 

and job-training programs. 

 

Each of these working groups has met on several occasions, and most have already reported to the Task 

Force on their findings. Maybe very briefly I could mention some of their recommendations, some of 

their thoughts: 

 

The Public Sector Subcommittee has made a survey and on the basis of that survey reported that 4 per 

cent of all the positions in the Provincial Civil Service today or Crown corporations are presently filled 

by native people. Now, the majority of these people took employment during the last several years 

largely as a result of a deliberate Government policy to give preference to native people. Our 

observations to date are that, given an opportunity, the job stability and achievement of these new 

recruits compares favorably with those of white recruits with a similar education. The committee‟s 

survey also indicated that, with a major effort, substantially more jobs could be found in our Civil 

Service during the coming year. Therefore, 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

962 

it will be the Government‟s objective to have 7 per cent of all Civil Service and Crown corporations 

positions, that is 7 per cent of our total staff, filled by native people by the end of 1970. At least that will 

be our target date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — At the same time we hope that some of our municipal governments, some of our 

school units and some of our hospitals could make a greater effort to hire native people. The survey 

indicates that only about 1 per cent of jobs in these jurisdictions are presently filled by natives. I was 

talking to the Administrator of the Grey Nuns‟ Hospital a week or so ago. I was disappointed to find that 

there were only three or four natives in that great institution. I think Mr. Bourassa is going to try and do 

something about it. I appeal today to the Mayor of Regina. I‟m sure he‟s sympathetic to this problem. 

Perhaps he could talk to his personnel officer down at the City Hall and see if he couldn‟t get a few 

natives in on behalf of the city and perhaps also the General Hospital. We‟re hoping that in the coming 

years, municipal governments will hire up to 3 per cent at least of native people. 

 

The second working group has undertaken a survey of every industry in Saskatchewan that employs 

more than 10 people. We haven‟t got any specific figures on this yet. However, it is evident that the 

figure will run into the thousands judging from the response we‟ve had from industry. The response 

makes us optimistic about the attitude of private industry towards the employment of native people, 

because seldom did we find reluctance to engage native people where job vacancies occur. At the 

present time the Government is examining proposals for special incentives, cash incentives, to train 

native people on the job. I had hoped that we could have had a decision in the current session on this 

matter, but apparently it isn‟t possible. But we hope that in a matter of months to have worked out some 

kind of an arrangement with the Federal authorities so that we can pay some kind of incentive grant. If 

we can‟t work it out with Ottawa, we‟ll do it ourselves. 

 

The third committee has had to do with the finding of natives to take these jobs. That responsibility 

pretty well has been left to the Provincial Indian and Métis Branch. Our placement officers number, oh, I 

should say, 12 or 14, and they have worked with Indian Affairs, Manpower and with others. They go on 

to the reserves, they go into the native communities and they try to find people who have the standards 

which are needed, who want to take jobs. Work in this field obviously will have to be expanded with an 

enlarged staff. 

 

The fourth committee, as I said a moment ago, is engaged in upgrading work, trades-training work and 

education generally. In most cases native people lack training for jobs, but we‟ve found that repeatedly 

some even lack the basic literacy standards required to take proper trades training. We recognize that it 

may be necessary to spend considerable sums in setting up the proper system of training to equip natives 

for employment. However, we shall be prepared, and I‟m sure Hon. Members on both sides of the 

House will be prepared to make whatever investment is needed to expand these facilities to the point 

where they should be. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

963 

 

Finally, our Housing Committee is the fifth committee. It has commenced work and a number of its 

proposals have already been put into effect, although I wish it could go a little faster. 

 

Several hundred new houses, mainly in the North, have already been constructed for natives in the past 

few years. There is another program of special interest and that is a program which was initiated by the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) a few months ago in which the Government purchases 

existing used houses in urban centres and then makes the houses available for rent to Indian families 

locating in cities to take employment. At the present time there are 16 such houses which have been 

purchased in Regina, there are 11 in Prince Albert and 6 in Saskatoon, for a total of 33. We would hope 

to have several hundred such housing units available to assist in the relocation of Indian people who are 

seriously trying to find employment by the end of 1969. I‟ve asked the Minister to try and make 

purchases in Yorkton, in the Battlefords, in Moose Jaw, and Swift Current. The houses of course only 

will be purchased if we have jobs for the people who take them. Now, it would be unrealistic of the 

Government or any other government to claim that this problem, which has been with us since 

Confederation, can be resolved overnight, but we do believe, I repeat, that unless major action is taken 

the situation will rapidly deteriorate. 

 

May I make the philosophy of this Government in this particular field quite clear. Our Government 

believes that our Province and our country owe every individual the right to work, in short a job at 

decent wages. We do not believe that we owe anyone a living, if that individual is able-bodied but is too 

lazy to work. Thus our efforts will be devoted primarily to finding ways and means of increasing job 

opportunities. In other words, we will try to help those who want to help themselves. 

 

We are not interested in increasing hand-outs or welfare payments to the able-bodied. That remedy has 

been tried in the past and it just simply hasn‟t worked. I believe that our ultimate objective must be to 

devise programs that will offer to our people of Indian ancestry the kind of realistic economic 

opportunity that will permit them to live in a far greater degree of human decency. 

 

Now, in achieving this objective, Mr. Speaker, the Government and the people of Saskatchewan will 

have to invest very large sums of money. I‟m sure no Hon. Member is not prepared to do this if results 

can be obtained. It may be questioned what justification the Legislature has in spending large sums of 

money on a relatively small proportion of its citizens. I reiterate that the present rate of population 

growth of our Indian and Métis people indicates that proportionately their numbers will be 

proportionately much larger in a few years. The other taxpayers of our society can ill afford to continue 

to pay the price for neglect of this problem. 

 

As I have indicated already, the Government has been trying diligently to bring opportunity closer to our 

natives, but experience has shown us that the magnitude of the problem is such that something more 

than simply a branch of government is needed. Therefore, we are proposing today that all government 

programs, designed to assist people of Indian ancestry with the exception 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

964 

of agriculture, be co-ordinated through a new department to be known as the Saskatchewan Department 

of Indian Affairs. 

 

The Bill now before the House will carry out this objective. As I indicated, or as the Throne Speech 

indicated, there will be a Minister, a Deputy Minister and whatever experts are required in the 

Department. I believe Saskatchewan is the only province so far at least to have such a department. 

 

The objectives will be clear cut: first, to find employment for native people throughout the province; 

secondly, to provide our natives with the educational upgrading and vocational training to equip them to 

take employment; thirdly, to help Indian people relocate if necessary to ensure that adequate housing is 

available to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think any program of employment will work unless there is housing. In all of these 

cities and in all of these mining communities, even though it‟s going to be very expensive, we must 

make certain that houses are there before we can expect the native people to remain. If success is to be 

achieved, our efforts will require a good deal of planning and determined effort, as I say, on the part of 

Government, on the Legislature, our white community, and the native people themselves. We will need 

the understanding and the co-operation of every element in our society. So far I think our Task Force has 

failed to make full use of the churches. We‟ve had a number of preachers and priests contact us 

indicating that they want to help. Before the next Task Force meets, we hope to have a role for the 

various churches to follow-up some of the work that should be done, when these native people come out 

of the North and move into houses in the city or the communities. We are very grateful for the assistance 

that we have been promised. Now in the period ahead, Mr. Speaker, there will no doubt be many 

frustrations and difficulties but I think we must be tolerant and patient and certainly determined. 

Together I am convinced this House can make major strides in solving this very thorny social problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, it is not often that this Assembly considers a Bill 

which gives me as much satisfaction as the one before us now. Seldom do we see a Bill which is so 

urgently required and seldom do we see a Bill where the potential benefits are so great. In the past five 

years no other government in Canada has been more concerned about our native people and no other 

Premier has been a better friend to our native people. He has spent a great deal of time visiting reserves, 

discussing problems with the Indian people. Their affairs have always received top priority with the 

Premier and we are seeing concrete evidence of this here today. The Indian and Métis Branch of the 

Department of Natural Resources was set up by this Government and it has done an outstanding job. 

People in the Departments of Agriculture, Welfare, Natural Resources, Education, Health and others 

have also done a good job. However, I feel that many of these programs can be more effective and more 

efficient under one department. Mr. Speaker, the Task Force on Indian Opportunity, which was set up in 

the past year by the Premier, was mentioned here today. It is a dramatic and exciting new approach to 

this problem, and it has received favorable and enthusiastic comment all across Canada. Its purpose, 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

965 

 

basically, is to find permanent employment for Indian and Métis people, but it fully realizes also that 

this task cannot be accomplished without also examining the associated, social, cultural and education 

problems involved. The Task Force has already made an impact in the life of our native people but much 

remains to be done. It needs the new Indian and Métis Department as a working partner. Surveys have 

been made in both the public and private sectors of our province to indicate the number of native people 

in jobs and the jobs available. These surveys, Mr. Speaker, mentioned by the Premier have shown wide 

variations in the number of native people employed by our major industries. They show wide variations 

in the number of native people employed by different departments of government and different levels of 

government. Some cities, for example with relatively large numbers of native people, have apparently 

made little effort to provide them with any employment. Surely it is reasonable to expect government 

departments in cities to employ native people, at least in proportion to their percentage of the population 

of Saskatchewan or about seven per cent as the Premier suggested. And encouraging results by the Task 

Force in some local areas have convinced the Task Force that similar results are possible on a larger 

scale if the proper effort is made. The hopes of our native people have been aroused by the Task Force, 

and I sincerely trust that they will not be disappointed. The new Indian and Métis Department will 

receive valuable assistance from the Task Force. I predict that the results will be encouraging. I am 

pleased to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I have some considerable interest in this Bill and I 

have as well listened with interest to the comments of the Premier as well as the Hon. Member from 

Moosomin (Mr. Gardner). It has been my objective since the Bill was introduced into this House to 

communicate with a number of the people of Indian ancestry, my purpose in this being that we might 

obtain or at least I might obtain, a variety of opinions from those people whose lives will be directly 

affected by the provisions of the Bill, in order that I might make some comments which would be 

germane to the subject and to the principle of the Bill itself. I feel somewhat reluctant to enter into the 

principle of the Bill, I do so because I find myself becoming a part of or a participant in the kind of 

activity that I have long believed to be the main contributing factor to the sum of the frustrations and 

some of the problems that do confront our native races from becoming a part of the mainstream of 

society. Because I have not been able to receive the returns that I hoped I would be able to receive, and 

because I would like to develop my remarks more extensively than I have been able to do this day, I 

would therefore ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 31 — An Act to 

amend The Local Improvements Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to this Act, namely, The Local Improvements Act are mainly for 

the purpose of clarifying the various provisions of that Act. We have had some difficulty with the 

meaning of the word “work” or what a local improvement 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

966 

is and we propose by an amendment to provide that a work or local improvement need not be 

continuous. Some people say a local improvement must be continuous, for instance, can‟t be broken by 

a street or a lane. Therefore, there would be great difficulty if you had to petition and advertise a block at 

a time. We propose to provide that a work or a local improvement will be continuous, even though it be 

broken by a street, lane or some other kind of physical object. The Act now further provides that you can 

only combine two services, such as sidewalks and curbs in one work. We are providing that you can 

provide more than two services by an amendment which is before the House. 

 

Under this Act, if a local improvement be petitioned out, that local improvement has to stay out before it 

can be advertised again for a period of two years. Due to our short construction season and the fact that 

planning has to be done and advertising has to be done, it usually takes about three years at the earliest 

before you can get one of these local improvements going again that has been petitioned out. We are 

suggesting that the term in our amendment be reduced from two years to 18 months. We are also 

providing that, when work is performed on behalf of a ratepayer by a municipality or at the request of a 

ratepayer, that that work may be paid in instalments and billed on to the tax bill. At the present time it is 

paid in a lump sum. 

 

There is provision in this Act for special assessments for agricultural lands. In order that a party may 

obtain a special assessment, that land has to be subdivided and used for agricultural purposes. We have 

had some difficulty in ascertaining just whether land is subdivided or not. As the main test is whether 

the land is used for agricultural purposes, the amendment drops the provision of unsubdivided land and 

the test will be, if the amendment is adopted, whether the land is used for agricultural purposes. 

 

In this Act we are also providing that the local improvement rate will vary with the kind of local 

improvement. For instance, if a sidewalk be six feet wide, a certain rate would be charged; if it is four 

feet wide, another rate would be charged. Under the present Act you must have a uniform rate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that covers some of the amendments to this Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend 

The Rural Electrification Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, The Rural Electrification Act at the present time provides for an interest limit of 5 

per cent on farm loans advanced by the Corporation under the authority of this Act. The amendment 

proposed in this Bill would remove that limit of 5 per cent. We feel that in the light of present-day 

interest rates 5 per cent is no longer realistic. The 5 per cent limit will still apply on existing loans; they 

will not be affected, but a more current rate will be made flexible to new loans in this area. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, although this amendment is short and easy 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

967 

 

to explain, the principle of it, particularly at this time when the rural population of Saskatchewan is so 

hard pressed for cash and is finding it so difficult to pay for obligations that they have contracted for, 

because of the situation that exists at the present time, I don‟t see how I can support this amendment. 

 

What it does in effect is to give the Government the complete decision without any challenge to 

establish any rate of interest that it deems advisable. On arrears of loans made for rural electrification as 

I see it, Mr. Speaker, there is no justification for increasing the interest rate. If the Government is 

wondering about collecting the arrears, Mr. Speaker, the Act sets out clearly that the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation can establish the arrears plus any interest as a lawful tax levy collectable through the 

rural municipality on at least one quarter section of land. With this kind of security, any farmer, any 

person owing this type of an obligation, any obligation of this kind, this kind of a debt, realizes 

immediately that it is a charge against his land and certainly wouldn‟t allow the interest to pile up. The 

Government, Mr. Speaker, is made up of a party that through the years, particularly while they sat on 

this side of the House, talked about refunding the entire cost of the installation of rural electrification in 

the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how far the Government has come! How out of step it is with its own party policy when 

they were here in the Opposition. It is hard to believe. Look at them now! The Government is going to 

raise the interest rate on the arrears of a loan while a farmer is in economic trouble. These were the 

political Santa Claus, these were the sugar daddies of Saskatchewan politics who were going to give us a 

complete refund of the cost of rural electrification. They have come before us now with an amendment 

asking for the right to charge any interest rate they like on the arrears on the amount that the farmers are 

unable to pay. 

 

Let me ask the House: does the Saskatchewan Power Corporation need this money? If this is an 

incentive to make the farmer pay it immediately, does it really need it? I hardly think so. The 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation made $8 million, $4 million of which the Government dumped into 

funds to balance the Budget, Mr. Speaker. It balanced the Budget! How? How did it balance it? Will it 

now balance it at the expense of the farmer who is unable to pay the amount that he owes on the 

installation of electrical equipment on his farm? Will it be at his expense? It is going to raise the interest 

rate so that it can balance the Budget. The ones who talked so loud and so long about refunding the 

entire cost of rural electrification. Mr. Speaker, in my estimation payment of any interest will be a 

hardship on some of the rural customers if they sign up this year. Payment of five per cent interest would 

be a hardship. Incidentally, I see nothing in the Bill to suggest that this couldn‟t be charged on old 

accounts. In all probability it is thinking of raising it to 7, 8 or 9 per cent. I notice that, as far as advances 

to those who sell furs, it has raised the interest rate on those advances to such a degree that it has driven 

them into the hands of the banks. Now it is going to charge a rate that is probably comparable with the 

bank charge. You know its counterparts at Ottawa allowed the banks to raise interest rates and set us off 

on a wild inflationary spiral. Probably that is what is responsible for this little amendment. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

968 

The Government will argue that it has to pay more for the money on the open market and that‟s why it 

wants more interest on arrears that will be owing. Mr. Speaker, paying any interest rate on arrears, 

paying arrears, paying anything in some instances, will be a hardship on the hard-pressed rural 

customers. But this amendment says that, from now on, the policy of the Power Corporation and the 

Government opposite will be to charge such a rate of interest on outstanding accounts as they deem 

advisable. As they deem advisable? With their judgment it could be anything, Mr. Speaker. Consider the 

plight of the farmer. Consider his lack of cash. Consider the fact that he can‟t sell his grain. Consider the 

fact that he cannot find money to dry the damp grain that he has. Don‟t you think that the principle of 

this Bill is wrong? Don‟t you think that all of us on this side of the House should raise our voices in 

anger? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Don‟t you think that it is time we said, when you talk about rising interest rates on 

arrears owed by this group of people, because they are the people who are the most hard-pressed, these 

are the people who can‟t meet their obligations, because there isn‟t a question that farm people in this 

province meet their obligations when they can, don‟t you think, in all seriousness, that it is about time 

particularly for those of us on this side of the House, we should shout at the top of our lungs? For 

goodness sakes, stop! 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment is a blank cheque. This gives the Government the right to charge anything 

it likes in interest. Do you realize that if it wants to collect this bill it doesn‟t have to charge high interest 

rates. The Act gives it all the power in the world. I am not talking about electrical power, I am talking 

about the authority that it has. It doesn‟t need to raise the interest rate to collect arrears. The legislation 

says that it can shut off the power or it can remove the lines. It can take out the transformers, it can take 

out the poles, the wires, the apparatus and the equipment. Mr. Speaker, finally it can collect by putting a 

levy on the tax rate. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it made lots of money with the Power Corporation and it brags 

about the corporations that it makes money with. It reports these. Some of them it doesn‟t report. But if 

it did make money on the Power Corporation, we are prepared to accept that. I want to know why, why 

we are socking it to the hard-pressed farmer with this amendment. Because this is the group, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the group here opposite that is going to raise interest rates. The interest rates will be a 

deterrent for the farmer who is considering the installation of electrical power. It is an increased cost to 

the customer who is buying electricity. Everyone up until now who has installed power and has had an 

overdue obligation on this type of an account has paid 5 per cent. All the other customers have paid 5 

per cent. There is a new kind of a customer now. He is going to pay whatever the Government deems 

advisable. He is in its tender hands. What a lucky fellow he is! 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t need the money to collect, it doesn‟t need the money to increase its income. 

There is nothing to indicate here that it wouldn‟t apply it retroactively if it could get some of the 

contracts rewritten. At this particular time I disagree with the principle of the Bill because it is a 

hardship on those who will be short of money. It is a hardship particularly 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

969 

 

when the Corporation is making money. Mr. Speaker, I maintain the principle of giving it the right to 

charge any rate that it likes, when there was a fixed rate in the legislation before, is discriminatory and 

can be used in a discriminatory fashion. Mr. Speaker, I think there should be a fixed rate in the Bill and I 

think that it should remain as it is. Therefore, I must oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, before the Minister closes the debate, would he 

answer one question. Will this have any impact on the interest rate? Does this give you permission as 

well to increase the interest rate on agreements that are not in arrears? 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, I will answer that in my remarks. I think I indicated that we do not 

anticipate adjusting the interest rate on the contracts that were in force. There are farm representatives 

on the board of directors of the Power Corporation. 

 

While the Hon. Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) is drying his crocodile tears, I might say 

that I am surprised on two counts. First of all that he has turned out to be a spokesman for the farmers 

and, secondly, that he did such a poor job. I was really disappointed as I thought that he would have 

done better. I can‟t exactly get his point that this release of the interest limit is an endeavor to try to 

collect the accounts. There is no relationship whatsoever. I think that he was not only beating a dead 

horse, but a horse that never even existed in trying to make his point here. I think that it was just some 

more fuzzy Socialistic economic thinking. 

 

I guess I will have to agree to disagree with the Hon. Member in our basic philosophies. I feel that, if 

any segment of the population is going to be subsidized, it should be done directly rather than through 

indirect means. An unrealistic interest rate of 5 per cent is a subsidy. That‟s all it is on today‟s money 

market. I think that it makes sense to adjust these interest rates to a more realistic figure. I can assure the 

Hon. Member that we are not going to be in the same category as some of the short-term lending 

institutions in the country with unlimited interest rates, because we have to meet competition in this 

regard. I think that he can rest assured that the Power Corporation has not got a reputation of exerting 

undue hardship on people as far as interest rates or installation charges or anything is concerned. 

 

I think that answers the point that I wished to bring up. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 33 
Messieurs 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Leith 

Howes Grant Radloff 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Larochelle Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Gardner 

Steuart Estey Coupland 

Heald Hooker McPherson 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

970 

 

McIsaac Gallagher Charlebois 

Guy MacLennan Forsyth 

Barrie Heggie McIvor 

Loken Breker Schmeiser 

 

NAYS — 24 
Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Meakes Brockelbank 

Wooff Berezowsky Baker 

Kramer Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Davies Snyder Kwasnica 

Dewhurst Michayluk Kowalchuk 

 

Mr. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 37 — An Act to amend The 

Power Corporation Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, under The Power Corporation Act there is provision made for borrowings not to 

exceed an aggregate sum of $400 million. But in computing such an aggregate net sum there are several 

exclusions including temporary loans and money borrowed for some specific purposes, securities for the 

Corporation hypothecated or pledged for temporary loans and certain other exceptions. So that actually 

the debt of the Corporation could exceed the $400 million by quite an amount when you take into 

consideration these exceptions or exclusions. The Bill in question is to give effect to the amendment, to 

increase the borrowing authority for the purpose of the Corporation. At the same time I think that this 

would result in a more readily determinable reference of the borrowing of the Corporation by a glance at 

the balance sheet and the amount of this borrowing authority that is exercised at any one time. We are 

suggesting that the Act be amended so that the outstanding aggregate net sum borrowed at any time will 

not exceed $650 million. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Before the Hon. Minister takes his seat, I wonder if I could ask him a question. Will 

some of this money be used to develop the Saskatchewan Power Corporation subsidiary that is to be set 

up in Northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Grant: — Not necessarily, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, this legislation suggests that the borrowing power of the Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation should be increased to $650 million from its present ceiling of $400 million. We, in 

the Opposition, are prepared to support the increase because if the Power Corporation is going to expand 

it must have funds. It was my understanding there is to be a new expansion in Northern Saskatchewan. 

Certainly the future of our province and the future development in that area for minerals or the tourist 

industry will need money and it would be wrapped up in this type of expenditure. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, we wholeheartedly endorse the idea of expanding Northern Saskatchewan. Without the 

expansion of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation down through the years, we would have had very 

few of the industries that we have, 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

971 

 

for instance, the potash industry, the oil industry, the steel industry and so forth. I might say that it was 

the farsighted action and the imagination of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation that was responsible, 

in the past year when it spent the money that it did, for developing industry in Saskatchewan. Without 

the imagination and the courage of these people, that is the directors and the staff, we might be still 

groping for a source of power to develop minerals, to develop industry, to develop our natural resources. 

Mr. Speaker, in January of this year, there is a lengthy story in The Leader Post, I‟ve got the story here - 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation subsidiary to be set up in the North — January 10th, Leader Post. It 

describes the type of subsidiary Crown corporation of Saskatchewan Power that will be used to develop 

Northern Saskatchewan. I approve of the idea, but I must warn the Minister and I must warn every 

Member of the Government that this Crown corporation must report not just to the Cabinet, not just to 

the board of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation but to the entire Government and that is to the 

Legislature of this Province. The report must be submitted to the Crown Corporation Committee where 

the Opposition may at their discretion criticize its operations. If it is to be a truly democratic expenditure 

in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan, this is the only way that it can be handled. All of us 

have watched with concern — and I may say with the utmost concern — some of the hidden 

expenditures that have gone on regarding some other developments in some of the areas of the province. 

This is regarding the Saskatchewan Pulpwood Industries Limited at Prince Albert. Too many questions 

have been asked and too many times we have been refused information. Too many times have Members 

of Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition been refused information which would tell the people of this 

province exactly who is spending their money and for what purpose. This money is borrowed; its use 

and its methods of development, the whole development procedure, the manner in which it is being 

expended must be reported to the Saskatchewan Legislature. Let me say this, our form of Government 

has some advantages, but there are some forms of government too that have disadvantages and, in the 

form of government that I am thinking of, you don‟t have to report your mistakes and you don‟t take 

money from the people. You can take the money from the people and you can explain to no one what 

happens to the money. You can misuse funds. Even if the funds are not used in the public interest you 

don‟t have to tell anyone about it. You can mismanage their affairs and you never divulge the 

mismanagement details. You report only your successes. You never tell them about your economic 

failures and your bad judgment, because in this form of government that I am thinking about you spend 

money unwisely and tell no one. In my estimation the form of government I am describing is the worst 

that exists in the world today and it is not democratic. Mr. Speaker, the refusal to give information, the 

refusal to tell people what we do with the money you have taken from them, the money that you are 

spending on their behalf, this refusal adds up to arrogance, and I say emphatically undemocratic 

arrogance. I recall hearing a former Cabinet Minister of the St. Laurent Government say it was 

arrogance that defeated us. It was the deals that we were ashamed of that led us to the arrogance, and it 

was our refusal to divulge them that produced the evidence that proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that 

we were arrogant. Mr. Speaker, in the interests of democracy and in order to safeguard the rights of the 

Opposition and the interests of those who will eventually pay back this loan, it is my intention to move 

in Committee an amendment that will guarantee to all Members of this House the knowledge of the 

operations of 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

972 

any Crown corporation that is set up as a subsidiary of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The 

amendment will divulge the use of the money in full detail, the manner in which it is managed, to the 

people who will be putting up the money. This amendment will be an attempt on behalf of those on this 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker, to safeguard the democratic rights of the people of this province. Mr. 

Speaker, I maintain that if we are going to vote money we should know exactly how it is spent and by 

whom. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, as I said the other day, I never cease to be amazed the longer I stay in this 

House, and this afternoon I have been amazed twice. The Hon. Member from Regina North West is now 

an expert on the Power Corporation as well as on farming and a few other things. For him to stand over 

there and point his finger at this Government and our record with the Power Corporation, to me is 

nothing but total disregard for the facts of life that have occurred in the last few years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Grant: — How he can blithely stand over there and suggest that they were the originators of all 

these goodies that we have nowadays, and that they are the ones that made a success of the Power 

Corporation. Just look what happened in the last few years. In 1963 they only had an equity in the Power 

Corporation of about 7 per cent and now we have an equity of 16½ per cent. Our customers have grown 

in gas from 97,000 to 137,000; and in electricity from 201,000 to 267,000; and our profit from some $5 

million in those years to $14 million. Look at the number of employees. In 1963 they had 2,858 

employees producing these insignificant figures I have quoted. Now with the nice figures that I have 

quoted for the current situation, we have 2,597. With reference to the question re Power Corporation 

expansion in the North, I think it is out of order at this time. I can‟t fail to answer it. I can assure him 

that there will be money spent in the North. I think his question was out of order when he asked if these 

borrowings would be used to develop the North. The northern development, while it is very important to 

us, I think he realizes as well as the rest of us that it is a pretty small portion of the entire operation of 

the Corporation, and it is difficult to say what portion of this $650 million limit that we have for 

borrowing is going to be used in the North. Whether it comes out of operations or out of borrowings, he 

can‟t say and I can‟t either, but we will be pushing ahead with that program and I can assure him that it 

will be reported on through the Power Corporation Annual Report. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Grant (Minister of Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Public 

Health Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, one amendment in this Bill will permit regulations, that now apply only to public 

swimming pools, to include those pools operated for the use of patrons by motels, apartment blocks and 

trailer courts. The public pools have been constructed in accordance with health specifications. There 

remains some doubt in the present Act whether existing health laws legally apply to swimming pools 

other than those accessible to 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

973 

 

the public at large. Therefore, the definition of a swimming pool is being broadened to include those in 

motels, apartment blocks and trailer courts. 

 

There is an amendment in the Bill to update the Act with respect to regulations governing the 

preparation, transportation and retention of meats and perishable foods. The amendment will allow the 

Minister to set up regulations to maintain the proper standards with respect to new processes for 

packaging and sale of frozen foods, such as frozen dinners, etc. 

 

Another change will allow the Minister to set up regulations governing upholstered and stuffed articles 

— these are not politicians — in keeping with regulations in effect in other provinces. This will allow 

the free movement of such articles out of Saskatchewan to other provinces. 

 

The other amendments in the Bill are of a technical nature. They are proposed as measures to improve 

administrative procedures and might be described as housekeeping in nature. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I have only a remark or two to pass on the 

amendments to The Public Health Act and indicate general approval in principle of the Bill. I was 

interested though in the amendment to Section 72 which provides for regulations to be made respecting 

the heating, lighting, ventilation, inspection and general cleanliness and sanitary standards of factories. I 

was hoping that the Minister might, when he closes the debate, make some reference perhaps to some 

changes that he might be proposing in the regulations and indicate perhaps whether the jurisdiction of 

the Department was sufficiently wide previously to allow them to do all of those things that the 

amendment permits them to do under these circumstances. Before the Minister closes the debate, too, I 

was wondering if he might care to comment with respect to Section 4 of the amendment, as it provides 

for the actual lessening, if I can put it that way, of the authority of the Mental Health Officer under some 

circumstances, leaving the authority instead with the Board of Health. Formerly it was the Medical 

Health Officer and the Board of Health who had joint authority to do certain things. Under the 

amendment to the Section 4 of the printed Bill this now provides that the authority formerly held by the 

Mental Health Officer is no more. I wonder if the Minister when he closes the debate on second reading 

might give an indication on these two matters. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, may I also ask the Minister (Mr. Grant) a 

question in closing debate also with reference to the question which my friend (Mr. Snyder) has just 

raised with respect to the heating, lighting, ventilation, inspection and general cleanliness and sanitary 

standards of factories. I am not sure what the amendment does, Mr. Minister. But you are aware I am 

sure that as of this time the Department of Labour, and inspectors of the Workmen‟s Compensation 

Board are supposed to look at the matters referred to in factories and assure that they are satisfactory 

standards. I have some doubts that in all cases they are satisfactory. My pertinent question, however, 

would be just who has jurisdiction at this point; or how is co-ordination to be achieved, as between the 

other jurisdictions? I may be mistaken in this particular amendment; it may not be referring 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

974 

specifically to what I have drawn your attention to. But if I am correct in the assumption that I took to 

begin with, I just wonder how all of these functions are to be co-ordinated and what will be the specific 

powers of your officers if this amendment carries. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, referring to the question concerning the reference to factories, 

the power of the Minister of Public Health to make regulations is extended to factories, the handling of 

meat and perishable goods, upholstered and stuffed articles. Public Health has an interest in the working 

conditions prevalent in factories insofar as general sanitation and cleanliness are concerned. I should 

emphasize that my Department will primarily not be concerned with safety measures and accident 

prevention in factories, since from a government viewpoint this is a Department of Labour rather than a 

Public Health function, so it is purely from the sanitary standpoint that we are interested in the factories. 

 

The question pertaining to Section 4, I believe, where we struck out the words “or Medical Health 

Officer”- I think, Mr. Speaker, I will have to answer this in Committee when I won‟t have to impose on 

the time of the House to get the explanation. I will make it a point to do so or explain in private to the 

Member who has raised the question. I have it here, but I just can‟t put my fingers on it. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 39 — An Act to 

amend The Agricultural Representatives Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, most of the proposed changes in The Agricultural Representatives Act are 

essentially those of name changes in the title and where they appear throughout the Act Since the Act 

revised the authority for the carrying out of agricultural extension activities as such, and since other 

individuals and groups such as rural municipal officials, councils and committees as well as agricultural 

and other specialists, who are not agricultural representatives, are also involved in the activity, the 

present name of the Act is not truly descriptive. With the implementation of regionalization of 

agricul-specialist services as well as the Ag. Rep. services, accompanied by the appointment of the 

Regional Extension Co-ordinators, who will be co-ordinating all agricultural activities within their 

respective regions, we submit that changing the name of the Act would provide a common denominator 

under which staff from various branches of the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture could operate 

within a region. 

 

Some of the organizations mentioned in the current Act are either incorrectly or improperly named, 

owing to the fact that the organizations in question have changed their names since the Act was written. 

We are proposing that these names be more correctly stated. Since the function of the currently named 

Agricultural Conservation and Improvement District Board is essentially that of planning and advising 

on agricultural extension programs, we are suggesting that they be called Agricultural Extension District 

Board. In order to ensure that 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

975 

 

Members of the Agricultural Conservation and Improvement District Boards appointed by the Provincial 

Advisory Council on agricultural extension services are actively contributing to their respective board 

activities, we are proposing that such appointments be made for the definite term of office consisting of 

five years, subject to reappointment. This would allow for the replacement of members who have 

become inactive for various reasons. Current legislation does not provide for the definite representation 

of rural homemakers on district boards. Since many facets of agricultural extension directly concern the 

farm home and rural living and depend on the support of rural homemakers for their success, we are 

proposing that the Association of Homemakers‟ Clubs in Saskatchewan be permitted to appoint an ex 

officio member to each particular board at their discretion. 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the name change and I hope that now, through the 

policy of changing the name, it shows some closer association with the farmer as an extension service 

that this program will be updated to supply more information and be of more help to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. I agree and support second reading of the Bill. However, there will be some questions I 

would like to ask the Minister in the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend 

The Poultry Brand Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that has been on the Statutes for a good many years and practically 

no use whatsoever has been made of the Act. In fact during the past year, the year 1968, I think there 

were only two poultry producers in the province who used the services of the Act and branded their 

poultry. The indication is that in the present year there will be no poultry producer in Saskatchewan 

using the Act. I suggest that the Act be repealed. 

 

Mr. Messer: — I have one question of the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. I just wonder how we 

are going to catch and prosecute the ever-burdening problem of chicken and turkey rustlers, if we don‟t 

have a brand on them? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I think the people of Saskatchewan have become more civilized and that takes 

place now in the cattle business rather than in the turkey and poultry business. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend 

The Agricultural Development and Adjustment Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we are proposing amendments to this Act that would authorize a broader range of 

program than is now authorized under the Act. The Government is acutely aware of the serious situation 

of a considerable number of Métis settlements in the province. As you know we undertook the 

Cumberland 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

976 

House farm project in 1964 with a view to providing employment to the people at Cumberland House 

and also with a view to establishing a few of the residents in ranching operations of their own. We are 

now desirous of trying this type of operation in the northwest part of the province where there are a 

number of settlements of people of Indian ancestry with practically no opportunities for employment 

available to them. To provide some opportunities of employment we are commencing farm projects at 

La Loche, Ile-a-La-Crosse and an additional project at Green Lake. The amendment to this Act will 

authorize this type of program. It is necessary to broaden the definition of project so that the provision of 

income and training opportunities can be identified as an objective as well as oil and water conservation 

as it now applies to. The amendments proposed will specifically authorize a development of farm 

projects but are worded to cover a broader range of activities such as the pilot program we undertook 

last year of paying half the farm wages for people of Indian ancestry that were taken on at private farms 

as trainees. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to compliment the Minister of Agriculture in regard to the 

updating that he has done to this Act. It is a good one and I am particularly pleased to hear of the added 

extension it is going to have in helping Indians and Métis in particularly the northern portion of the 

province. However, I think this Act has not in the past been used to the extent that it could have. There 

are many areas that I believe the Provincial Government has been somewhat negligent in taking 

advantage of such amounts of money that are made available to farmers who are in need of having this 

amount at this time, the projects that the Act makes provision for, especially the making of areas of rural 

development and then participating in upgrading these areas, the farmers‟ problems in these areas, the 

water, conservation and development portions of this Act. There is provision for improved land, erection 

and improvement of buildings, purchasing of machinery and working capital. Also money was made 

available through this Act for the diversification of farms, especially now when we have a problem in 

the agricultural field, problems in regard to the high interest rates of money and so on. The fact that this 

Act makes money available to these farmers, I would suggest that this be used much, much more 

extensively than what it is now. However, I will be supporting the Bill on second reading but would like 

to deal further with it in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I concur with what the Member from 

Kelsey (Mr. Messer) has just said. What this Act needs is not so much amendment as action. I think it is 

one of the worser parts of the Government‟s record that this Act which was passed in 1964 has in fact 

seen such little use. I don‟t want to attempt to go into the whole Act in detail at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

The Minister has indicated that the amendments are going to make it more applicable in the 

development of human resources. This, of course, is a very acceptable kind of change. But I would, like 

the Member from Kelsey, draw attention to some of the ways in which the Act has ever since 1964 made 

possible the development of human resources and the extent to which it has not been used for these 

purposes. This Act was passed, Mr. Speaker, before the present agreement with regard to ARDA was in 

effect. Fortunately the present agreement was subsequently 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

977 

 

negotiated and fitted in very well with the aims and the objectives and the procedures of the Agricultural 

Development Act of 1964. Subsequent to that we have developed the organization known as FRED. 

May I just read part of the terms of reference from this Federal organization known as FRED. It says: 

 

The Federal Government may sign an agreement with any province to implement the comprehensive 

plan and program of social and economic development in areas that have special and urgent needs. The 

agreement specifies programs to be implemented by various agencies of the Federal and Provincial 

Governments, programs to be implemented through ARDA and special new programs to be cost 

shared with provinces using money from the fund. 

 

This is the end of that statement with the terms of reference with respect to FRED. I regret, and I think 

this House needs to regret, that the Government of Saskatchewan has seen fit to make practically no use 

whatsoever of this kind of an arrangement. There are areas in Saskatchewan which could well have 

benefited from such an arrangement. There are other provinces, Manitoba for example, which have 

undertaken action of this kind. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the lack of action on the part of this Government was 

responsible for the moving of the regional headquarters of ARDA out of Saskatchewan and into 

Manitoba. If we had more activity here we might have had that rather valuable agency continued to be 

based here in the Province of Saskatchewan. A few days ago in another debate we heard some extensive 

discussion and some very impressive evidence as to the problems in the region of the northwest region 

of the province around Meadow Lake. Certainly this kind of development in that particular area would 

have kept some of those businesses there and kept some of those farm people there profitably employed. 

It would also, Mr. Speaker, have kept a lot of people off social welfare who have been on social welfare. 

I can‟t emphasize too much the regret that we need to indicate the lack of use which the present 

Government has made of this particularly valuable legislation. 

 

May I say, Sir, that in 1964 money was left in the Budget for beginning the work of development in 

three regions of the province. Some considerable advance work had been done in selecting those regions 

and in preparatory work in those regions. The regions, as the Minister I am sure will know, were located 

one around Broadview, one around Nipawin, the other one around Meadow Lake. For reasons known 

only to itself the Government chose not to proceed with those plans whatsoever. I submit that the people 

in those areas have been denied a lot of opportunity because the Government has failed to proceed in 

that way. 

 

I appreciate, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the fact this is going to be used to extend the human resource 

development in the province. I want particularly to draw attention of the Minister to a couple of sections 

in the Act which already provide for the development of human resources. I refer to the education 

assistance under Sections 40 to 43 of the Act. This would make it possible in the event that a farmer 

between the ages of 21 and 60 had sold out his farm and realized a sum less than $15,000 to get some 

assistance for education and to fit himself for another career. It provides that the Minister of Agriculture 

and the Minister of Education together not only provide training 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

978 

opportunities but also provide some sustenance allowance while the person is getting trained. It provides 

in another section that there can be a supplementary allowance rate not exceeding $50 per month during 

the time the applicant is receiving training pursuant to the agreement. These are sections which have 

been left bare and unused by the present Government of Saskatchewan. While the amendment is good, 

let me say again that what is needed, in order to make this Act valuable to the people of Saskatchewan, 

is not so much an amendment as it is action by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn‟t going to reply to any of the remarks previous to the Leader of 

the Opposition getting on his feet. If the Leader of the Opposition wants to go back to the other 

agreements, the first agreement that he signed and the other agreements that were signed since we came 

into power, he will see what action and development has taken place in the province. I invite the Leader 

of the Opposition to go down into the Broadview area today and see the tremendous activity that is 

taking place in the development of the Crooked Lake region in that part of the valley, to see the amount 

of money that is being expended in there through the Department of Natural Resources along with 

ARDA in developing that whole region. Today the native people in that area have something they have 

never had before. They have jobs, they have community pastures. They have farm lands developed, and 

they have one of the best recreational resorts coming up in the whole area of the province since this 

Government took advantage of the ARDA Agreement. 

 

Then you go up into the northern part of the province. Believe me the area, the delta area of 

Saskatchewan and the Cumberland House area of Saskatchewan was a disgrace when we took over in 

1964. Here was the oldest settled area of Saskatchewan, about 1,000 people living in that area in 

destitute farms. In all the years that you were the Government of this Province, you never lifted a finger 

to try and help them out, to try and make themselves self-sufficient, to try and provide better schools, to 

try and make them independent, to try and give them new housing, to try and give them sewer and water 

or to give them herds of cattle or anything else. You go up in that area today, Mr. Leader of the 

Opposition, and see the tremendous differences that have taken place in that period of time. Five settlers 

on permanent establishments, with a total of 366 head of cattle. A main farm with a total of about 296 

head of cattle at the present time. Five of these settlers on land of their own, each comprised of 270 

acres, along with equipment, modern houses, modern water facilities and with power. Then to give them 

a base on which to expand, we have gone into the delta region of the province in this area that you were 

talking about and said we did nothing, the northeast area of Saskatchewan. What have we done up there 

to date? In order for those people to expand we have cleared about 1,840 acres in the last year, so we 

will have 1,840 acres available for forage crops and for expansion of that cattle enterprise in that area. 

 

Then we move on to the northwest part of the province. I would invite you to go up into the Meadow 

Lake area today and compare conditions in the improvement of not only the agricultural industry, but of 

the living conditions of the people in the whole of that area as compared to four years ago. It is 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

979 

 

the same with the Torch River area. What has happened in there? We‟ve gone in and those farmers who 

wanted to sell out through ARDA acquired their farm lands, and now we have developed a series of 

pastures across Northern Saskatchewan. Incidentally this year we will be operating 57. You operated 34 

in the whole of the province that last year you were in operation. This year we‟ll have provision for over 

100,000 head of cattle. Buying up these farm lands and enlarging the units of these small farmers have 

given them a better base on which to conduct their operations. 

 

All these other programs have been brought in, not only in the three areas that you mentioned, but in the 

whole ARDA area of Saskatchewan. An area by agreement that comprises the eastern part of our 

province follows the Qu‟Appelle River valley, to a point north of Regina, thence to Lanigan, then to 

Saskatoon, then off to the Battlefords to the northwest area of the province. What have we done in these 

areas for the small farmer? Go back to the census of 1961. You will find that that was the area of the 

province when many of our farmers had an income of less than $1,200. In fact their total income was in 

the neighborhood of about $3,300. This was their total sales in the census year of 1961. Believe me this 

was the area of the province that needed help. So throughout all that area of the province, we have grants 

of $3 per acre for clearing land, grants to help them with their sewer and water, grants for fodder 

shelters, grants for hog enterprises to get them into the hog industry and to make them self-supporting, 

grants for sowing submarginal land to grass to change over from cereal production to grass production 

for providing fodder and feed for livestock and on top of that, acquiring other land from some of these 

marginal farms and taking them into our Department, clearing, breaking and reseeding and allocating 

them for forage projects. So, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, if he wants 

to compare the record of this Government in diversification in the past four years as compared to theirs 

in 20 years, I doubt there is any other province in Canada that could even match ours, let alone their 

record in the 20 years that they were in power. 

 

So, if we go up into the northwest part of the province you will find this year we will clear and break 

784 acres in the Ile-a-La-Crosse area and set up a cattle enterprise there to give training and employment 

to those people. We will go into the La Loche area and clear another 700 acres of land there for a similar 

type of program; at Canoe River, 1,600 acres there to provide work and wages and training for those 

people. The same with Green Lake, 12 sections of land there now are being cleared and broken for a 

1,500 head of cattle enterprise to help the plight of the Métis and native people in those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don‟t take second place to any province in Canada as far as utilizing ARDA funds are 

concerned or setting up ARDA programs. Then to get up as the Leader of the Opposition did and try and 

pooh-pooh the record of this Government and say that they had legislation on the books, which they did 

have in this Act and was just put into effect the year that you were voted out of power. You had plenty 

of opportunities to set up facilities for the farmers prior to that. I would suggest that, because of our 

action, we have done more to keep the small farmers on the land and build up the resources to a practical 

means than anything you had envisaged when you put this down on paper and in the Act. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

980 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Would the Member answer a question before he takes his seat? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Surely. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — How many agreements do you have under FRED and how much unexpended money is 

left in the ARDA agreement? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — On the ARDA agreement, I haven‟t got the figures with me here but I‟ll have them 

ready for you in Committee or in Estimates and we can produce them at that time. I think you‟ll be 

surprised at the commitments we have to date. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The question was how many agreements under the FRED agreement? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Under the FRED arrangement, I don‟t think we had to utilize FRED arrangements 

at all in this province because we were doing the work through ARDA. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. J.R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 42 — An Act to 

amend The Department of Natural Resources Act. 

 

He said: This Bill provides for an amendment to provide grants, or provide us with authority to pay 

grants to associations and organizations which are involved in and interested in conservation and 

renewable resources. 

 

The second amendment is an amendment to cover certain commercial operations in sites other than 

Provincial parks, such as our Trans-Canada highway campground sites. 

 

A new section is covered in this Bill to provide for the distribution of surpluses or to take care of 

deficits, if there are any, in connection with our commercial operations in Provincial parks and 

Provincial recreation areas. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the provisions that are contained in this 

Bill with respect to the means whereby grants may be officially made to those associations, 

Saskatchewan Forestry Association or Saskatchewan Wildlife, and whatever other groups may be 

contemplated in this particular Section of the Bill are appropriate, and certainly I think we can support 

this. The idea of course of providing assistance as well to Trans-Canada highway sites in order to be 

able to fulfil the obligations that they do fulfil and the roles they fulfil in the interchange of tourists in 

Saskatchewan, I think is very appropriate as well. 

 

The thing which I would like to comment on is Section 23(a) which is new. It is rather difficult to 

understand that these 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

981 

 

requirements are being made, that is, the principle of returning surplus monies. Of course going back to 

the Provincial Treasurer is understandable, but where losses are incurred by any particular commercial 

operation of a Provincial park, these will not be sustained by the Provincial Treasurer but in fact will be 

chargeable to the following year‟s operation. It is difficult to understand what the Government has in 

mind in this particular respect, I am not sure. One may find that not because the particular Provincial 

park is not doing and fulfilling its role, but simply because of some difficulties experienced in the 

economic process, may put it into a position that would be very difficult for it to recover. What would 

the Government propose to do in circumstances of that kind? Other than this, Mr. Speaker, I am sure 

that we can support the Bill. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Mr. Speaker, in connection with the matter discussed by the Member from Shellbrook 

(Mr. Bowerman), I might say that this is apparently the procedure that is used in all commercial 

operations with any department of Government and as related to the parks by the Provincial Treasurer. 

This new Section is identical with Section 15 of The Natural Resources Act which provides the same 

procedure insofar as surpluses or deficits are concerned with our Construction Branch. I might just add, 

for the information of the Hon. Member, that they receive advances from the Provincial Treasury in 

order to provide the working capital for these special operations at the commencement of the year. If 

there is any surplus, as this Section provides for, it will be turned back to the Provincial Treasurer and 

into the Consolidated Fund of the Province at the end of the year. If there is a deficit, the deficit will be 

taken care of from the funds available within the jurisdiction of the Department. I don‟t think that on any 

occasion, unless it was a very serious loss, it would affect any Provincial park or campsite. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 43 — An Act to amend 

The Northern Administration Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments covered in this Bill to The Northern Administration Act were 

designed for the establishment of local advisory associations rather than as currently ratepayers 

associations. The reason for this is that in many of the remote settlements in the northern part of the 

province, we make no assessment or levy any taxes. Therefore, the present provision in the Act for 

ratepayers associations doesn‟t apply. It is very necessary that we have some type of local government 

in these particular areas and settlements. So we have decided that by setting up advisory associations 

rather than ratepayers associations, this will not be restricted as has been up until the present time. 

 

Another amendment is giving the Minister power to establish recreation boards in these remote 

settlements. The reason for this is to be able to take advantage of the grants which are available from the 

Youth Agency. Unless you have a recreation board established in a community, then you can‟t take any 

advantage of the available grants from the Youth Agency. 

 

A further proposed amendment to the Act is to provide authority, which the Provincial Auditors claim 

we haven‟t at the 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

982 

present time, to provide and make grants for winter works programs for the installation of sewer and 

water in certain of these communities and electrical distribution systems. In order to satisfy the 

Provincial Auditors, this amendment is proposed under this Bill to amend the Act. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, having been associated with a good many of the northern 

communities, I presume most of them in this province, I am happy to see the relaxing of legislation 

which does permit this vital part of the growing process of these communities being established, in that 

these local advisory associations might become a sounding board as well as an authoritative group in the 

community. I believe that this is a necessary part of the program to involve these people in the 

development of their own communities as well as developing themselves along the lines of 

communities, such as we have in the South. 

 

Therefore, I concur with the recommendations in the Bill as presented by the Minister and certainly as 

well the establishment of the recreation boards under authority of the Minister which provides that these 

communities might as well receive the benefits of grants that are provided to groups and municipalities 

in the South. Therefore, I would concur with the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The 

Workmen’s Compensation (Accident Fund) Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to give second reading to this Bill, I would like to mention that this is one 

of the recommendations made by the Workmen‟s Compensation Review Committee. Though this 

recommendation had been in the legislative process before the report was presented, at this point I 

should say that the report will be tabled tomorrow morning and be available to all Members of the 

Legislature. In reverting back to the Bill, the first Section is strictly a tidying up and a housekeeping 

amendment. The second one is a new principle that is, it is recognizing in the Act professional services 

that for years have been used. Chiropractic services will be recognized in the Act. It is only adding 

chiropractic services after medical and surgical. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, since the Minister agreed to table the report of 

the Review Committee, I would like to have that report first before I make any observations, so I would 

beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 46 — An Act to 

amend The City Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The City Act and to the other urban Acts which will follow are 

not very lengthy due to the fact that there is a consolidation now going on to consolidate all urban Acts, 

which is now being reviewed by a committee 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

983 

 

of SUMA and the Department, and, I hope, will be brought in at the next session of the House. 

 

Insofar as the amendments to The City Act are concerned, probably the main amendment involved the 

increasing of the allowance or honorarium which may be paid to aldermen from $2,400 to $3,600 per 

year. The amount to be paid is left to the council. All the other Sections dealing with remunerations 

insofar as The City Act is concerned will remain unchanged. There are two further amendments to this 

Act, both having been requested by the larger cities. The first will permit a city to pass a resolution from 

time to time creating a covered mall, and the resolution will permit the city to prohibit vehicle traffic in 

that area. Under the present City Act the city may acquire land and resell that land for purposes such as 

industrial, commercial or residential but cannot lease it for a period of time, if it is more economical to 

lease it rather than to sell. Now the third amendment to this Act would permit the city to lease land that 

it does own and in the future the city might well turn around and sell that land for one of the purposes 

which I have indicated. 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Well I didn‟t intend to say too much on the Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. I am pleased to see that some effort is being made to raise the indemnity to $3,600. I think we 

had proposed an amendment the past two or three years using the $4,800 figure. I don‟t know whether 

the Minister plans in the amalgamation of all these Acts that he will make a change next year. However, 

I am pleased to see that a change has been made. I was wondering whether there would be any 

advantage in perhaps delaying it and have the Government reconsider it on that basis, perhaps to put it at 

$4,200. We have a report on a survey made of our salaries at city hall, the Plunkett Report. It indicates 

that there should be an alderman‟s fee or indemnity of at least $4,200. It did suggest it could be $4,800 

but preferred that it be put at $4,200. However, I am not going to hold up the Bill, Mr. Minister. I do 

think that an alderman of a city does earn more than the $3,600 a year. We did raise our indemnities to 

$9,000 here last year, and if you take it proportionately we got $6,000 and they got $2,400. Now the 

$3,600 and the $9,000 are fairly close but I think a $4,200 figure might have been more in line. I am not 

being critical of it, I appreciate it, and I‟m sure the aldermen will also appreciate the $1,200 increase. 

 

With regard to the mall, that is an excellent amendment. The matter of leasing properties rather than 

sale, this is good too, not only for cities. We even have large developers in Regina that are not selling 

their land, but they have lease arrangements, even for housing or apartment purposes. This seems to be 

the trend not only through public organizations but private as well. I think the matter of leasing is long 

overdue and I think we should have that right. I‟ll go along with the Bill. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, all I can comment on is that I agree with the comments of the Member who 

has just spoken (Mr. Baker). As far as the Government is concerned $3,600 will be the maximum 

brought in at this time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

984 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 47 — An Act to amend 

The Town Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Town Act are set out in this Bill. The first amendment 

deals with permitting the council to fix the salary of the mayor. This is a change to bring it in line with 

the provisions of The City Act. Insofar as remuneration is concerned, we have omitted the number of 

meetings required to be held and payment received and have inserted that $500 per annum will be the 

maximum amount paid to a councillor where the population is less than 3,000. Where the population is 

3,000 or more, remuneration would be up to $650 with the exact amount in both cases to be determined 

by the council. This represents a one hundred odd dollar increase from the previous method of payment. 

We are also permitting an allowance to a councillor to be fixed by the council, not to exceed $25 per day 

for each day that that councillor is out of town on town business. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend 

The Village Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill refers to amendments to The Village Act. These amendments are along 

the same line which I have indicated in the other urban Acts. The overseer‟s remuneration will be fixed 

by the council according to the amendment which is before the House. The allowances paid to 

councillors are not to exceed $160 per year, if the population of the village is less than 300 and, if the 

population exceeds 300, the allowance or remuneration is $240. Those are all of the amendments to The 

Village Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend 

The Local Improvement Districts Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this concerns amendments to The Local Improvement Districts Act. At the present 

time when we make a LID into a rural municipality as we do, each year we take one of our LIDs out of 

the South and either make it into a rural municipality or divide it into existing rural municipalities. We 

have to distribute the assets of the LID according to assessed value of the areas. That is, if you split an 

LID three ways into various municipalities the assets would be divided three ways according to the 

assessed value of the land going to each of the three municipalities. We are now proposing by this 

amendment that other concepts be taken into consideration when LIDs are created into municipalities. 

These are, for example, in this amendment removing from LIDs Indian Reserves. The reason for doing 

this I will comment a little more on in The Rural Municipality Act amendments is we hope to create on 

the reserve more self-government as is permitted under The Indian Act and may be even permitted to 

more extent under amendments to that Act. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

985 

 

You will note in the Act that there is an amendment concerning pipelines. There will be a House 

amendment removing that amendment. We have to hold further conferences with the Province of 

Manitoba. We propose by amendments, Mr. Speaker, to bring the provisions of The Rural Municipality 

Act regarding the division of licence fees from trailers into the LID Act. We are conferring on the LID 

Committee the power by an amendment to deal with the question of road bans. At the present time the 

need for road bans is determined by the Department and often time is of the essence and by the time it 

gets back to the LID the road ban question may be over and damage has been done to a highway. We are 

putting the authority to ban traffic on roads into the LID Committee. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make some comments in regard to the 

disposition concerning Indian Reserves, but as the Hon. Minister has indicated that he will have further 

comments in regard to this under The Rural Municipality Act I would like to withhold my remarks until 

that time. I will be prepared to support the motion that is before us. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend 

The Rural Municipality Act. 

 

He said: Now in connection with amendments to The Rural Municipality Act, Mr. Speaker, the first 

amendments deals with taking Indian Reserves out of rural municipalities. Now under The Rural 

Municipality Act the only inference you can draw is that nothing should be in a rural municipality unless 

it can be described by townships and many of our Indian Reserves are not surveyed. Legally I don‟t 

think that they should ever have been in a rural municipality. We have, in the past, gone onto reserves 

and assessed land that has been leased to a white person and then the adjoining municipality levied a tax 

on the leased land. 

 

Now what we are planning on doing under this amendment is that the Indian Reserve will control all of 

the revenue from its leased lands. At the present time you know that rental is divided fifty-fifty between 

the municipality that collects it and the Indian band. This amendment will put the whole of the revenue 

from leased lands back into the Indian band. I might say another reason for doing this is that in the past 

this fifty-fifty distribution has been fundamentally for roads. I intimated in the House at the last session 

that we were negotiating with the Indian Affairs for an agreement for building roads on Indian Reserves 

on a contributory basis. That agreement has now been signed. There is money in the Budget to proceed 

with that plan at this sitting. So I hardly see the reason for a rural municipality to participate fifty per 

cent. The Government feels that this is another step to let the band control its own funds, as it is entitled 

to do to a large extent under The Indian Act. 

 

The present Rural Municipality Act, Mr. Speaker, provides that if you have an amalgamation of rural 

municipalities or a rural municipality being created from an LID that that must take place on January 

1st. Now we have this committee for the SARM, who have pretty well covered this province, looking 

into the question of amalgamations. We feel, supported by this committee, 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

986 

that we should amend our Act so that amalgamations can take place pursuant to a date fixed on the 

Minister‟s order. 

 

Another provision in this Act clarifies the holding of a first election in a rural municipality. The 

Minister‟s order will set the nomination date and the election date will follow according to the terms of 

the Act. We are permitting that hamlets through the rural municipality may adopt a National Building 

Code. We are further providing power in the rural municipalities to enter into an agreement with an 

Indian band if an Indian band desires to use the facilities of the rural municipality in order to maintain 

roads. 

 

We have run into difficulty in connection with the assessment rolls. Once an assessment roll is 

confirmed the levy becomes legal, and if it isn‟t confirmed it is not a legal levy. We have appeals 

pending before the Assessment Commission and the verdict has not come down in time to permit the 

roll being confirmed. There has been delay in confirming the assessment roll therefore causing delay in 

levying the tax. We are proposing in this amendment to provide that the Minister may confirm an 

assessment roll even though there still be appeals pending to the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Commission. 

 

There are other amendments to this Act that are necessitated by bringing into The Rural Municipality 

Act, Mr. Speaker, those provisions which we brought into other Acts last year, dealing with this blanket 

exemption for producers who owe money to municipalities. I think that is just a matter of mechanics. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — When the Minister closes the debate will 

he tell us whether he has consulted with the Indian bands themselves. 

 

Mr. Wood: — This was the same question that I was going to ask, Mr. Speaker. In regard to this 

method of dealing with the Indian Reserves I think there is very much to commend the action which the 

Department and the Minister have taken in this regard. I can understand that they have a legal problem 

here and possibly this is the best way in which to handle it. I am certain that it is only right that the 

Indians should be allowed to have the full amount of any tax levies, that these tax levies should be of 

their own volition, and that they should have the opportunity to utilize the total for their own use. I think 

that it is a very good idea that they be allowed to carry on their own local government, that they be put 

on their own resources in this regard. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, as a short-run expedient I have very little fault to find with it. I feel, however, that 

in the long run — I am afraid that I am just not in a position to say what this is, but I have a feeling that 

it would be desirable that we should continue to work toward bringing these Indian people more fully 

into our own communities instead of segregating them into little communities of their own. Now it is 

quite logical that as a village is taken out of a municipality and it is not part of a municipality, it is quite 

logical perhaps that an Indian Reservation be the same. There is a connotation in this that I don‟t feel is 

quite what it should be. I can‟t be against this part of the Bill that we have before us, but I feel that the 

Minister himself, I am sure shares my feelings in 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

987 

 

this, that he would like to have some method whereby the Indians instead of being segregated into a 

little colony of their own could be brought more fully into the operation of our society. I just don‟t know 

exactly what the long-run result of this action that we have before us will be. 

 

There is another factor in this Bill that I would like to comment on. This is the matter of giving the 

power to bonus, to exempt from taxation, to guaranteed debentures of industrial undertakings by 

municipalities with the authorization by an Act of the Legislature. In one way I would commend the 

Minister on taking this action, Mr. Speaker. It reminds me of what I heard concerning one lady when she 

said, “Get up you big lug, we are getting married today.” I think the Government is now making legal 

what they did a few years ago with regard to the municipality of Cory. I think there was a good deal said 

in the House at that time about our attitude towards this. I think that there is quite a bit on record that we 

felt that having the municipalities involved in this matter of giving inducements to have industry move 

into their particular municipality was not really a good one. 

 

In the long run it was more or less self-defeating, that one municipality would be in competition with 

another and that if all government at all levels, provincial as well as municipal, took this attitude, in the 

long run the results would be just the same. The only one that would really profit from it would be the 

industries themselves. In many instances these would be large corporations in which the small amount of 

money that they would obtain from the municipality in this way would really not influence their decision 

one way or another. 

 

I don‟t think that this is a good policy or good principle of having municipalities doing this. This Act 

that we have before us proposes to make legal this sort of thing by the authorization of an Act by the 

Legislature. Of course it is really no different in the long run from what we had before. This is what was 

done in this House some years ago, but this gives more cognizance to it and I really don‟t like seeing the 

thing come in here. Aside from these, as I have said, this is really no great change from the Government 

policy that they had before. Personally I would be prepared to support this Bill. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I am concerned again by what seems to be a further isolation of the 

people of Indian ancestry into various corners of the municipalities in which they now reside. I feel that, 

while the legislation may have some beneficial aspects so to speak if you were dealing simply with 

dollars and doughnuts or things of that kind, when it comes to dealing with people and the rights of 

people and the privileges that people should have, not to be able to speak their minds on this particular 

part of the Bill, places these people one step further from coming into the mainstream of society, which 

we already have had in the Bill suggesting that they were attempting to do so. 

 

I think that there are problems, as have been suggested by the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey), 

problems such as levying taxes and problems which are paper problems, that could be worked out on 

paper if necessary, if time and consideration and the desire were there to do so. I am not so convinced 

that the ideas or the principle of the Bill is wrong. I am concerned that there has been little consultation 

again with the Indian 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

988 

people over what their wishes might be in this respect. While the Minister did suggest that there was 

provision whereby the councils of the reserve might come together with the municipal council, and there 

they might enter into some agreement with the municipality if they wanted to, nevertheless, the fact that 

you cut these reservations out of the municipality, cut them out of the association that they otherwise are 

required to come together and rub shoulders with one another, I think is an eroding principle and an 

isolating principle, which I fear will produce some rather undesirable results. I suppose that for this one 

reason alone you couldn‟t oppose the entire Bill, but I am sure that the Minister should take this under 

advisement and there should be some consultation with the people on the reservations. 

 

Mr. Baker: — I agree with the principle of having the reservations set up their own source of municipal 

councils using their band groups. It is a very good step forward. Some people may construe it as a matter 

of segregation, but I don‟t view it that way. In Regina, some two or three years ago, I advocated that we 

build an Indian and Métis Centre. I was accused of segregation at that time, yet all it was to do, was to 

give priority to people of Indian and Métis ancestry. I believe we will gain more by having these bands 

run their own operations. I hope they will eventually become full-fledged rural municipalities or 

whatever name you want to designate them. I would hope that the Premier would give me full support 

when I approach him and the Minister of Municipal Affairs, in due course, with regard to the 

construction of an Indian and Métis Centre for the aged people in Regina. 

 

I notice that he indicated many houses would be purchased here for Indian and Métis families, I think 

that this is an excellent idea. He also requested that municipalities assist in the employ of these people, 

using a figure of something like 3 per cent for larger centres. We will do all we can to co-operate. I 

would hope when I do come to the Government with regard to this home for the aged, I will receive 

their support. It is needed in Regina. We can renovate an old building or construct a new one. It would 

be operated on a similar basis as the band would on the reservation by their own people. I endorse what 

is being done here. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — There is one question that I would like to ask about these leases on the 

Indian Reserves. Would the taxes be collected by the band council or would the taxes be collected by the 

rural municipalities? What about the school taxes? How would they be collected? This is what I am 

wondering because in the past the municipality collected the taxes on the leased land that existed in the 

Indian Reserves. Now, how is this going to be done in the future? 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, just to reply to the two or three remarks that have been made. To the Hon. 

Member from Kinistino I say that the only thing that I am talking about is the municipal tax. That is the 

only taxation that we deal with in this Act. Now what has been done in the past as has been intimated 

here, is that the rural municipality has collected the whole of the tax as assessed. It has kept 50 per cent 

and has turned 50 per cent back to the Indian bank. In the future the band who makes the lease will 

collect the tax. None of that money will go 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

989 

 

through the rural municipality. 

 

In regard to the reference to taxes by the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood), may I just point out 

that the amendment, insofar as the Act is concerned, refers to business tax, whereas the Cory transaction, 

as I understood it, referred to the land tax. What we are talking about here, will I think in 100 per cent of 

the cases — and we can clear this up in Committee — only refer to business tax. In regard to any 

consultation, I have attended two meetings of Chiefs of the Council Chiefs in the past four months. At 

each of those meetings the one point that was brought up particularly was this 50 per cent that was going 

to the municipality. I am inclined to agree with some of the comments made opposite. The Indians to my 

knowledge and from what I have ascertained are very jealous of the reserves. They want to preserve 

those reserves. I hope that in time to come, and indeed immediately, that there will be co-operation 

between the rural municipalities and the reserves and that no amendment in this Act, I suggest, will 

affect that in any way. Certainly if it does prohibit it in any way, I can assure you that we will amend it 

at the next session, but I can‟t see how it can. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like some clarification. He used 

the word that the municipalities collected the rent. I presume that he meant taxes and not rent. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this has been a very difficult thing. Some of these agreements do not even 

describe the land. Some agreements do not set forth the rent. Apparently in order to collect the taxes the 

assessors go out and assess the leased land and a tax is levied. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 53 — An Act to 

change the Name of Saskatchewan Government Telephones to Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 53 as the heading suggests is to change the name of the Corporation from 

the Saskatchewan Government Telephones to Saskatchewan Telecommunications. I will take a few 

moments to outline why I think it is appropriate to change the name at this time. 

 

Members will recall that in the middle of 1968 SaskTel, as it is referred to as its trade name, celebrated 

its 60th anniversary. It has come a long way in the field of communications and we think that it has 

reached maturity in this area. Therefore, it should be designated as such. Changing the name to 

Telecommunications is in keeping with the new concepts and technology of communication. We think 

that Saskatchewan Government Telephones is too restrictive in that it is indicative only of voice 

transmission. The word telecommunication is more appropriately described as service which SaskTel is 

now rendering. Telecommunication services today are very wide and very broad in their application in 

telegraph and telephone and wireless and radio, in television and other forms of communications which 

are currently being done today. For example, SaskTel is a partner in Trans-Canada Telephone system. 

We will be an active 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

990 

partner, we hope, and participate actively in the establishment of the Canadian Communications Satellite 

System, which is now on the drawing board and, as has been indicated, is hoped to establish before the 

mid 70s. Such a system as this of course will make radio, television, telephone and other services 

available even to the remotest areas of Canada. 

 

We are presently giving study to a new phase of activity which SaskTel will be participating in and that 

is in the field of cable antenna television. This is a coming way of bringing television into the homes. 

We believe that SaskTel should undertake to participate in it. Thus the agreement which we are drafting, 

we hope, will have certain major principles in which SaskTel will undertake to provide the facilities for 

the distribution for cable television. The distribution of the signals is the same as it distributes any other 

type of signal. In other words we will put up the hardware or the material that is necessary to transmit 

the signal, but we will not participate in originating content and broadcasting as such. We will own the 

cable facilities and we will allocate a designated number of channels to the operator, who secures the 

licence to bring cable television in. For instance in the city of Regina we will allocate him specific 

channels which he may have, and all other channels apart from that will be reserved to the corporation 

for its expansion in other areas of telecommunication. In the main the channels allocated to the operator 

will be restricted to where SaskTel must reserve certain activities unto itself, because the same wire that 

today carries television signals can also carry signals necessary to print a newspaper. It can carry 

restricted educational films. It can connect a home information centre with a distant computer. It can 

connect the home with the distant teaching machine, in which the youngster in the home may turn in so 

to speak and receive this lesson from the teaching machine. Even the wife may do her window-shopping 

by means of television in a home. She may do her banking by means of television at home. These are the 

future activities in the telecommunication field, and we feel that this should be a restricted area, to 

SaskTel itself. Telephone service will always remain a vital part of the operations but it will be only a 

part and will share with other forms of communication in the total wide spectrum of 

telecommunications. 

 

This year to show, as an instance, the advancement of communication, in Regina we have established 

the new push-button telephones. The touch-tone telephones you‟ll note use a musical note to activate the 

switching equipment. They can be used to send other data other than telephone conversation. You‟ll 

notice, those of you who may have it, that it has 12 buttons on it. The two buttons that are spare now 

will, we think, in the future be used for computerized services. This will open a wide range of services 

offering such things, as I‟ve said, of banking by telephone, the housewife doing her shopping and 

phoning home and putting her oven on to have the meal ready when she comes home. All these exciting 

things the total field of telecommunications envisions. For this reason we believe that it is appropriate 

that we keep in tune with the new technology. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure that we all appreciate much that 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

991 

 

the Minister has said with regard to the necessity of updating the legislation to keep pace with all the 

new technology that is being applied in the field of communications at the present time. I would very 

much appreciate if the Minister would explain to us just all that is involved in the last Section, at least 

Section 43 dealing with entering into agreements and buying shares in other companies that are 

concerned and just where this leaves this House in regard to reports, annual reports, etc. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I didn‟t deal with other sections of the Bill because they are basically the same as the 

powers that we have under the Act as it is today. Saskatchewan Government Telephones must have the 

power of course to enter into any contracts where it is negotiating for instance with Trans-Canada 

Telephone system for the supplying of services throughout Saskatchewan. It must have the contracts 

spelling out the terms and conditions and there‟s no change in the power that it has to sign contracts, the 

legal obligations which it must assume and so forth, there‟s no change in the present Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Minister of Telephones) moved second reading of Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The 

Telephone Department Act. 

 

He said: This is a very simple amendment, Mr. Speaker, an Act to amend The Telephone Department 

Act. Wherever reference is made to Saskatchewan Government Telephones, Government Telephones is 

removed and it becomes Saskatchewan Telecommunications. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Cameron (Minister of Telephones) moved second reading of Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones Superannuation Act. 

 

He said: This has two amendments as Hon. Members will know. It is a change in the Superannuation 

Act to bring it in line with the other Bills where we‟ve brought in new amendments to the 

superannuation. The second thing is where the name Government Telephones appears, to substitute or 

replace it with the name Telecommunications. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cameron (Minister of Telephones) moved second reading of Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend 

The Rural Telephone Act. 

 

He said: This is an amendment to The Rural Telephone Act and I think it‟s for a specific purpose. Hon. 

Members will note that the present Act provides for the taxing of parcels of land within 100 yards of the 

telephone line. We‟ve run into this problem with the widening of grid roads. For instance if a telephone 

line runs north and south, it‟s readily available to tax the parcels on the west side, because they‟re within 

the 100 yards of the line but when it comes to parcels on the east side, by the time you take the road 

allowance into consideration these parcels are outside the reach of the 100 yards and therefore are not 

taxable. This of course if not the purpose of the Act 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

992 

so the amendment provides that, in the calculating of the distance, the width of the road allowance shall 

not be considered in that calculation. You can reach beyond the road allowance on the other side of the 

road for taxing parcels over there. Another Section states that, in the event the line or portion of the line 

is removed or abandoned, that particular land may still be taxable for the construction assessment until 

the debentures are paid off. Those are the two amendments to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, I personally had some doubts about this last section the Minister dealt with, 

that is, Section 40, of retaining some of these lands until debentures and loans are paid off. The wording 

is a little different from the Act that is now in force in that the amendment widens the Telephone 

Company‟s right to hold this land until all loans and debentures are paid up. As it was written in the Act 

that now exists, it was only, as I read it, until the cost of construction of the line running past that land 

had been paid off. This certainly is going to encumber many parcels of land for a good many years after 

all telephone service has been withdrawn. Am I right, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I think this point raised by the 

Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) is a sound one. If one might give an example, as I understand it 

under the old Act if a particular line was financed and subsequently abandoned and it was financed by a 

capital levy, say a 10-year capital levy, and the line was abandoned so far as this parcel of land was 

concerned, i.e. this parcel didn‟t have the phone service abandoned, in the eighth year it would be 

encumbered for two years more. But I think that if in the seventh year the telephone company borrowed 

some money on a 20-year debenture to finance some other venture, then this land is going to be 

encumbered not for two years more but for 22 years more or 21 years more in my little example. I read it 

that way. I may misread it and I am putting this explanation to the Minister, so that when we get to 

Committee we can have a look at it to see whether I‟ve misconceived it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Yes, I can only say this that this is certainly not the intention and we will take a very 

close look at it in Committee. We have been asked by the Rural Telephone Company to bring in this 

amendment because they find that the rural telephone company with debentures owing runs into 

difficulties. Simply because someone moves off the farm and no longer uses the telephone and has it 

disconnected with the lines removed, he is no longer liable for those debentures. It is felt that those 

people who were there and formed the Rural Telephone Company should not be exempted from their 

share of the cost of establishing the company. If there is any implication that means that, a year before 

this happens, they‟ve just issued a new debenture and hooked this farmer again for another 20 years, we 

will certainly take a very close look at that. I would hope that in Committee I can give you a full 

explanation. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

993 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend 

The Larger School Units Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 57 the one that is before us deals with amendments to The Larger School 

Units Act. I suggest, Sir, that there is nothing of a real controversial nature in these proposed 

amendments but I will go through them very briefly one at a time. Section 7, the first section deals with 

alternations of sub-unit boundaries. Now the present Section in the Act provides for the disorganization 

of a sub-unit and renumbering. However, it is written in such a way as to imply disorganization as a 

prerequisite to renumbering in itself. So the purpose of this amendment is to provide separately for the 

renumbering of sub-units in cases where disorganization is neither necessary nor involved. 

 

Section 29 has reference to election procedures under The Urban Municipal Elections Act passed last 

year by this Legislature. It is possible for a village or a town to dispense with the preparation of a 

Voters‟ List. When this is done each voter registers when he appears at the poll. The purpose of 

amendments 1(a) and 3 is to permit that same procedure to take place with respect to unit elections. 

 

Section 33 is repealed and a new section substituted for this again deals with election procedures. 

 

Section 38 is repealed. A new section is substituted. This amendment again deals with procedures with 

respect to elections in the sub-units. 

 

Section 81(a) is a new section dealing with the preservation of documents in a district. I discussed this 

briefly in a previous Bill, Mr. Speaker, and I don‟t propose to deal with it any further at this point in 

time. 

 

Section 83 merely corrects a revision error that was drawn to our attention by Legislative Counsel. 

 

Section 123(a) is a new section of the Act, Mr. Speaker. Under existing legislation the unit board is not 

eligible to take advantage of mortgage loans under The National Housing Act for purposes of providing 

housing for teachers or other employees. The purpose of this amendment is to remove this restriction on 

unit boards and to make them eligible for loans under the above mentioned legislation. We are not 

suggesting that they should embark seriously in this field with today‟s interest rates in the housing field, 

but we do feel that this is a provision that should be included in this Act. We have talked to unit 

members on this question and I suggest that it is a good move. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, just a few brief words about the Bill. We are glad of the 

updating procedures in line with The Urban Municipal Elections Act 1968. I am very happy to see that 

the school boards may now make loans under The National Housing Act and we will not be opposing 

the Bill. As a matter of fact we will not even have very many questions in Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

994 

Mr. McIsaac (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 58 — An Act to amend The 

School Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 58 an Act to amend The School Act does contain some of the 

amendments referred to in the previous Bill but it also contains a number of others which I will deal 

with somewhat more extensively. 

 

Section 2, the first section of the Act. The first 14 or 15 paragraphs of the present Act deal with 

definitions essentially pertaining to the rights of persons in the processes of elections and voting in 

school districts. Now certain of these definitions have become outdated and confusing when they are 

compared to The Urban Elections Act. Now for example the amendment to Section 2(c) is designed to 

define a burgess in the same manner as is defined in municipal legislation. Hence burgess means the 

same for school and municipal purposes. I think the need for this is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker. Other 

similar amendments proposed here are equally, I think, obvious when they are examined. 

 

Now the amendment to subclause 3 of Clause N of this Section changes the residence qualifications of a 

ratepayer from five months prior to June 1st to five months prior to voting date, again bringing this 

provision into line with The Urban Municipal Elections Act. 

 

Section 83 again deals with the oath of affirmation of a voter and is again a section that brings about 

uniformity with The Urban Elections Act. 

 

Section 94 deals with election procedures. 

 

Section 118, subsections 30 and 31, subsection 30 makes a change in reference, the previous reference 

being to The Teachers‟ Salary Negotiation Act which of course has been superseded by The Teacher 

Salary Agreements Act, and this makes this change. At present paragraph 31 in the Act is obsolete and is 

being dropped and in its place an amendment is proposed to give school boards authority to provide 

funds for scholarships and bursaries to teachers and students. This is an increasingly common practice 

but up until now I am informed that there has been no legislative authority for this practice. 

 

Now Section 118(a) is a new section that deals with the orderly disposal of documents and records. 

 

Section 182 is a section I am sure of interest to at least one of the Members opposite, Mr. Speaker. This 

is the Section dealing with the ceiling on the interest rate on debentures. And incidentally this ceiling on 

the interest rate on school debentures has been with us since prior to 1905 at eight per cent my officials 

tell me. An exception to this is The Secondary Education Act which makes no reference at all to ceilings 

on interest rates on debentures. Presumably the intention of this legislation was that there should be 

certain controls in respect to debenture borrowing and that a control on the interest rate should be built 

into the Act. Now until very recent years, in fact this year, this limitation has not been particularly the 

cause of any hardship to school boards. Moreover other controls in the meantime have gradually been 

built in and built up with respect to debenture borrowing and I refer here to 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

995 

 

the controls exercised by the Department itself in reviewing building projects and of course the Local 

Government Board primarily. During the past year, as I have mentioned, it has become more and more 

difficult for school boards to borrow at a yield rate of eight per cent. This in effect would mean the 

possible curtailment of projects of real urgency. Severe restraints in the field of construction, I am sure 

all Hon. Members would agree, are necessary with interest rates at present day levels. I suggest that it is 

unrealistic to argue that projects should be prevented from proceeding merely by a statutory ceiling on 

the borrowing rate as such. The controls, as I say, exercised by the Local Government Board with 

respect to the total financial circumstances of individual boards is a good deal more realistic and a good 

deal more responsible approach to this. So, in essence, Mr. Speaker, we are repealing this Section for 

these reasons and again I could point out school boards organized under The Secondary Education Act 

have not been subject to any limitation and certainly experience there has not indicated any unfavorable 

developments. 

 

The next two Sections, Mr. Speaker, are I think, of some real significance. Traditionally and of course in 

conformity with existing legislation the Easter vacation occurs in the four days immediately following 

Easter Monday. Now this means that the length of the school term between January 1st and June 30th 

does vary quite considerably depending upon the date which Easter happens to fall, which everyone 

knows is subject to change almost every year. Now with the introduction of experiments in the semester 

organization in our schools for programing our instruction, it is considered essential to have 

vacation-break periods more consistent with uniform lengths of school terms and more in conformity 

with the programs offered themselves. The Province of Ontario adopted this piece of legislation last year 

and it was a poor year to get any indication of how it worked because I believe Easter did fall on the 

same third week in March as this Section will propose. This amendment will result in the Easter 

vacation occurring every year at the same time and in dividing the spring term into roughly two equal 

periods as such. 

 

The next section, Section 208, subsection 1, Mr. Speaker, is another section designed to promote a 

greater flexibility in the entire organization of our school systems. The operation patterns of our schools 

as embodied in the Statutes and in the regulations have been with us for a long, long time. The 200-day 

year, the five-day week, the five or six hour day as such between nine and four o‟clock, with prescribed 

periods of recess, for lunch and so on, certainly do place restraints on any kind of innovation in the 

planning of programs and in the programing of facilities and the staff of some of the schools we are 

seeing develop in the province today. And while these strict prescriptions, if you will, may well have 

been necessary and even desirable in the past, Mr. Speaker, I suggest we are now in an age where the 

professional staffs of our schools with their administrators and board members are experimenting with 

new ways of achieving our educational objectives more effectively and more economically and to 

greater utilization of time of the staff and of facilities. But the fact, Sir, that they cannot go very far in 

this direction with the restraints imposed by law and regulation which were designed, as I say, for 

maintaining uniformity in the earlier days. I think that all Members would agree that it is becoming 

increasingly evident that the physical resources of some of our major school systems must be used more 

extensively than they have been in the past. We can no longer afford to leave facilities idle for many 

weeks in a year or many hours in the day 



 

March 5, 1969 

 

 

996 

and this amendment is of an enabling type under which certain circumstances will allow a school system 

to organize itself along lines which will permit some greater flexibility and some innovations in 

organization, if you will, as to use of time, the use of staff time, space and equipment in an effective 

manner. In order to take advantage of this legislation a school board would of course have to submit its 

plans to the Department for prior approval before implementation. I would hope that this amendment 

will receive the full support of all Members in the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next section, Section 213 deals with kindergartens. The object of this amendment is to recognize 

that kindergarten education may apply not only to town districts as the old Section said, but to any 

district. And also it eliminates the statutory prescription regarding fees and leaves this to the discretion 

of the school board. 

 

Section 247, subsection 6 is a new subsection and it deals with fees payable on behalf of Indian people 

or Indian bands. With the legislation which we introduced last year providing for the establishment of 

school districts which include an Indian reserve, it is necessary to provide some arrangement by which 

fees may be paid on behalf of those children who reside on a reserve. The School Act on the other hand 

requires that no fees be charged of resident ratepayers of a school district. So residents of Indian bands 

are not really taxpayers in the usual sense and the funds required to operate a school or provide service 

elsewhere were normally and are still normally of course being provided by the Department of Indian 

Affairs. So this amendment provides for this special situation in which the Department of Indian Affairs 

may pay the fees on behalf of Indian children to the local school board or to the school unit if the district 

is in a unit. The fees are not levied on the parents of the children. 

 

Section 270, the old section is repealed and a new section is proposed here. The School Act has for 

many years provided that a teacher may not be a trustee of a school district in which he is employed as a 

teacher. This amendment is merely an extension of that same principle and it provides that a teacher may 

not be a trustee of a school district in the salary negotiation area in which he is employed as a teacher. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final amendment in this Act, Section 294 is a new section. Under existing legislation 

where a Board of Education has been established when a high school district is disorganized, it becomes 

necessary technically at least, under the present Act that an election be held to elect a new Board. Now 

as the Board of Education has already been elected as the Board for the school district and the high 

school district, it is felt that ratepayers should not be asked to again go to vote for a new board. So the 

purpose of this amendment is merely to permit the Board of Education for the two districts to continue 

in office as trustees for the remaining district and to continue to be styled by the designation Board of 

Education. Normal election procedures of course will apply to all subsequent elections. 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments to make and beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o‟clock p.m. 


