



















































Hansard: February 05, 1969


117 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session -- Sixteenth Legislature 

5th Day 

 

Wednesday, February 5, 1969 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO AIR CADETS 
 

Mr. B.D. Gallagher (Yorkton): —Mr. Speaker, I would like through you to introduce to the Members 

of the House, not a group of students but a group of Air Cadets No. 17 Yorkton Squadron who are 

seated in the Speaker‘s gallery. They are 35 in number and are accompanied by their Commanding 

Officer, Captain Ed Magus. I am sure that all Members will want to welcome this fine-looking group of 

air cadets from my home city to the Legislature. I know that they are a little disappointed. The trip had 

been arranged some time ago and they had expected to hear the Premier, but because things that are 

beyond our control they are going to be able to hear him today. I hope that the Members who do speak 

will make up for the air cadet‘s disappointment. I am sure that all Members want to join with me in 

welcoming them here and hope that they have an enjoyable and educational day. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to draw to 

the attention of the House and through you to welcome on your behalf and on behalf of all Members, I 

am sure, the high school students from the Sedley high school in my constituency who are seated in the 

west gallery in the first two rows and are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Fink. Those of you who 

come from the Frozen North may or may not know that Sedley is a very thriving farming community 

southeast of Regina. They are served by very good roads and it is a very thriving farming community. At 

the present time there is a new industry you might say or a new school in Sedley and it is the Roy 

Wilson Centre. These students are here today to observe democracy in action. I know that all of us will 

serve as an outstanding example to them of the kind of representative democracy that we live in in this 

province and this country. I know that you would all wish them a very happy and successful visit here to 

the Legislature and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): —Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the Members 

of 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

118 

the Chamber through you a group of students situated in the east gallery. They are students from 

Howard Coad School in the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. They are accompanied, I understand, by 

two of their teachers, Mr. Enns and Mr. Berryere. I hope that they have an interesting stay in the 

Chamber this afternoon and an educational one. I am sure that all Members agree with me on that and 

join with me in wishing them a safe journey home after today‘s visit to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you a group of students from 

the Rosetown high school. These students are seated in the west gallery. They are accompanied by their 

teacher, Mr. Klassen. They had quite a time getting here this morning on account of the snow storm. I 

am sure that the Assembly will join with me in extending welcome and wishing them an enjoyable 

afternoon and a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

POLICY ON ROAD GRANTS 
 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey). Does the Government have a policy for 

providing special road grants to rural municipalities? If so, under what conditions are these provided? 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): —On a point of order! Surely this question could be put in 

written form. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): —Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the question was 

asked by a person who knows the answer. But I suggest that he follow the order found on page 20 and 

submit a question like this in the usual written manner. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

NEW POLICY ON VETERINARIAN INSPECTION SERVICE 
 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): —Mr. Speaker, I would like to announce a new 

policy which came into effect earlier this year which provides veterinarian inspection services to 

operators of domestic abattoirs not exporting meat products outside of the province. The policy 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

119 

is provided for in an agreement with the Federal Department of Agriculture which became effective the 

1
st
 of January this year. The inspection is carried out by the Health of Animals Branch of the Federal 

Government. The Province pays the cost of this inspection which is $2.37 for each beef animal and 59 

cents for each hog, sheep, or calf. This fee is shared on a 50-50 basis between the Provincial 

Government and the operator. Inspection is on a voluntary basis and the plant must be approved by a 

Provincial Standards Committee comprised of representatives of the Provincial and Federal Health 

Department, the Department of Public Health and the Locker Plant Association. Operators who apply 

for these services will have their products marked with the Canada Approved seal. The Department of 

Agriculture has already received eight applications from operators in the province. Approval of the first 

plant receiving inspection services is expected to come from the Provincial Standards Committee in the 

very near future. The policy will allow these abattoirs to compete for sales to retail outlets and other 

establishments in Saskatchewan who keep only meat that is under Federal inspection. 

 

Operators of domestic abattoirs wishing to receive this service should make an application to the 

Production Marketing Branch, Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture, Regina. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT RE HON. W. ROSS THATCHER 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): —Mr. Speaker, today I am sorry to have to announce to the 

House that Premier Thatcher will not be attending the Conference in Ottawa on the Constitution and that 

I will be taking his place. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Charlebois (Saskatoon City 

Park-University), and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition). 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): —Mr. Speaker, before I adjourned the debate yesterday I had 

congratulated the mover and the seconder of the Address-in-Reply for an exhibition of some valor and 

determination under difficult circumstances. I had remarked about the failure of the Premier‘s United 

States speech to conform with other than imaginary facts and I had spent some time in drawing attention 

to some of the immediate problems which are very much in evidence in the city of Moose Jaw, the city 

which my colleague Mr. Davies and I represent in this Legislature. 

 

The months that have passed since this House prorogued last spring have been very eventful ones, Mr. 

Speaker, The Federal election of June 25
th

 was of particular significance in our 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

120 

province. Saskatchewan, in 1968, Mr. Speaker, was described by a number of political commentators as 

the only real surprise in that general election. No doubt there were a number of factors which 

contributed to the fine showing of New Democratic party candidates. I think it was particularly 

significant that the New Democrats won in areas where we have not held the Provincial seat for a 

number of years. I am told, Mr. Speaker, if the Federal vote is translated into Provincial votes in the next 

election, the New Democrats will win Saltcoats constituency, one which we have not had since 1948. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — It is a matter of interest, Mr. Speaker, to observe that only a handful of votes separated 

the Liberal party from losing the two seats that they won on June 25
th

. While voters in other parts of the 

country, Mr. Speaker, appeared to be responding to the somewhat doubtful charms of Pierre Elliot 

Trudeau, Saskatchewan voters indicated their lack of confidence with the Liberal party, with Liberal 

candidates finishing last in all constituencies except two. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, the 

Provincial seats won by the Liberals in which the New Democratic party took the most votes in the 1968 

Federal election – Pelly 51 per cent by the New Democrats; Saltcoats 39.1 per cent; City 

Park-University 34.9; Watrous 40 per cent; Yorkton 35.4 per cent; Humboldt 36.7 per cent; Elrose 44.4 

per cent. The Liberals, Mr. Speaker ran a very miserable third in a number of other seats that they hold 

in this House: in Morse, Mr. Speaker, the seat that is held by the Premier who unfortunately is not with 

us, the Liberals drew a miserable 26 per cent, with the NDP drawing 34 per cent. The Liberals ran third 

in Morse, Milestone, Kelvington, Last Mountain where they drew a miserable 22 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

In Arm River and in Rosetown where the Liberals drew a miserable 24.8 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my travels about the province during the Federal election one over-riding feature was 

evident and that was the distrust across the province for anyone who called himself a Liberal, be he 

Federal or be he Provincial. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — And this didn‘t happen by accident, Mr. Speaker as the Liberals worked hard for that 

reputation. The electors of this province are still stinging from the $34 million of new taxes that were 

heaped upon them last March. And they remember too well . . . 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): —35, 35! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — . . . 35, Davey said yesterday, I‘m sorry. They remember too well how the 

Saskatchewan Liberals claimed to have 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

121 

the panacea for instant prosperity and reduced taxes. Probably the most significant individual 

contribution to the rejection of the Federal Liberals in Saskatchewan was made by the man who leads 

this Government in this House. I think the Premier‘s problem is perhaps best described by Mr. J.E. 

Burns of the All Canada Insurance Federation when he spoke to Eastview Rotary club in Regina last 

September. He said and I quote: 

 

We have been left with the horrible notion that all the people of Saskatchewan aren‘t quite thinking on 

the same wave length as the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Burns could be congratulated on his powers of perception 

and I hasten to add that the Kelvington by-election will indicate just how correct Mr. Burns was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — It is becoming increasingly evident, Mr. Speaker, that the vast majority of 

Saskatchewan people are not on the Premier‘s wave length. More and more Saskatchewan voters are 

ready to register their opposition to the theory, Mr. Speaker, that profits must come first and people 

second. They fail to appreciate the Premier‘s line of thought and the line of thought of those sitting 

opposite that profits are sacred and untouchable to be worshipped like a sacred cow. 

 

The Leader Post of September 30, 1968 quoted the Premier as telling a meeting of Insurance Companies 

in Minneapolis, and I quote: 

 

That business should wear its profits proudly. 

 

Well I think most Saskatchewan people would want to qualify that broad statement somewhat and 

would question the pride with which profits may be worn by those who are charging the aged every 

nickel that the traffic will bear in nursing homes that are springing up across the province and across the 

country. I ask the question, Mr. Speaker: are profits to be worn proudly by those who are prepared to 

lend money at a rate of interest which excludes all those Saskatchewan couples who earn less than 

$8,000 a year and who are attempting to buy a home? I would have to suggest that it takes a degree of 

courage of perhaps callous indifference for the drug industries to wear their profits proudly in the light 

of revealing facts of recent years which indicate, Mr. Speaker, that Canadians have the dubious honor of 

paying more for their drugs than any other group of people on earth. 

 

According to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, Mr. Speaker, corporation profits for the third quarter of 

1968 showed sharply increased earnings, indicating that corporate profits 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

122 

for 1968 will be well in excess of $5½ billion. I suggest that these excessive profits constitute the big 

leak in our economy. They are the principal cause of inflation. In spite of the fact that there are some 

people who would like to lay the blame solely at the doorstep of organized labor, there are other matters 

that must be taken into consideration. The records of Canada will show, Mr. Speaker, that it was rising 

prices not rising wages that started the inflationary spiral. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — The Wall Street Journal, which can hardly be regarded as a Socialist publication, Mr. 

Speaker, in the November 14, 1968 issue states that too many people believe in the cost-push theory 

which says that unions win wages boosts and push up the cost of business, which then tries to recoup by 

increasing the price of consumer goods. The article states and I quote: 

 

Perhaps the most obvious trouble with this theory is that it does simply not square with observable facts. 

It is more accurate to say that rising consumer prices cause rising wage demands. In this post-election 

period inflation remains a clear and present danger and it won‘t be diminished one whit by efforts to put 

the blame solely on labor unions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the cold facts are that over $5 billion, that is to say, $5,000 million 

is being drained out of the Canadian economy annually. Much of it is escaping to foreign companies and 

never to be seen again. It really matters very little whether these profits are worn proudly or not. In the 

end they appear as debts in Canadian homes. These excessive profits, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you 

represent a leak in the economy which cannot be ignored forever. 

 

Somewhat closer to home, Mr. Speaker, it might be appropriate for this Government to show some 

interest in the excessive increases in the cost of highway construction since it has assumed the reins of 

office only a few years ago. The rate of increase expressed as a national average is less than half of that 

of Saskatchewan, with all the provinces recorded showing an average increase of 26 per cent while 

Saskatchewan‘s increase was over 63 per cent over a three-year period. Additionally, Mr. Speaker, when 

this Government refuses to provide information to this Legislature concerning a contract between a 

wholly owned subsidiary of the Saskatchewan Timber Board and the Pulp Industry in Prince Albert, it 

would appear that there is something involved that cannot be worn proudly in public. Similarly, Mr. 

Speaker, the agreement between the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and North Canadian Oil 

involving the sale of gas from the Hatton gas fields remains a dark secret which the 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

123 

Government refuse to divulge, giving Saskatchewan people reason to speculate not only about the 

wisdom of the transaction but even more serious, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the integrity of the 

Government is placed under a cloud, when these transactions involving large amounts of money are 

hidden under a veil of secrecy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, another factor which contributed to the rather miserable showing in Saskatchewan of 

the Federal Liberals on June 25
th

 relates, I am convinced, to the unwillingness of the Saskatchewan voter 

to accept the Premier‘s theory that there is nothing wrong with the foreign investment except that we 

don‘t have enough of it. Vast numbers of Canadian people are shocked by the increasing ratio of foreign 

investment in Canadian industry compared to the investment by Canadians. The Watkins Report, a 

4,016-page document compiled by six professors, confirms the fears on many Canadian people that we 

are in danger of losing our sovereignty and becoming a banana republic. At present the Report says that 

United States owns more of Canada than it owns in the whole of Latin America – $15 billion in Canada 

as compared to $9 billion in Latin America. The Report goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that the menace 

isn‘t simply the integration of the Canadian and United States economy with the attendant difficulties of 

implementing independent Canadian policy to combat unemployment and inflation. In the words of the 

Report United States subsidiaries have become instruments of American foreign policy and American 

military goals. The Watkins Report concludes that more than half of the 743 largest Canadian industries 

are foreign owned and controlled. The Report makes a pointed reference to the fact that these corporate 

giants have considerable political influence on the local level 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, the people of my constituency need not be reminded that the decision to 

close the Robin Hood Flour Mill emanated from the American headquarter in Minneapolis. More 

recently Gulf Oil formerly British American announced that the operation in Moose Jaw will undergo a 

conversion or be phased out with the operation being centralized around a new refinery in Edmonton 

which will apparently provide the prairie market probably by pipeline. 

 

Policy decisions, Mr. Speaker, made south of the border, are I am afraid cold and impersonal. They fail 

to recognize local problems or community considerations and are based on economic factors with little 

or no regard for the impact that these decisions may have on individuals or the community in which they 

live. There are indicators which point to the fact that the potash industry is in trouble at the moment. 

This is apparently accounted for by the fact that there is an over-production and a shortage of Canadian 

dollars in some of the countries which are our potential customers. It should be a 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

124 

matter of concern to this Government that American subsidiaries in Canada have regarded themselves 

bound by the American Trading With The Enemy Act, which forbids trade with mainland China or 

Cuba. Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, are becoming less and less impressed with the Premier‘s 

theory that American capital is vital to Saskatchewan‘s growth, and we suggest to you today that there 

are other alternatives which deserve this Government‘s attention and the attention of the Government at 

Ottawa. 

 

MacLean‘s Magazine of January 1969 carries an article which deals with the stuffy and the research 

which went into the Carter and the Watkins Reports and the part that was played by a certain Geoff 

Conway. This article states and I quote: 

 

The studies in which Conway has been involved tend to reinforce each other. His studies for the Watkins 

Committee and the Toronto Stock Exchange expurge forever the myth that Canadians are cautious 

investors. The reason Canadians own so little of their own economy, his figures demonstrate, is that 

large institutions, insurance companies, mutual funds and pension funds, are grabbing off most of the 

available stocks thus creating a serious supply shortage for the small investors. The figures show that, 

even if all the big companies like Eaton‘s and all the United States subsidiaries like General Motors 

were to sell one-quarter of their shares to Canadians, there still would not be enough equity to meet the 

demand. In other words we can afford to buy Canada if only the rules were altered to let us do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I think these facts are impressive in spite of the fact that the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) sits there chuckling like a little elf, but it should be borne in mind, 

Mr. Speaker, that the Premier, when he expounds his theory that there is nothing wrong with foreign 

investment except that we don‘t have enough of it, should remember also at the same time that during 

World War II we expanded our economy four times without the benefit of foreign capital. All of this has 

contributed over the past few years to a very suspicious manner in which the Liberal Party is being 

viewed by Saskatchewan people. The creditability gap is increasing. In the words of Mr. Burns, 

Saskatchewan people are just not thinking on the same wave length as the Premier. 

 

The foregoing, Mr. Speaker, is intended to indicate some of the reasons for the current unpopularity of 

the Liberals in Saskatchewan. But add to this, Mr. Speaker, that $7 million tax on the sick people, and I 

think you have all of the ingredients for the defeat of the Government which is out of tune with the 

mainstream of political thinking in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

125 

Mr. Snyder: — This undoubtedly accounts for the Premier‘s reluctance to call that by-election in 

Kelvington. I think the chronological order of events is worth noting as they relate to deterrent charges, 

Mr. Speaker. We all remember the adamant refusal almost a year ago by the Minister of Health (Mr. 

Grant) to exclude cancer patients from this impost last April. His comment was that all patients must be 

treated uniformly and the Government bluntly refused to entertain any thought of excluding specific 

groups or special categories. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that Members will agree that they have received 

more correspondence with reference to deterrent charges than all other matters combined over the past 

number of months. The measure, Mr. Speaker, is almost universally unacceptable in Saskatchewan 

where the vast majority of public opinion holds with the reasoning expressed in the Hall Commission 

Report which said and concluded that a policy of imposing partial payment would simply deter the poor 

and have no effect upon unnecessary demands of those in the middle and high-income categories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government stuck with their guns zealously and firmly and them came the June 25
th

 

Federal election with the voters of Saskatchewan indicating their distrust and their lack of confidence in 

the Liberals in almost every corner of the province. Political commentators were in general agreement 

that the failure of the Federal Liberal candidates to make a respectable showing related directly to the 

current unpopularity of the Liberal Government here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Well, apparently a stinging rebuke by the electorate is the kind of language that 

Liberals understand. In a matter of only a few weeks following the June general election, these headlines 

appeared in the paper. ―Cabinet discusses utilization ceiling.‖ ―Family ceiling being considered.‖ Now 

these news items, Mr. Speaker, point to the possibility of exempting cancer patient and pacing a family 

maximum of deterrent charges. Why, Mr. Speaker? For compassionate reasons? Not for a moment! This 

decision is being contemplated because of an obvious and a glaring need for this Government to mend 

their political fences. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I understand that the brain trust of the Liberals have already concluded that it is too late 

to save Kelvington but they are still hopeful that the tarnished image of the party may be improved 

before 1970 or 71 or 72, when they must account to the people of Saskatchewan for their stewardship. 

There appears to be a great deal of confusion, Mr. Speaker, among Members of the Cabinet opposite 

with regard to the attitude of the public concerning deterrent charges. On November 18
th

 last, 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

126 

Mineral Resources Minister Cameron told the Moose Jaw South Liberals that utilization fees are no 

longer a matter of concern to the Saskatchewan people. Now the Moose Jaw Times Herald replied in an 

editorial of November 22
nd

. The editorial is entitled ―Oh, really Sir?‖ which says in part and I quote 

from the editorial: 

 

The situation may be likened to a family simply not discussing the fact that father is in jail. It doesn‘t 

mean that they have forgotten or like the idea. Mr. Cameron said that people have shown more interest 

in getting grid roads, oiling programs and grants for access roads. That kind of thinking loses elections. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems that other high-ranking Liberals are not in agreement with Mr. Cameron that 

the tax on the sick is an issue which is dead and gone, because only four days later the Premier was 

guest speaker at a graduation exercise of a class of psychiatric nurses at the Saskatchewan Training 

School at Moose Jaw. He devoted much of his address to a continuing attempt at that time to justify 

deterrent charges to this gathering. Yes, Mr. Speaker, for an issue that is supposed to be dead and 

forgotten it still appears to demand the attention of a good many people. Why even at the Liberal party‘s 

annual convention – the convention which is held each year unless the Premier decides otherwise – 

Welfare Minister C.P. MacDonald was assigned the task of explaining and justifying deterrent charges 

to the Liberal delegates. Well after almost a year of experience with these utilization fees there are a 

good many of our Saskatchewan people who require no explanation of how they work or how they 

affect large, low-income families. Many of those people, Mr. Speaker, a large number of them in their 

senior years, know this story by first-hand experience. Here is one example concerning a patient with a 

heart condition who underwent surgery twice between 1957 and 1968 at no cost to the patient. The third 

operation took place on March 12, 1968 at the Regina General. The patient was discharged May 17; the 

patient readmitted June 24; new admittance record, Mr. Speaker, a new start on another $2.50 fee 

schedule; discharged July 16 and readmitted July 17 and back on the $2.50 fee; discharged on August 

10, and so on. 

 

Now perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) will still argue that it is good exercise for 

people to participate in the getting well process. But my experience with those who have contacted me – 

and there have been many – is that it merely contributes further to the mental anguish that the patient 

suffers. The Minister of Health I understand was made aware of a case of a Moose Jaw woman, a cancer 

patient who had been in hospital well in excess of 90 days prior to April 15
th

. She had been a patient at 

the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. By error, Mr. Speaker, the husband was billed $50 for deterrent fees 

which was an illegitimate charge because of her length of stay in the hospital, 90 days prior to the 

introduction of deterrent fees. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

127 

The bill was placed in the hands of a collection agency which threatened to garnishee and finally by this 

method intimidated an already grief-stricken husband to pay the $50 bill. When I became involved, Mr. 

Speaker, the administration at the Union Hospital admitted their error and agreed to return $35 of this 

$50, suggesting that someone had to pay the collection agency‘s fee and by jove it wasn‘t going to be 

the hospital. And only at that point did the Minister of Health become involved, and I want to express to 

him my thanks for seeing to it the matter was settled on a satisfactory basis, prior to the patient‘s death 

last September. 

 

These are a few examples, Mr. Speaker, of the many cases where hardship and anguish have resulted 

from unwise and unkind legislation. One doctor told me recently that his patient load has been reduced 

by a marked degree by those patients whom we call our senior citizens. Many older patients, some of 

them with high blood pressure and other chronic complaints which require regular care, he tells me, 

simply are not making those return office calls as directed by him, and he can only conclude that 

deterrent charges are discouraging many of this low-income group from seeking necessary services. 

 

I expect, Mr. Speaker, that my community of Moose Jaw is co different than most others in the province. 

I expect that every Member in this House can, like myself, relate to cases where senior citizens are 

postponing medical and surgical treatment for hernia, for hemorrhoids, for thyroid conditions and other 

postponable maladies. To what extent this delay may be harmful or dangerous is not for a layman to 

judge. What we do know, Mr. Speaker, id that the entire concept of preventative medicine has been 

undermined by these utilization fees. I suggest that it would be somewhat difficult to judge the 

long-range effect of this tax on the poor, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps experience elsewhere may shed some 

light on the matter. 

 

Time Magazine of November, 1968 in the section entitled ―Medicine‖ carries an article ―Treating the 

poor.‖ This article tells how through funds provided through the Office of Economic Opportunity, a 

team of medical men have launched a counter-attack on medical poverty by setting up 51 neighborhood 

health centres in a number of depressed areas across the united States. The article draws attention to one 

of the first centres to be established under the program at Columbia Point, a community of 6,000 people 

near Boston. The article concludes that a program of preventative medicine saves money, and to quote 

directly from the account it says: 

 

Cut off from routine preventative medicine, poverty-ridden people tend to be extremely ill when they are 

finally compelled to go to the hospital. A sample of 54 Columbia Point families was found to have a 

total of 200 hospital days in the year before the centre opened. Two years later because of better 

preventative care, this had dropped to 40 days or an 80 per cent reduction. Hospitalization 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

128 

at $50 to $100 a day in true cost is the most expensive part of medical care. For those 54 families alone, 

the second year savings in hospital may have been as much as $10 to $12,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a sober appraisal of these facts would seem to lend credence to the widespread belief that 

the Government has embarked on a narrow, short-sighted and ill-advised program with the imposition of 

a measure which has already shown conclusively that it has the potential to deny medical services to 

poor people and encourage the neglect of conditions requiring medical treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a rather sombre note upon which to conclude my remarks in this debate. The 

reference in the Throne Speech to a family ceiling on deterrent charges gives some indication that this 

Government has recognized to correct, at least in part, its largest single, strategic blunder to date. I fail to 

be impressed with the Government‘s reason for having reached such a decision. An examination of the 

facts and the chain of events over the past year seems to indicate beyond all doubt that the Government 

is running scared and motivated by political concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — There is little in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, to foster or encourage confidence or 

trust in this Government, consequently I will be voting for the amendment and against the main motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): —Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in debate to the Throne Speech, I wanted to 

primarily confine my remarks to agriculture but first, Mr. Speaker, may I refer Members‘ attention to the 

speech yesterday in the House by the Member of Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan). It has been my good 

fortune to be a newly-elected Member of this Assembly. I have heard a number of speeches from 

various persons in that short time. However, no speech has made me feel so sad being a Member of this 

Legislature as the one from Last Mountain yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — It was absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker. One expects when we enter into political life 

that there will be an honest class of opinions and ideologies, but we expect these conflicting class of 

opinions and views to be represented vigorously and hard by both Members. But we do not expect nor 

will the people of Saskatchewan tolerate speeches of the cut of the Member of Last Mountain based on 

basic disrespect for this Legislature. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

129 

This is a matter that cuts through all party lines to all the people. The Member‘s (Mr. MacLennan) 

speech was based on innuendo, gossip, hear-say and half-truths. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — At a time when all people in Saskatchewan expect us to act as parliamentarians in a 

truly dignified manner, the outrage of the Member from Last Mountain was a slur against us and will 

take a great deal of time and hard work to overcome. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, returning to the agricultural situation in the province, my first reason 

would have to most certainly be because of the disastrous crops that the farmer of Saskatchewan 

suffered in 1968. This was due abnormally to the drastic harvest conditions and the weather that 

prevailed on him during that year. 

 

My second reason in dealing with the agriculture is because of the total lack of recognition that the 

Government gave to the seriousness of this problem in the Throne Speech. Even the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) when he delivered the Premier‘s speech yesterday only donated two minutes of 

time to agriculture and then sporadically mentioned it during the remainder of the speech, showing no 

concern for the agricultural problems of this province. The statement in the Throne Speech, that reduced 

income to the farmers of Saskatchewan is being constituted and made up for by industries outside of 

agriculture, is going to be of no help to the Saskatchewan farmer. I ask the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane) what satisfaction is this going to give to farmers who have piles of grain in the fields which 

they have lack of finances to dry, farmers that have grain out in the field that was not worthwhile drying, 

farmers that have grain that it is debatable as to whether it is worthwhile spending the money to dry. 

 

The statement by the Government that, despite poor growing conditions and extremely unfavourable 

harvesting weather, our province was still able to harvest its seventh largest crop in history is of no 

concern to the Saskatchewan farmer and of no comfort to him in the situation he now finds himself in. 

The further statement of working with the Federal Government and that they have made every feasible 

effort to make certain that adequate grain drying facilities are available to the farmers, this is of no relief 

to most Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) tried to assure the 

Saskatchewan farmers that the surveys, according to him, stating they showed excessive amounts of 

grain in the province that were tough and damp, that these statistics made available to the farmers were 

unrealistic and 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

130 

inaccurate. He went on to say and mentioned that the grain in the Province of Saskatchewan is an asset 

to the farmer and that both Provincial and Federal Governments had done something toward solving this 

problem by the way of the maximum of the $600 loan towards drying grain. He went on to say that 

perhaps the Provincial Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) deserves some credit for this. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, if he only knew what the farmers of Saskatchewan are being confronted with, he would retract 

such statements simply because the problem is far from being solved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the crux of the situation is not as to how much tough and damp grain we have, whether it‘s 

a 100 million bushels or 200 million bushels, the crux of the situation is not whether Saskatchewan has 

just had its seventh largest crop in history, the crux of the problem and situation is that the farmers of 

Saskatchewan do not have the available capital to dry the crops that are an asset to this province, Mr. 

Speaker. The Government has been negligent in solving this problem that any department could have 

foreseen that there was going to be problems in regard to agriculture this year because of the drastic 

climatic conditions that prevailed in the province. But there was absolutely nothing of a constructive 

nature that came from either the Provincial Department of Agriculture of the Federal Department of 

Agriculture in regard to recognizing and solving the grain problems that were confronting the farmers 

until the first or second week in December, and they only made recognition because of pressures that 

were being brought upon them and it was not only to bring forth positive policy or constructive policy 

that would solve the problem. I, however, must admit that there was a time when a positive program 

toward the drying of the grain was brought forward. I say this because on December 19
th

 an article in the 

Leader Post by Mr. Steuart and Mr. McFarlane stated that they would pay the full cost of fuel, either 

propane gas or fuel oil up to the maximum used, based on receipts provided by the supplier where grain 

was dried. The plan proposed to pay 50 per cent of the cost assessed by the custom-drier to a maximum 

of 6 cents a bushel or $300. Mr. Steuart, who is ever aware of apparent problems and was extremely 

concerned as to the fact that some of the fuel may be used to heat perhaps some freezing farmer‘s home, 

said that the apparent problems or difficult areas would be smoothed out. Well, Mr. Speaker, the entire 

proposal was smoothed right off the table during the smoothing-out process as it never did come into 

effect. Instead, Mr. Speaker, they came forward with a policy that they did carry out, which was 

co-ordinating dryers in the province. This program has been and will be of very little assistance to the 

farmers who have no means of drying grain, no financial means of paying for drying grain. And the 

advances of up to $600 which the Federal Government feels so proud about is of very little help to the 

people who are already in debt and in effect will find it difficult to pay back the loan because of the poor 

quality and grade of grain that they have. The only thing that this advance does for the farmer is to put 

him further into debt in an already disastrous situation. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

131 

The Premier of this Province (Mr. Thatcher) stated on Monday that the farmers were not making use of 

the dryers available and I must agree with him, but I want to point out to the Members opposite (and I‘m 

sure that a great many of them are already aware) the impossibility of drying grain in 30 to 40 degree 

below zero weather. The bulk of the machinery that is required is just not built to operate in such 

temperatures. Perhaps if the Hon. Deputy Premier (Mr. Steuart) and some of his colleagues could go out 

in the country and experience these conditions, they would find out how utterly ridiculous these 

statements are. In all due respect to the Premier in his present condition which I‘m told is pneumonia, 

perhaps he did go out and take a look at this and this was the result that came about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — I want to bring to the Government‘s attention that, if it were possible to dry and farmers 

did take advantage, the 10 cent per bushel loan (at least he did more than you fellows did over there if 

that‘s what he did get it from) would cover less than half the cost of drying under these conditions. The 

cost of drying grain in the province is fluctuating between 20 and 30 cents per bushel at the present time. 

I might add that if the Federal Government and related handling industries had been better informed 

before opening the 3-bushel quota with Liberal propaganda made in their favour, they would not have 

had the problem of the magnitude that they have now, simply because the farmers would not have 

harvested the quantity of tough and damp grain that they did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because this grain is an asset to the economy of not only Saskatchewan but of Canada, the 

only realistic and positive program that should have been initiated and carried out by the Provincial and 

Federal Governments was one of direct financial assistance to farmers, but their continued refusal to 

bring forward positive programs towards alleviating this problem can only mean that the economy is 

going to suffer and that the farming industry is going to receive a blow and setback. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the portion of the Throne Speech that was donated to agriculture is no different 

from the entire body of the Throne Speech. It neither answers nor does it bring forth any concrete policy 

that would be of assistance to the people of this province and to the farmers of Saskatchewan in 

particular. It mentions diversification which in itself is fine but it does not go on to say what the farmers‘ 

story is in regard to the lack of income, whether he‘s diversified or a single grain farmer. It praises the 

program of swine production, but if the Government of Saskatchewan has been able to encourage only 

153 farmers since the program was put into effect in 1967 it seems rather dismal results for the type of 

publicity the program is getting. 

 

The ever accelerating rate and increase of accidents in 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

132 

the Province of Saskatchewan should have been included in the Throne Speech to try and come forth 

with some answer in regard to improving the type of machinery that farmers now use. There should have 

been mention of improvements and research towards establishing a weather-forecasting system that 

would be closer involved with the agricultural field. There should have been mention of a farm credit 

policy for the farmers at this time. There should have been mention of the strengthening and 

encouraging of the Wheat Board‘s selling position and the inclusion of crops such as flax, rye and 

rapeseed. Mr. Speaker, these, too, are not only all of the growing concerns of the farmer in 

Saskatchewan that the Province has been negligent in recognizing and taking progressive steps to solve, 

but, Mr. Speaker, I‘m not asking the Government or saying that the Government should be taking the 

needs of agriculture into consideration and entering them into the Throne Speech only because of the 

Province of Saskatchewan‘s bad crops that the farmers reaped last year. But I say it should be looking 

into these matters because everywhere you look in the agricultural field there are problems. 

 

Canada‘s exporting of grain is down drastically from last year and will be down considerably more by 

all estimates for 1969. One reason that will contribute to this backlog is the ships that are waiting at the 

West Coast to be loaded with grain, grain that is not there. Many of these ships have already left. This 

situation is costing the prairie farmer a great deal of money – demurrage charges of up to $3,000. The 

farmer is a two-way loser in this situation. It costs him money to have the ships leave and not take the 

cargo of grain, it costs the farmer money to have the ships wait to be loaded because of the demurrage 

charge that has to be paid to them. 

 

This situation at the West Coast along with our carryover and production trends for future years 

definitely proved that government should be aware and working towards a closer relationship between 

marketing and production. The Premier says he was aware of agricultural problems being major and 

critical and that over-production is our problem. Perhaps he should have done something about this by 

looking more closely at the problem in the West Coast and informing the Federal Government of that 

situation. 

 

The economic branch of the Federal Agriculture Department started in a study, presented to the annual 

Provincial Agricultural Outlook Conference in the fall of last year in Ottawa, that the farmer is the only 

member in the agricultural industry who is not making more money every year. I believe this statement 

to be true. It is true because the farmer is in a cost-price squeeze, as the Member from Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald) stated several days ago. It is also true that the farmer was in the same position, as the Hon. 

Member stated that it was 20 years ago, that the price of grain was high or higher then than it is now. 

But other than giving a weak excuse that, because the farmer now has power, sewer, water and roads 

which should show the farmer‘s income position is better, he stops there. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

133 

I would like to bring to his attention and the attention of the Members of this House that 20 years ago 

the farmers carried very little debt. I am told by a release put out by the Royal Bank of Canada just 

recently that the prairie farmers are now carrying more than $2 billion worth of debt, and this, Mr. 

Speaker, is why he has the conveniences of life that he did not have 20 years ago. He has them because 

he went into debt for them and not because his operation was earning him the money where he could 

outrightly buy them. Consequently the farmer is still and will remain in the cost-price squeeze that he is 

now in unless strong government action is taken. I believe also the Member from Cannington said that 

the answer was in strong government action. Unfortunately I see no action on behalf of this Provincial 

Government. In fact the only action that I have seen on behalf of the Federal Government is the Prime 

Minister touring the country making statements that he and his Government are not responsible fort 

selling grain but it is a direct problem of the farmer. Mr. Speaker, this statement is so preposterous it is 

almost difficult to believe that it came from a supposedly educated man. It is an absolute impossibility 

for the farmers of Saskatchewan, or for that matter the farmers of nearly any exporting country, to be 

able to compete with governments of other countries who are selling the farm produce of that country. 

We have been aware of this for a great many years and have been trying to establish better marketing 

means. Then when we have the Prime Minister of Canada come forth with a statement such as the 

farmer should be responsible for selling his own grain. Mr. Speaker, it can only appear by the lack of 

action and regard to the present agricultural situation in the prairies and by the statements for which the 

Prime Minister is wholly responsible that we are not progressing in the agricultural field but indeed 

regressing. 

 

I often wonder, Mr. Speaker, if these people whoa re making the statements that agriculture should be 

able to look after itself, that tit is already a industry that is sponging off the rest of the country, I wonder 

if they know, Mr. Speaker, that agriculture in the Province of Saskatchewan contributes 40 per cent of 

the gross value of commodity production, generally speaking and in some years has reached a much 

higher percentage than that, closer to 50 per cent. 

 

Do the Hon. Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) and his colleagues 

and the other people that go along with the neglect toward agriculture know and realize that farmers earn 

20 per cent of our foreign exchange? Do they know that he now produces enough basic food to feed 45 

people? Do they know that in 1966 the farmers of Saskatchewan spent $137,017,000 wholesale price for 

machines and repairs and that out of the total agricultural sales in Canada, Saskatchewan bought 29 per 

cent of them? Do they know that nearly half of the total income of the people in Saskatchewan is 

derived from agricultural persons engaged in agriculture and its related service and industries that make 

up the largest single group of the labor force in Saskatchewan? 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

134 

Do they know that agriculture is a major purchaser of petroleum, rubber, automotive parts, hardware, 

paint and electrical materials? In fact $146 million was spent by agriculture on petroleum in 1967 and 

$90 million spent on chemicals, pesticides and fertilizer. Do they know that 22 per cent of our 

manufacturing industry use raw materials from farm origin, that 20 per cent of the gross value of factory 

shipments are made from farm products? Do they know that in 1964, 7,400 out of a total of 33,000 

manufacturing plants were processing foods and vegetables and paying 215,000 workers over $1 billion 

a year in wages? Are they aware that the Canadian family is now taking less and less of its take-home 

pay to be spent on food? In the early 50s it was 25 per cent; it is now closer to 20 per cent and this is due 

only to the efficiency of farmers. But this will not continue unless an immediate long-range program in 

regard to agriculture is taken. I am a farmer myself, Mr. Speaker, and I am speaking on behalf of 

farmers and I want to tell the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) and the rest of 

their colleagues that the farmer of Saskatchewan is fed up. He is sick and tired of the Governments using 

them, moving, shuffling, and even sacrificing them for political gain, as if they were of no more value 

than a pawn in a chess game. That, Mr. Speaker, is why we in the New Democratic party have laid out a 

positive and realistic program in regard to the tough and damp grain in the Province of Saskatchewan 

now for the Western farmer, a nine point program. For the benefit of those opposite, especially the 

Premier as he seems to have had a lapse of memory the other day in regard to them including some of 

the other Members, I will read them again: 

 

Urge the Federal Government to make a cash payment of up to 10 cents a bushel towards the cost of 

grain drying, sharing of that payment by the Provincial Government, provision by the Province of the 

necessary administrative structure to carry out the payment program. Urge the Federal Government to 

appoint a co-ordinator of grain movement who would have authority to get grain moving from elevators 

to terminals and ships. More action and responsibility for seeing that existing drying facilities are used 

to capacity. Urge the Federal Government to continue to contribute to demurrage charges of ships forced 

to wait for wheat cargo. Offer to share with the Federal Government and grain companies the capital 

cost of installing grain drying facilities. Work with the farm organizations and handling companies to 

explore the value of using elevator-based drying facilities in parts of the province even in normal years. 

Offer to join in a study with the Federal Government involving railways, grain companies and shipping 

companies to examine the whole process of handling and moving grain from elevators to ships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not because of the lack of initiative on the part of the present Government in its 

Throne Speech, I will not, Mr. Speaker, support the motion but I will support the amendment. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

135 

Mr. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I would first of all like to take this opportunity to 

congratulate the mover and seconder of the Address-in-Reply on their material and delivery. As you are 

well aware the problem they face is to outline the tremendous development taking place in our province 

in the limited time that was allotted to them. Under these circumstances they did extremely well 

showing the people of Saskatchewan the progress that has taken place, particularly in the last 12 months 

under a Liberal administration. 

 

I wish to spend some time this afternoon looking at the political picture in Saskatchewan since I gather 

from the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) that there is a feeling of hope that the 

political tide is swinging back in their direction. I would remind the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that 

because he presented a new look for a few months is no reason to suggest that this same new looks is 

being portrayed by the party which he leads. The fact that he did not have the courage to face the 

Government with his new growth proves he is aware that nothing he does could revive a party that has 

been dead for some time. 

 

Since the NDP still maintain aspirations of again forming the government in this province, I will provide 

an in-depth look at their political party for the people of Saskatchewan, so that they will be fully ware of 

the dangers of trying a second dose of Socialism at a time that our province is showing unprecedented 

development and progress. I will show this afternoon that the NDP are the same old party with the same 

old leaders and the same old philosophy and ideas that they were in 1944 – which I might remind you is 

a quarter of a century ago. Nothing has changed in spite of the hopes and dreams of some of the younger 

Members opposite, from the party that the people of Saskatchewan repudiated in 1964, in the 

by-elections in Moosomin and Bengough and again in the general election of 1967. They are further out 

of touch with the realities of today than at any time since their birth during the Dirty Thirties when a few 

optimists felt that there was room for a Socialist party on the Canadian scene. 

 

However, after a mild flirtation with the CCF, most serious people in Canada returned to the philosophy 

of free enterprise that has provided our people with the greatest freedom and the highest standard of 

living in the world. Even the NDP party‘s brothers behind the Iron Curtain have been forced to dilute 

their socialistic theories with a substantial infusion of free enterprise to prevent absolute chaos in their 

economy. Socialism can‘t work and it won‘t work even when force is used to back it up. I would thus 

remind the people of Saskatchewan that in the foreseeable future their choice – in fact their only choice 

– will continue to be the Liberal Government of the day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The NDP for 20 years proved 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

136 

They were incapable of translating their socialist dreams into the action that would allow Saskatchewan 

to develop its human and natural resources as equal partners in our Confederation. One needs to look at 

the leadership of the NDP both on the Federal and Provincial scene to realize how completely they have 

been left out of the main stream of today‘s politics. Within the last two years all federal parties have 

assessed their leadership. The Conservatives were the first at which time they took the opportunity to 

replace a 73-year old leader with one who had just turned 54. Unfortunately for them age was not the 

only problem within the Conservative party. Although they recognized the need for a younger man who 

could speak the language of the day, they failed to elect one at their Leadership Convention. 

 

The Liberal party was much more fortunate and as we are all aware at the Leadership Convention 

replaced a 71-year old leader with one who was 49 and entirely in tune with the times. Mr. Trudeau‘s 

election victory and his continued growth in popularity from one end of the country to the other show 

that he is certainly the man for Canada in these changing times. 

 

The NDP had a great opportunity to replace their 64-year old leader with a younger man. Tommy 

Douglas‘s personal defeat for the second time during an election, plus the fact that the NDP failed to 

make any election gains, gave them the opportunity and the motivation to replace the federal leadership 

with a younger man and it appeared for a short time that this approach might be taken. 

 

July 2
nd

, black headlines announced to the country in general, that T.C. Douglas was to quit as NDP 

Leader. Following this announcement, several young hopefuls emerged as possible candidates. Allan 

Blakeney, Deputy Leader of the Provincial NDP party said he was considering letting his name stand. 

However, he didn‘t wish to commit himself too fully until he saw what happened at the Provincial 

Convention. He would prefer the provincial leadership to the federal, but both appear out of his reach at 

the present time. 

 

Many of us were surprised on June 27
th

 to read that Henry Baker, NDP MLA for Regina South East was 

also considering the national job. His actual words were, and I quote: 

 

It‘s been suggested that I take over, Mayor Baker said in an interview Wednesday. I could be one of 

their strongest contenders. 

 

He continued: 

 

The NDP has got to find men who are looking for something different, we need about 90 good men 

across the country who can win seats. To get them we need somebody who knows people across 

Canada. I could get them, he said. We‘ve got to have people with a name. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

137 

One thing our Member opposite is noted for is his self-assurance and lack of modesty. 

 

It soon became obvious that his colleagues in the NDP did not share Mr. Baker‘s own feeling that he 

was the man for the job. His Provincial Leader said the NDP was satisfied with their present leader and 

that no one is seeking an alternative to Mr. Douglas. Ed Whelan, one of Mr. Baker‘s colleagues in the 

city of Regina said that he had been son disappointed at Mr. Douglas‘s defeat that he hadn‘t given any 

thought to his successor. Roy Romanow, an NDP MLA, whom I would have thought would have been 

in favour of younger leadership, said that he was disappointed that Mr. Baker saw fit to make his 

comment in light of the fact that Mr. Douglas has not yet announced his intention. Jack Messer, the 

freshman NDP Member from Kelsey, was a little more outspoken than the others when he said that he 

felt that Mr. Baker did not have the federal experience needed to lead the party in Ottawa. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Too old, too old! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Other NDP MLAs who for the sake of saving them embarrassment were not named in the 

paper, were even more outspoken than that. They said: 

 

You‘ve got to be kidding, my on-the-record comment would be so fluffy as to be worthless, my 

off-the-record comment would be so intemperate as to be really worthless. 

 

Another one said, ―I‘d say I would be willing to run for President of the United States if I thought it 

would get me a headline‖, suggesting that perhaps Mayor Baker is more interested in publicity than 

actually attaining the job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — To our mind it is unfortunate that the Mayor is held in such low esteem by many Members 

of the NDP and that these Members did not have the decency to refrain from belittling one of their 

colleagues in public. Thus it appeared that any attempt to replace the aging Mr. Douglas would meet 

with considerable objection from the Saskatchewan NDP MLAs. 

 

The NDP then had a second opportunity to bring a younger man to the fore in the House of Commons 

when they appointed a new House Leader but again age won out over youth with the appointment of 

60-year old David Lewis. In two instances the Federal NDPs selected men of yesterday‘s generation, 64 

and 60 years old respectively, to lead a party which claims that they are the party of youth today. 

 

In Saskatchewan a similar pattern evolved during the summer. The Saskatchewan NDPs also had two 

opportunities to show 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

138 

that they were on the side of the youth and in tune with the times. At their annual convention last July, 

the leadership and the presidency of the party were both up for grabs, but in both cases age won out over 

the youthful contenders. In fact they were so enamoured with a Leader who has been around for 25 

years and led them to two election defeats, they would not even let the young mayor of Moose Jaw‘s 

name be placed before the convention. This must be disappointing to the younger members of a party 

that claimed in this Legislature less than a year ago that they were the party of the youth. 

 

All across Canada today, political parties are choosing men in touch with the times, are trying to narrow 

the generation gap, except in the NDP where age is still a premium commodity. One can only suspect 

that they are fearful of the youth of today, knowing that in all probability they would take the party away 

from socialism towards the more successful and acceptable free enterprise approach. Among the youth 

of today the only ones that have time for socialist dreams are the kooks and radicals on our campuses, 

the social misfits and dregs of humanity found in the hippie jungles, and the subversive elements and 

anarchists that are using the NDP party as a vehicle to obtain their own selfish ends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — What can be said about the leadership of the NDP being outdated is equally true of their 

philosophy. I will give you several examples to show you, Mr. Speaker, that they have exactly the same 

philosophy and intentions today that they had when they were born during the depths of the depression, 

and that they secretly maintained during their term of office in Saskatchewan. They were committed to 

the destruction of the free enterprise system then and they remain committed to the elimination of the 

free enterprise system today, as shown this afternoon by the speech of the Member for Moose Jaw North 

(Mr. Snyder). 

 

For a short time after the federal election, the NDP were elated by the fact that they had elected some 

young men to Parliament. However, elation soon turned to despair when it became evident that although 

young in age, they were still bound by the outdated philosophy of their political party. John Burton, MP 

for Regina East was a young man who should have been expected to make a speech in tune with the 

thinking of his own generation. The biggest disappointment of 1968 for the people of his constituency, 

of which I happen to be one, occurred when he made his first speech in the House of Commons during 

the Throne Speech Debate. It was reported in the Leader Post: 

 

 Mr. Burton hewed to the basic party lines as set out in the Regina Manifesto. 

 

His first words were: 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

139 

 The task of  eliminating inequality in Canada is unfinished until the economic power held in the 

 private sector is wrested away and re-structured . . . 
 

One would have thought that a young MP making his first speech could have found something more 

original and in tune with his society than a quotation from the Regina Manifesto of some 36 years ago. 

The time spent as research assistant to the Leader of the Opposition must have shackled any thought of 

his own that he might have had. What more proof do we need than that of the antiquity of the NDP. 

 

As those of us who have lived in Saskatchewan are well aware, political expedience was another 

trademark of the NDP. Their motto during their term of office was, ―If it doesn‘t bring you votes, don‘t 

do it. If it does bring you votes, try it over and over again‖. A prime example was the manner in which 

they manipulated the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. Prior to each election the rates would go 

down and then immediately afterwards they would go up higher than ever. This philosophy has not 

changed, Mr. Speaker. If any further proof of this was needed it was provided by Lea Benjamin, the 

other Regina MP, when he requested that the Federal Government withdraw its financial assistance to 

Saskatchewan‘s Medical Care and Hospitalization Plan until the utilization fees were dropped. It was 

quite apparent from this request that he had no concern over the future of the health plans for the people 

of Saskatchewan, but was concerned only with the political gain that might accrue for the NDP. Truly 

another disappointing performance from a man, young in age, but already barren of ideas. Their political 

party first, then the people of Saskatchewan, has always been their motto and it appears that it will 

continue to be son. 

 

Another basic philosophy of the CCF and later the NDP was to eliminate local governments. We all 

remember how they were stripped of their authority under the NDP government. WE all remember how 

the attempt was made to impose a country system against the wishes of the rural municipalities. Only the 

watchfulness of the Liberal opposition supported by local opinion prevented this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — A speech by the NDP Member for Saskatoon Riversdale, as reported in the Saskatchewan 

Teachers‘ Bulletin, November 15
th

, 1968, revived the fear that local government has had of the NDP. He 

told a meeting of teachers that the first point in a plan for education was the abolition of local school 

boards. As is the NDP when they were Government had not done enough to limit and erode the powers 

of the local school board, they would not abolish them altogether. This would be the thin edge of the 

wedge and the abolishment of local municipal government would soon follow. Further proof of this 

became evident last 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

140 

week when the NDP passed a resolution at their convention calling for the nationalization of all farm 

lands in Canada. This resolution is not surprising for when the NDP were the Government, they 

nationalized everything but the farmers‘ land. 

 

They tried to nationalize the trappers and fishermen. They nationalized the lumber industry and drove 

hundreds out of existence. They nationalized airlines and they spent thousands of the taxpayers‘ dollars 

attempting to nationalize the shoe, wool and the leather industries, all of which failed. Now a return of 

the NDP party would see every farmer in this province lose his lands to the state. Of course once your 

land belonged to the NDP you would no longer need a municipal government. This happened in Russia 

and China and would happen here under a Socialist regime. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Leaders of the NDP today try to maintain that they are a party for all classes, but again the 

facts do not bear this out. The NDP has always been a party that was dominated by one segment of 

society. With the inception of the CCF it was a farm-dominated movement. Following the depression it 

became dominated by intellectuals, and since the change of name from the CCF to the NDP it has 

become wholly dominated by the labor unions. 

 

At the NDP convention in July one of their labor bosses told the convention that he was concerned that 

the people in the NDP said they would not dare go out in the country and say they would throw out the 

compulsory arbitration bill the Liberal Government has placed on the statute books. 

 

Len Wallace, an official of the Wholesale-Retail Workers Union, told the convention that the party had 

better make up its mind. Farmers might well ask, ―Make up its mind to what?‖ It had better make up its 

mind that labor is dominant and the farer is of little concern. They are particularly vocal now about the 

farmers‘ problems because for one labor unions are not involved, but I would ask the farmers to recall 

how much sympathy they got from the NDP when strikes prevented the movement of prairie grain. The 

NDP sympathy was then with the unions as it would be now if the unions were involved. Len Wallace 

admitted further that the NDP had not invited labor and farmer to sit down together. He said there is no 

formal program to invite labor people to attend rural constituency conventions and that there is no 

formal program to invite farm people to address labor gatherings. From this it is evident that no attempts 

are being made to bring labor and farmers together in Saskatchewan, because the NDP are committed to 

labor and farmers have nothing in common with them. 

 

Further proof comes from the fact that Tommy Douglas advised trade unionists in the United States and 

Canada to step 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

141 

up their political activity. Speaking to a convention of the United Packing House Workers of America in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Douglas told them that these unions must widen their political interest. Just after this 

speech they passed a resolution to work towards the defeat of the Liberal Government in Saskatchewan. 

Thus it appears that when Mr. Douglas and Mr. Lloyd call on labor to widen political interest, it means 

only for the interest of the NDP. But as Tommy Douglas once said, ―He who pays the piper, calls the 

tune.‖ At the NDP annual convention it was reported by their treasurer that the party is financed by 

membership fees and by affiliation fees of trade union organizations. He went on to show that out of 

income of $292,000 in 1967, $21,000 came from membership fees and $271,000 from trade union fees 

and other contributions. From this it is obvious why the NDP must play the game the labor union way. 

 

The final aspect of NDP philosophy which I wish to deal with this afternoon is their attitude towards our 

neighbors to the south. I am not surprised that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), the Member 

from Moose Jaw and the rest of them are out of the House at this time, because if there has ever been a 

disgrace in this province, it is the actions of our Members opposite when it comes to their relationships 

with our friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — From their inception they have been strongly anti-American and this feeling grows 

stronger every day. But, Mr. Speaker, regardless of what the NDP try to tell us, we must remember that 

Canada and the United States have been at peace for 157 years. The defence of our country is a joint 

United States and Canadian responsibility and we couldn‘t defend ourselves without their aid. The 

majority of our export and import trade is with the United States. Our pulp mills, our potash mines, our 

base metal mines all our other industries, depend to a large extent on American investment. 

 

They have been good neighbors. They believe in the same values we believe in. They want freedom, 

they oppose totalitarianism and they believe in democracy, values which are abhorred by the 

Communists and the NDP. With this friendly relationship existing with our neighbors to the south, it 

was with revulsion and horror that we heard of the burning of the American flag in Naicam this summer 

by members of the NDP. Regardless of the country involved, a flag is a symbol of a nation‘s identity, a 

pride of being. Men and women are prepared to die and have died for it. Respect by everyone is due to 

every flag of every nation. But do the NDP have respect for this? Obviously they do not, as they wilfully 

and deliberately burned the flag of a friendly country whose young men dies for Canada in two world 

wars. In their boorishness, the leaders of the NDP have no respect for anything or anyone that is not part 

of their philosophy. Lowell Monkhouse, a member of the NDP 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

142 

provincial executive said that the burning was sponsored and financed by the NDP. He also said that he 

clapped when the flag was burned and said it was to bad that they didn‘t burn a couple of five star 

generals too. Such a statement could only come from a depraved party whose moral conscience is 

non-existent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, sitting to your left are the party responsible for the most deplorable action ever taken 

by a political party against a friendly neighbor since Confederation. The shame and disgrace from this 

action will unfortunately be with Saskatchewan long after the NDP are gone and forgotten. Let us hope, 

however, that this incident will continually remind our people of the true character of the Saskatchewan 

NDP. 

 

It was only a few days after this that we find that the NDP, not satisfied with burning the American flag, 

were sending telegrams to Prime Minister Trudeau, demanding that United Stated bomber training 

flights over Saskatchewan be stopped. The same day, however, another black headline appeared in the 

daily papers, ―Russia still deep inside Czechoslovakia.‖ Did the NDP convention send a telegram to 

Moscow to withdraw troops and tanks that were killing innocent people? No, they did not! To this day 

not one member opposite has spoken out against the aggression of their Communist friends. 

 

They were quick to demand withdrawal of American training flights from Canada that were here with 

the full knowledge and approval of our Government. They remain strangely silent when one country 

deliberately invades a friendly neighbor with no excuse and no explanation and destroys their 

government with force and bloodshed. Could the difference be that they are more in sympathy with 

Communist totalitarianism than with the democratic ideals for which the Czechoslovakian people were 

prepared to die? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I have tried this afternoon to show the image of the NDP as they are today. 

By concrete examples I have shown that their image, their leadership and their philosophy have not 

changed in the last 30 years. 

 

Today they offer two alternatives I have outlined: a party as it is at present with old leaders, an old 

philosophy and a fear of change or a party as it would be if the younger members of the NDP took 

control; members dedicated to the abolishment of local school boards, to the nationalization of farm 

land, to anarchy in our universities, to the abolishment of the Indian treaty, to the destruction of the 

United States and the establishment of a Communist government in Vietnam, all of which were 

approved by formal resolution a the young NDP Provincial Convention in Moose Jaw less than a month 

ago, thus becoming part of their program to be implemented when opportunity allows. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

143 

In view of these alternatives, which are the only ones offered by our friends opposite, one can only say, 

―Thank God for the Liberal party in Saskatchewan, which is dedicated to freedom and democracy for 

all.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, I might add that the image of the NDP that I have pointed out this afternoon 

is not only the image as the Government and the people of Saskatchewan see them, but it is the image of 

the NDP as seen by their own members. From their own mouths they admit that what I have said is true. 

Just a few examples to prove my point. Rod Thompson, the NDP MP for Battleford-Kindersley, and a 

former campaign manager for the Leader of the Opposition, is certainly one who should know the inner 

workings of his party. He told the delegates at their convention last July that their party is too negative, 

too smug, too self-righteous and too opportunistic. He continued that one of the most damaging charges 

other parties have been able to make is that the NDP is an old party going nowhere. He praised us by 

saying that the Saskatchewan Liberals have taken the right track. Premier Thatcher promised to do 

something positive and he did it. He promised to clear up Socialist stagnation. What greater 

condemnation is needed than these words from one of their own members. 

 

Mr. Gilbey, another strong leader of the NDP, was critical of a tendency in the party generally to reduce 

its approach to merely seeking methods of getting votes. He claimed that Mayor Baker would not make 

any speeches during the political campaign for fear it would hurt him locally. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Finally, a local school teacher said that 95 per cent of the Commonwealth subscribers 

never read it, but it was good doormat material. Certainly a shame that our friends opposite would spend 

one-half million dollars of the taxpayers‘ money on doormat material when they were the Government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are words of condemnation and confession from leaders within their own party 

who are openly admitting what we have known to be the truth. The NDP is an old party, too smug, too 

opportunistic, too self-righteous and going nowhere. 

 

Since the Throne Speech Debate began there have been several comments from both sides regarding the 

unrest that is present on the Regina campus. It has been made quite plain by speakers from this side of 

the House that, as a Government, we have no intention of letting the activities run our universities which 

belong to all the people of this province. One point, however, that had not been brought out clearly and 

which is of 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

144 

the utmost importance to the people of the province, is the relationship between this group of activists 

and disturbers on the Regina campus and the NDP party of Saskatchewan. We have always had our 

suspicions that the unrest on this campus was related to our friends opposite and it has been proved 

beyond suspicion during the last two days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — Monday was a black day on Regina campus. It was the day the Board of Governors took 

the time to visit the University to meet with the Students‘ Council in the hope that some progress could 

be made in settling the fee dispute. What did they gain for their efforts? They were pushed, shoved and 

rudely treated by members of the SRC and a small group of hoodlums which they represent. Related to 

this uncalled for and childish display towards the Board of Governors was boycott of classes and an 

all-night teach-in. 

 

The suggestion for these actions was made by John Gallagher, SRC Councillor, who, as first speaker, set 

the tone of the gathering by saying that militant action at this time is quite in order and he hoped that the 

issue wouldn‘t be settled so that they could have a strike, thus showing his concern for the whole student 

body which he supposedly represents. 

 

The second speaker was Don Mitchell, another SRC member, who carried on in his usual loud and 

irresponsible manner. The interesting fact, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan is that these two 

SRC members that organized the teach-in are both members of the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

party. If you look in the last issue of the Commonwealth it will be borne out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — these two young Communists were backed up by Mike Lloyd, son of the NDP Leader of 

the Opposition. Gerry Kusiak, son of a former CCF Member from Canora, and a chap I must say I am 

not too well aware of by the name of Karl Marx, whose name was most appropriate to the gathering 

which opened and closed with the signing of The Internationale, the Communist theme song. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — There may be some who might say that the fact that the leaders of this SRC are members 

of the New Democratic Youth party is only coincidental. However, when the main speakers of the 

evening showed up, it became obvious that it was not coincidence, but was a well-planned, strategic 

move by senior members of the NDP. The first keynote speaker to appear on the stage turned out to be 

Len Wallace, an ardent supporter of Mr. Smishek and Mr. Davies‘ SFL, which is affiliated with the 

NDP 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

145 

in Saskatchewan. This waterfront gangster proved to be an embarrassment to the whole union movement 

that he claims to represent, when he stated that all union members are illiterate, stupid and uneducated. 

This is no doubt true for the officials, but no the union members. When he went on the advocate 

harassment and embarrassment of members of the Board of Governors by picketing their homes and 

private business, he brought shame to the men whose fees support him in luxury. 

 

When I read the last paragraph of his speech it proved to be a shocker. While we had been thinking that 

his concern was for the students of the University, we find that it was for the SFL. The truth appeared 

when he suggested that students amalgamate with the trade union movement. I would remind the 

students that if they joined the SFL there would be no question of who would collect their fees. I am 

sure there are many good union men who will think twice before welcoming those students, who will 

never be anything but a burden and disgrace to our society, into their ranks. 

 

Now, again one might say this was a coincidence that Len Wallace was a speaker at the teach-in. 

However, even the most tolerant saw the connection when the next speaker was introduced. For who 

strolled out on the stage but Walter Smishek, NDP MLA for Regina North East and an executive 

member of the SFL. He must be one of the uneducated that his colleague Wallace referred to, because 

the best contribution he could make was to attack the University Senate, of which he is a member. But 

loyalty to a group of which he is part comes second to his loyalty to the NDP. 

 

After four speakers, the common denominator proved to be they were ignorant, activist, and are all 

members of the NDP. This intellectual and serious gathering ended with a dance and a rock and roll 

movie to show their deep concern for the problems of the University. 

 

From this it should be clearly recognized that the student unrest in Regina is nothing more that the result 

of the NDP agitators mostly labor-orientated, helped out by a few outsiders using the NDP party as their 

too, with the aim or embarrassing the Government. If they destroy the University in the process, they 

could care less. Fortunately, however, the people of Saskatchewan care. It is their University and they 

will not tolerate the interference of the NDP or any political party for their own political gain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Guy: — The Government has great faith that the Board of Governors, the administration, faculty 

and students can solve the problem without political interference from anyone. 

 

Just before I take my seat, I am reminded as I look at the 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

146 

weary haggard victims of circumstance sitting across the way, tired from a successful summer of 

burning American flags, helping to organize demonstrations in Chicago and creating unrest on our 

campuses, that there is one prominent member of the NDP who has found a more rewarding way of life. 

I refer to an article that appeared in the Fort Lauderdale Florida News, December 31
st
, 1968, where it 

was reported: 

 

In the mail there is one word from Clarence and Lillianne Fines. Over Christmas they were in Sydney, 

Australia. We‘ve been entertained by government officials in Melbourne and Canberra too, writes 

Lillianne. New Zealand was so interesting, great scenery and everywhere so lush and green. 

 

Next month they hope to return to Lauderdale and start building a new home. 

 

I am sure the people of Saskatchewan are please to hear Mr. Fines is building a new home and travelling 

extensively, whether this is financed by his former teacher‘s salary or his Cabinet Minister‘s salary, I 

open to considerable speculation. One thing we know is that he was smarter that the rest of those that 

were with him and are now still lounging on the front benches of the Opposition. One other thing that is 

apparent is that his brand of socialism is somewhat more sophisticated than that advocated by our NDP 

friends opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Guy: — Mr. Speaker, because I belong to a party that are the extreme opposite of this old 

tires group whose leader is now faltering back into the Chamber, I take great pleasure in supporting the 

Throne Speech and opposing the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): —I wonder if the Minister will permit a question before he takes 

his seat. 

 

Mr. Guy: — I have already taken it. Sir, you‘ll have you . . . 

 

Mr. Willis: — I wanted to ask the Minister, Mr. Speaker . . . I take it that the Minister has refused, Mr. 

Speaker. Is that right? 

 

Mr. Guy: — No, I didn‘t refuse, I said he would have his chance to make his speech once somebody 

writes it for him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

147 

Mr. Speaker: — The Chair will let him go ahead and ask it anyway. 

 

Mr. Willis: — In spite of the answer the Minister has given already I would like to ask the Minister 

when the Members of the House can expect to hear of the activities of the Department of Public Works. 

 

Mr. Guy: — He will hear it in due course as he always has in the past sessions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — I just wanted to say thank God that is not my address, if I have to die 

and leave this scene of time with anything on print or on record that equals what the House has been 

treated to for the last half hour. If ever a Minister of this Province, if ever a party was running scared, we 

have had the greatest proof of it for the last half hour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — If ever a Minister of a Cabinet of a party in power took the time that the Minister who 

has just taken his seat has taken to blow smoke screens to cover up the utter failure of statesmanship for 

the last four years, this regurgitation of this Minister‘s address in this very Legislature that I have sat and 

listened to him takes the cake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, in many ways 1968 may have been a momentous year, but for western 

agriculture it was a disaster. When I look at the opening paragraph of the Speech from the Throne which 

says: 

 

The past year was a difficult one for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

May I say that that was the understatement of the year. 

 

The year has been difficult. 

 

Anyone who would coin such a phrase for a Speech from the Throne is proof positive, Mr. Speaker, that 

they are simply unaware of realities or worse still refusing to face up the stark naked facts of the 

situation. Agriculture in 1968 faced a year with weather conditions completely out of time with farming 

operations as we know them on the prairies. But so far weather conditions are uncontrollable. 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

148 

Farmers have also faced this situation, Mr. Speaker, with Provincial and Federal Governments so out of 

touch with reality and so callously indifferent, that taxes, fees, plus the cost of living have steadily gone 

up to an all-time high, creating an impossible economic situation affecting not just the farmers but the 

whole economy of Saskatchewan. The weather was cold and dry over much of the province in the early 

spring, resulting in a very uneven germination of the crops. When rain did come toward the last of June 

it made a patchy uneven crop, a sitting target for an early frost which in 1968 came around August 11
th

. 

The frost produced a mixed grade of wheat over a large area of the province, grades varying from No. 4 

to feed and in many cases nothing in the head at all. I could enlarge on that one but I will let it go by. 

The frost was followed by a cold wet harvest culminating in the longest harvest season in 

Saskatchewan‘s record. I have neighbors who started the first week in August who haven‘t finished yet, 

and I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that this is why the northwest corner of the province is left out of the 

broadcasts this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — This has left the country full of tough, damp, wet grain impossible to market, impossible 

to store and during the weather such as we have had the last month, Mr. Speaker, impossible to dry at 

practical costs. So much for the weather conditions. 

 

The Hon. Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) spoke very decidedly against outright grants for 

grain drying, because he said his area got only five bushels per acre and had little or no grain drying 

problem and grants would force farmers in his area to pay for the less fortunate. I am quite ready to 

concede his point, the possibility that inequalities might exist, but I am quite sure that the Hon. Member 

for Cannington would be the last to suggest that refusing grants would iron out all the inequalities 

amongst farmers in Saskatchewan. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it is just quite possible that such 

outright grants might help to even up a lot of glaring inequalities presently existing between farming 

areas of the province. If much of this wheat is lost, not only to the farmers but to the economy of the 

Province, the farmers of the hon. member‘s constituency will share in the general provincial economy 

going down, not up. May I just point out that many farmers are a long, long way from delivering just 

one bushel per seeded acre. 

 

I am going to use the figures from my own farm because I am well acquainted with them but I am only 

one in thousands. I rented the farm. To date I have had $252.51 of my share of crop sold on the 1968 

crop of about 460 acres. But I have had to pay taxes between $700 and $800 at the present time. Oh no, I 

forgot, I got the $50 homeowner grant. But the first year my taxes had gone up $55, the next year they 

went up $35. In 1968 they went up to the point where I am now $100 behind 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

149 

the game. On top of all this are all the other taxes that the Government levied. It took these taxes out of 

the pocket that I might be able to get $50 out of the other pocket. It reminds me very much of the chap 

who bought hammers at $1.50 and sold them at $1.25 and claimed he made it on the turnover. It‘s a 

really wonderful scheme for the Government. Talking about turnovers, I have here a Liberal election 

leaflet. At the top it says, ―To stop the constant increase in taxes on your farm, vote Liberal.‖ And then it 

says, ―Please turn over‖, and on the other side it says, ―Reduce your property taxes, vote Liberal.‖ And 

again at the bottom it says, ―Turn over.‖ I don‘t know just exactly what it means but probable there is a 

side I haven‘t seen yet, I don‘t know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — They didn‘t put the year on it, Mr. Speaker, so that they could apply it to any situation 

that arose. However, we did, Mr. Speaker, get a turnover. We got the taxes raised on one side and the 

services reduced on the other. The Liberal party put property taxes up one third and a lot of other new 

taxes and fees applied just for good measure, so that this pamphlet really tells the truth except this 

reduce idea. I think they really made a mistake on that one. 

 

The Hon. Member for City Park-University, Saskatoon (Mr. Charlebois) endeavored to belittle, and I am 

sorry he is not in his seat. I wanted the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and the Minister who just took 

his seat (Mr. Guy) to be here for this one. The Hon. Member for Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. 

Charlebois) endeavored to belittle Socialism by using his own interpretation of Socialism. Strange but 

true, little Socialist Sweden took away from Canada this coveted place of second spot in the world so far 

as standard of living is concerned. These gentlemen are not up-to-date at al. Sweden took it away from 

us a year ago. I was over there this summer and sometime later during the course of the house I may 

give you some benefit of things that I saw. 

 

Agriculture was given little or no early leadership to meet the kind of situation farmers faced in the fall 

of 1968. As the Hon. Member who spoke on agriculture a moment ago said, before the tough and damp 

wheat that they had already been taken off had been marketed or dried there was another three bushel 

quota for damp wheat opened up. This led thousands of farmers to believe that this wheat could be 

moved and reach the terminals and the dryers. The result was that millions of bushels of damp wheat 

were harvested the last week or 10 days of the combining season. Following this there was little or no 

leadership given regarding drying experience or the purchase of drying equipment at cost price. Farmers 

in many cases were frightened by reports and experiences of wheat and other grains ruined by 

inexperience or the overcrowding of dryers in order to make the business pay a profit in this lauded free 

enterprise system. Thus all the 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

150 

Better weather of the late fall and the early winter was lost so far as grain drying was concerned. Finally, 

Mr. Speaker, as the terminals became plugged and the railway yards at the Lakehead were congested 

with loaded grain care, which incidentally didn‘t come out of the north of the province. Had they done 

so the farmers there would have been in a much better position to pay their way and be to some extent 

solvent as well as paying their harvesting expenses. Only after all this did the powers-that-be begin to 

realize there was a real damp wheat and drying problem in the Prairie Provinces. Even at this late date 

the leadership was only halfhearted. It seemed as though the Liberal Governments considered the 

farmers had only to step outside their homes to buy dryers or to rent them, that money, which they 

seemed to be so conscious of, did not enter into the picture, that dryers at $10,00 could easily be 

procured, that $30 per hour rent for a dryer was a mere cinch. Finally about the time the Government 

was ready to sit down to Christmas dinner, drying schools were in operation. Let me tell you, to the 

disgust of a lot of farmers many of these schools became glorified sales projects for the producers of 

grain drying equipment. One other thing for good measure, there was no AMA left in the province to 

give farmers any guidance in buying equipment that they knew nothing about. 

 

The drying loan by the Federal Government was so long in materializing that we got into the depth of 

winter and much of the value of this legislation is to be lost. Farmers have had to take out cash advances 

to meet living costs and harvesting expenses. It is now evident that these advances are going to carry 

over into the next crop year when interest will have to be paid. BY the time cash advances and drying 

loans are cleared away I wonder just how the great many farmers are going to put in their 1969 crop. 

Where was the so-called charismatic Prime Minister in all this? Finally he got west as far as Winnipeg. 

He shrugged his shoulders, rolled his head and asked that charming question that we just heard, ―Why 

should I try to sell wheat? That is the farmer‘s problem.‖ He didn‘t take the time to shrug his shoulders 

when it was a case of interest rates going up to nine per cent, or again when the cost of living figures 

revealed that in 1968 these costs were up over 1967 by 4½ points. It evidently doesn‘t matter to our free 

swinging, girl-kissing Prime Minister how difficult times are for the farmers or for the one-fifth of 

Canada‘s population in the very low income bracket. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, to me there is a much more alarming undertone in the Prime minister‘s Winnipeg 

statement than meets the eye. Is this a veiled suggestion that he wants to be out of the Wheat Board and 

out of the quota system, and out of orderly marketing? In fact, Mr. Speaker, out of everything pertaining 

to agriculture except taxes and the protection of the privileged one-fifth of Canada‘s people at the top 

who make it out of agriculture. Is this the real reason for setting up a so-called independent Grain 

Council? Independent of who, I would like to know? One wonders too if the Liberal party is hoping to 

rid itself of some of the wheat surplus by letting it go up in smoke 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

151 

in the spring. I well remember a former Federal Minister of Agriculture‘s remark during a period of 

wheat surplus and a summer drought. ―Well it will help to relieve the wheat situation anyway.‖ What 

happens to farmers during such crises doesn‘t seem to matter very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for too many years in what too many people considered buoyant years for agriculture, 

farmers were operating on a very, very fine margin, as a matter of fact too fine a margin to be in a 

position to absorb a situation of the magnitude of the 1968 disaster. I heartily agree with the Hon. 

Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) that the cry of farmer efficiency is a wornout cliché, that 

the time is long, long overdue for a cost plus price structure. I am very happy that he is to be found in 

this field of endeavour. Some of us have been saying these things for a long, long time without any help 

from the gentlemen opposite. However, I cannot follow him when he tries to blame labor for our 

difficulty. Labor is one of the farmer‘s best customers. Then in the next breath he tried to absolve the 

machine companies whose profits have been astronomical, pyramiding year after year. 

 

Just speaking of labor, seeing that so many downgrading things have been said from the gentlemen 

opposite and for the benefit of the Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan), I want to put in the 

records of the House a clipping from the Leader Post. It should be acceptable, September 9
th

, 1968: 

―Olson blames elevator firms.‖ This is the Liberal Federal Minister of Agriculture from Ottawa. 

 

Agriculture Minister Olsen Saturday laid more than 50 per cent of the blame for the month-and-a-half 

long grain handlers strike at the Lakehead on the shoulders of the company. Speaking at a press 

conference at Regina airport following a four-hour talk to Saskatchewan agriculture officials, Mr. Olsen 

repeated and enlarged on statements previously made on his stopover at Winnipeg. Mr. Olsen said, ‗His 

chief concern was that he wanted to dispel the idea that 100 per cent of the blame for the strike lay with 

the labour union, 50 per cent or more lies on the other side of the table. I think it is erroneous for farmers 

and the general public to think that labour union is the devil in this case In my opinion it is not.‘ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — There are a lot of Socialists in his office, that explains it. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — He evidently was quite sure there was a devil in it though. Unless there is better 

co-ordination, Mr. Speaker, of transportation, shipping orders, drying facilities, quotas and 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

152 

terminal management plus a vigorous sales policy, western agriculture as we know it, it doomed or at 

least it will take a long time to recover from 1968‘s staggering blow. Some farmers, Mr. Speaker, will 

never recover. There will be hundreds of farm casualties in 1969, farmers who simply cannot put in 

another crop. One is forced to ask: will the Prime Minister and this Government shrug their shoulders 

again and say it is no affair of ours, when what they really mean is this will give the corporation land 

sharks the chance they have been waiting for to pick up land at bargain values? 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the crop situation the fall of 1968 saw an unprecedented number of cattle go 

back from our stockyards to the feed lots on farms all over the province in an endeavor to salvage a lot 

of our out-of-condition grain. This meant that there would be a terrific increase in the amount of beef by 

spring, not numerically but just sheer tonnage. These cattlemen had barely got their winter‘s operation 

under way before buyers were speculating on a drop in the price of beef by spring, not to the consumer 

but to the producer. These rumors proved to be all too true. In fact this was the method chosen of 

announcing what was already a planned certainty in the mind of the packing house operators. Before I 

left home, Mr. Speaker, I was at a gathering where some of these cattlemen were furious because 

already the price had dropped to the point where they were going to work all winter for nothing. They 

had worked all summer for nothing to produce an unmarketable grain crop and now they were going to 

work all winter for the packing houses. Yes, Hon. Sir from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald), I agree it is no 

longer a case of efficiency, it is just a plain case of price. I will go one further and suggest if you really 

believe what you said the other day you will never stay where you care with the Liberal party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — They have never given the farmer more than would keep body and soul together and the 

patches on his pants. 

 

I almost heard a sob the other day when the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) said, ―Everybody 

suffered with the farmer.‖ Was this paramount, Mr. Speaker, to sating that when the farmer is alright, 

when the farmer is okay, you don‘t need to worry about the rest of the province? That I agree with, but 

just try to get the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) or the Provincial Treasurer or the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

MacFarlane) or the whole row of yes men in the Government to implement the needed legislation to 

keep agriculture strong and solvent. You will soon find out where their real sympathies lie. I make no 

apologies, Mr. Speaker, for asking outright drying grants which would benefit not just the farmers but 

the whole economy of the province. If it had been the CPR Company or the private pulp mill, 

governments would have been falling over themselves to help these people and the public would have 

been footing the 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

153 

bill. 

 

For over a year now the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. MacFarlane) and the Premier have been shouting 

diversification, diversification. I am all for diversification. I have lived and operated a mixed farm all 

my life. But the Hon. Minister knows – at least if he doesn‘t he shouldn‘t be where he is – that unless he 

and others do more about a planned and controlled price for a marketing system for livestock, 

diversification is a pure, plain deception. I‘m sure he must have seen that television program which 

showed a successful cattle-feeding operation. The interviewer asks the owner, ―Do you consider this to 

be an operation that a lot more farmers should undertake?‖ The answer is, ―No, if many were to start an 

operation of this kind, the market would break.‖ Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what I told the Minister in 

this house one year ago. And here we are a full circle on the merry-go-round in one year. It‘s not only 

the grain and the livestock producers who are in trouble. The honey producers are finding themselves in 

as difficult position as the grain growers. Honey processing plants are taking only 60 per cent of the 

1967 delivery. The carry over as of July 1, 1968, is more than double normal. Britain is buying only 50 

per cent of her 1967 purchase from Canada. United States imports have gone up very little. But here we 

have done nothing to explore or develop the American honey market. I the Premier would attend to 

some of these problems on his over-the-border excursions instead of vilifying his own province, he 

might be of great service to Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Perhaps the worst of all there has been absolutely nothing done to develop an Asian 

market for Saskatchewan honey which some believe has considerable potential. Surely honey the quality 

of Saskatchewan‘s could find an Eastern market of considerable proportions. 

 

Before I came down to the Legislature this session, I was discussing deterrent fees with a member of a 

doctor‘s clinic. Not a community clinic – I just wanted you to get that. I asked the doctor how much 

deterrent fees had cut down their practice. The doctor‘s immediate reply was that the books say 10 per 

cent. However he warned, ―80 per cent of that 10 percent is from the low-come group who have not the 

$1.50 each time a call is necessary of the $25 to get into hospital if that is my decision.‖ This is the 

situation. Mr. Speaker, some surveys already made prove that if there was abuse which this Government 

never tried to prove, it was not the low-income group who were to blame. This group, Mr. Speaker, is 

one group that a family ceiling on deterrent fees will not help, but, as the doctor pointed out, this is the 

group that are being deterred by deterrent fees. This brings us back to the archaic position where 

preventative medicine is not being practised on behalf of the low-income group or the province as a 

whole for that matter. Medicare costs 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

154 

could be cut by unified administration right across the board, which would be a much more Christian 

and much more human approach than taxing the people who are already sick and down on their backs. 

Mr. Speaker, as I view the present economic situation in Canada, the country is burdened with three 

great handicaps at the present time. A large sector of the private insurance business, number one. 

Number two, our lavish television advertising, and number three, the Liberal party. 

 

We‘ll take the first. Four-fifths of private insurance written in Canada is owned outside the country and 

much of the money goes out of Canada. Besides costing the public far too much for the protection given. 

 

Secondly, millions if not billions of dollars of television advertising is paid for with money that should 

be flowing into the public treasury instead of fouling up every program from morning until night. If this 

money was going where it lawfully should, public taxes could be reduced considerably. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the greatest liability that Canada has today is the Liberal party which aids and 

abets every sellout of Canada and Canadian resources to the highest bidder that they can find. Mr. 

Speaker, this Government can find money for dress balls, money for liquor, for receptions and opening 

which it refuses to disclose the cost figure for. Money for a $90,000 executive plane to fly to these 

cork-opening ceremonies and get this on e—money for subsidies for the free enterprise pulp mill to the 

tune of $6 per cord for every cord of pulp wood delivered. And don‘t forget this Government committed 

the people of Saskatchewan to this free enterprise scheme to the tune of $55 million if it doesn‘t work. 

And last fall the Premier admitted, of all things, it was strikes in other pulp mills that gave them a badly 

needed market; and I would just like everybody to think that one out to the conclusion. I am afraid, Mr. 

Speaker, that this grey head of mine may yet see the day when the people of Saskatchewan have to make 

good that $55 million Liberal commitment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Is there any wonder people are leaving the province? Is there any wonder Government 

speakers shout like mad to cover up this economic suicide? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Never learn. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — But there is no money for agriculture on its back. It was an unprecedented situation in 

1968. No money to make good a drug program that they promised in 1964. I did have a clipping here 

that I lost. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Read The Carillon! 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

155 

Mr. Wooff: — A Toronto woman with a particular heart condition . . . 

 

Mr. Heald: — What are you quoting from? 

 

Mr. Wooff: — I‘m quoting from the House of Parliament in Ottawa. A Toronto woman with a 

particular heart condition wrote Grace MacInnis in March, 1966 about the quinine-type pills . . . 

 

Mr. T.W. Weatherald (Cannington): —On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I think that‘s rather a 

secondhand source if it if the house of Commons parliamentary records that he is quoting from. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite willing to table it when I‘m finished. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If the Member is quoting from a newspaper he does not have to table it, but he must 

state the name of the paper and date of issue. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Oh well, I‘m proud to tell them what it is. I am quoting Grace MacInnis from the 

Commonwealth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now give us the date of the issue. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — I like to bait them a little. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Date? 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Oh, you want the date too. Very good. February 5, 1969. May I continue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — May I continue? I‘ve had my fun anyway. I like to set you up a little before I start. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — A Toronto woman with a particular heart condition wrote Grace MacInnis in March, 

1966. But the quinine-type pills 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

156 

she uses had already gone up in price from $12 to $65.25 for 500. the explanation given the woman was 

the war in Vietnam. Grace MacInnis said the food and drug director had advised her of a number of 

complaints and cited a report that the United State Government had purchased large quantities of 

quinine, resulting in increased prices of the drug derivatives. The Toronto woman discovered – and I 

would just like the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) to listen to this one after all that he said about 

Britain the other day – the Toronto woman discovered that her pills were sold in Great Britain at $7.50 

for 500. This was $4.50 less than the original price this lady was paying in Toronto. Grace MacInnis 

again wrote the Government. New information had come to light. United States investigation disclosed 

an international cartel purchase of a large stockpile of quinine which had been held in reserve by the 

Government. The United States Government kept a sufficient supply of this to take care of its military 

needs for an estimated 1,142 years. Having obtained control of most of the quinine supply, the cartel 

increased its prices by 500 per cent. There‘s lots of room for this Government to implement its 

commitment to the people of the province on a prepaid drug policy. No money for drugs, no money for 

health services for the low-income group. Only deterrent fees. 

 

Speaking of taxes I went into my credit union not long ago when they were making up the annual 

returns for each member. They used to have to make up every member‘s account for income tax if he 

had more than $100 of interest for the year. But Mr. Benson‘s fine tooth comb says that they‘ve got to 

make up an account for everybody that made $10 in interest in 1968. Just imagine the amount of work 

these people are doing for what Mr. Benson gets out of it. But those are their orders. 

 

History, Mr. Speaker, repeats itself. Elect Liberal Governments in Saskatchewan and Ottawa and you 

have political trickery, high taxation, agricultural chaos, exodus from the province, unemployment. Just 

think what unemployment would have been if thousands of people hadn‘t left Saskatchewan in the last 

four years. As a farmer, Mr. Speaker, I cannot and will not support the motion but will support the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — Mr. Speaker, would the Member permit one question? Mr. Speaker, if I understand 

what the Member said, he said that livestock prices were depressed because farmers in Saskatchewan 

were feeding their livestock poor condition grain, therefore increasing the tonnage and that was of 

course in the price. I believe that is what he said. Now the question. The question is this, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like the Member to tell me if those livestock were not fattened in Saskatchewan, would they not 

have been fattened in Ontario on corn or barley or in the United States and the tonnage would therefore 

be identical to what it is now. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

157 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Oh, but, Mr. Speaker, what a question, what a question! Now I don‘t believe you will 

leave the Liberal party]. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — This isn‘t the point at all. The point is that this Government is giving no protection 

whatever to these farmers, that they are at the mercy of the packing houses. They started a program of 

prophesying lower prices for spring. This is the point. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Rubbish! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — There is no rubbish to it. This is exactly what I told you last year and it is happening all 

over Saskatchewan today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — And you have done nothing about it and you don‘t intend to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): —Mr. Speaker, we‘ve been getting a lot of woofling from the other side for 

the last half hour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — The Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) made a suggestion that perhaps the Member for 

Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) might find a better home on that side of the House. I want to tell the 

Member for Turtleford that perhaps if the Member for Cannington did go over there it would certainly 

brighten things up a little bit. There would be a sudden and dramatic increase in the knowledgeability 

and the actuality of their economic pronouncements. I think he might even sit in your front ranks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — I don‘t think there is anybody over there that can sit in the same row with him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‘ve heard a lot about the farm situation – I don‘t intend to devote much time to it – but I 

did pick up something that the Member for Turtleford said about the 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

158 

northern farmers. He said that as a landlord he has collected only $242.15 since the first of August. I 

want to tell him that the difficulty and the hardship is not limited to the north part of Saskatchewan. 

Luck Lake which is in the Elrose constituency has not yet had a quota. The elevators are full of damp 

grain and some durum. Some of those farmers have not yet been able to deliver initial quota. I know of 

one man that has not had a nickel of income from his farm since June 15, 1968. There is a problem and I 

am aware of it. Those people of Luck Lake are aware of it too. You people are very late in recognizing 

some of the difficulties. I believe that if the Canadian Wheat Board had not opened the 10-bushel durum 

quota and had restricted it to five, had not opened the three-bushel quota on damp grain so quickly, then 

perhaps we wouldn‘t be in the situation we are now, waiting in Vancouver for dry No. 2 grain. Believe 

me our part of the country, the southwestern part of Saskatchewan can supply all the No. 2 dry grain that 

Japan and China want. If we have the chance to get it out there we will be moving it. 

 

I think that the Canadian Wheat Board made an error and I am not afraid to tell them. I have already 

mentioned in a letter to the Board of Commissioners that I though they made a mistake. I have had a 

letter back. I am not prepared to table this correspondence but I do want to tell you that there is a lack of 

uniformity in quotes which is distressing. Some parts of our area are now on three-bushel quotas. Other 

points which are les than 30 or 40 miles away have no quota at all, as I have mentioned, and no room for 

delivery. 

 

We have heard a lot about agriculture in the debate on the Speech from the Throne. In my opinion, the 

best speech, the most thoughtful and the most thought-provoking came from the Member from 

Cannington. I am not prepared to analyze any of the other speeches on agriculture. I think that every 

Member in this House knows that there is a problem. Every member is anxious that these problems be 

solved quickly. 

 

I want to say a few words too today about other problems, problems that are acute, problems that I think 

are being solved, but that need our attention as Members of the Legislature. I refer to the problem of the 

retarded children in our province. My information is that there are 1,151 educable retardates (and these 

are people with I.Q.s of from 60-80) in some kind of school in the province. I believe that there are just 

under 600 trainable retardates and some of these are not receiving any services at all. I am not sure that 

anyone really knows exactly how many there are in the province altogether. The Kinsmen Club of 

Saskatoon is to be congratulated for their initiative in beginning the construction of Elmwood residence 

for the residential care of mentally retarded. The Welfare Minister (Mr. MacDonald) took part in the 

sod-turning on October 3 along with Mayor Buckwold, Mr. Derek Arnold, President of the Saskatoon 

Kinsmen Club and Mr. G.N. Sneyd local manager of the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation. 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

159 

Over the years, a new philosophy regarding the care, treatment and training of mentally handicapped 

children and adults has developed. Rapidly developing community-based rehabilitation, sheltered 

workshop and recreation programs are contributing to the new way to life for many mentally 

handicapped young people and give amply evidence of the broad acceptance of the changing 

philosophy. 

 

Elmwood residence is a pilot project that will point up the advantages and disadvantages of this new 

approach to the needs of the retarded. It is a special-care home providing supervisory and limited 

personal care for 50 mentally retarded people, 18 years and over. These will be drawn from the city of 

Saskatoon and surrounding areas. Elmwood residence will provide board, room and laundry services to 

the guests and assistance with bathing, dressing and grooming when needed. Supervision and guidance 

in eating habits, social graces, developing work habits, medication programs and special diets will be 

given. From this residence the guests will be able to take advantage of the special training programs and 

available work that is offered in the community of Saskatoon. The financing of this new home with 

$500,000 was arranged with a Central Mortgage and housing Corporation loan, a Provincial 

Government grant of up to $100,000 which is non-repayable, and local sponsors. The share is largely 

borne by the Saskatoon Kinsmen Club who approved the amount of $38,700 for the project. Donations 

totalling over $10,000 to the furnishing fund have been received from a large number of interested 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a facility in Kinistino called The Haven of Hope. There are 12-18 children in 

residence and these people are receiving day care for which the parents are charged a small few. The 

cost of room and board here is $150 per month. 

 

Assiniboia has a residence which has been set up and is administered by four school units. This building 

was formerly a nurses‘ residence. About 20 children are living there and a day-care centre and a training 

classroom are provided. There is a small fee for the service provided at Assiniboia. It is felt that the 

parents should have some financial involvement, but that the fee should not be so high as to discourage a 

family from enrolling their child. I want to congratulate the four school units who are co-operating in 

this Assiniboia project and I hope that other areas of the province will follow their lead as quickly as 

possible. 

 

I hope that the Government will continue to broaden its policy in respect to retarded children. I know 

that there is an inter-departmental committee and it is actively working on the difficult problems of 

adequate care, health and education for these people but much remains to be done. Recently the 

Rosetown School unit is operating an opportunity classroom. Several children from the Eston-Elrose 

unit are able to attend on a day-to-day basis and the Eston School unit pays their tuition. This has been 

satisfactory but I believe that more 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

160 

residential homes are needed. In the first place, some of the retarded children in the province are not at 

all trainable and can become a tremendous burden to the family. I am not suggesting that any time the 

parents should shelve any of their responsibility toward these children, but I do say that sometimes the 

care of a retarded child at home may be the cause of physical or nervous exhaustion of the mother or it 

may be crippling to the development of other children in the family. 

 

I say that there is real need for homes like the one in Kinistino for the care of the retardate who must be 

moved out of his home environment. I realize that some of these people are being looked after at the 

training school at Moose Jaw; but certainly there are many others, who, if residential care were supplied 

or established close to their homes, would be able to get out on weekends or would be able to get out on 

special occasions. In short they could be able to maintain their membership in the family unit. I believe 

that much can be done by private citizens. I believe that the lead had to come from the 

Inter-Developmental Committee. I believe that this committee can recommend and can make possible 

the changing of some of the regulations that now prohibit the setting up of these homes. This is 

something all of us ought to be concerned with an I think that we all ought to take a very real and close 

interest in it. I don‘t know if any Member of this Assembly can say for sure how many retarded children 

are living in the bounds of his constituency. I know that I can‘t be positive that there are only eight; 

there may be 10, 12 or 15 as far as I know. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to pay tribute to the memory of a distinguished Saskatchewan citizen, Mr. 

Thomas Edward Myers, who died on January 11, 1969 at the age of 47 years. He was a farmer and he 

operated a feed lot in the Hughton district since 1948. He was also a man active in community and 

provincial affairs. He was the first cub master at Hughton. He was reeve and councillor of the Monet 

municipality for several years. He was chairman of the Rosetown Health Region. He was chairman of 

the Golden years Lodge at Elrose from 1957 to 1961. He was director of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, vice-president of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association. He was a director of the 

Western Canada Racing Association, a sport which he loved both as a participant and a spectator and he 

was a member of Alcoholics Anonymous for the last 17 years. Mr. Myers was well known and respected 

for his public activities. However, Mr. Speaker, hundreds of people knew him for his unselfish and 

dedicated struggle with the problems of alcoholism. I know that no matter how far away or how late at 

night or how inconvenient for him personally, he would offer his assistance. He has been a lighthouse 

for the AA movement in Saskatchewan. 

 

Perhaps it is unusual for the House to listen to an obituary like this for a private citizen but I don‘t make 

any apology for it. This man‘s family life and his public life illustrate to us all what can be accomplished 

by an individual. They also illustrate what we sometimes seem to forget, that some of the most 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

161 

lasting and the most precious things in our society are not necessarily built by governments with public 

money or even by organizations of people working together, but are sometimes at least the product of an 

individual‘s imagination his dedication to principle, his willingness to sacrifice personal comfort and 

personal profit for something he believes in. Of course other men will come forward to fill the public 

posts that have been vacated by his death, but I say to you again, Mr. Speaker, that he has left a mark 

that will not soon be erased in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): —Mr. Speaker, I found their presentations most 

interesting and most adequate. I had intended to speak on some aspects of the Throne Speech which I 

find most interesting and commendable, but two news storied in last night‘s edition of the Regina 

Leader Post disturbed me so much that I feel I must comment on them, even though the Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy) has already mentioned them. 

 

The first is the report of a speech given to the Regina Campus students by Mr. Len Wallace, 

international representative for the Retail-Wholesale Department Store Union. To set the tone for his 

presentation, Mr. Wallace is reported as saying to the students: 

 

If you win the fees fight, you just got back what you had. Changing the whole method of running this 

place, and changing the kind of people it turns out is a long-term battle and one we will help you with. 

 

I must say that I rather resent a campus of my alma mater being referred to as ‗this place.‘ The reference 

to the kind of people it turns out is really quite interesting and amusing. Here we have the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and the Hon. Members from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) and 

Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) being grouped with the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) and the Hon. Members from Athabasca (Mr. Guy), Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald), Elrose (Mr. Leith), Hanley (Mr. Heggie), Humboldt (Mr. Breker) and Moosomin (Mr. 

Gardner) – that‘s an interesting group. Perhaps Mr. Wallace is a political neutral in spite of some 

indications to the contrary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Referring to The Carillon, the report continues to quote Mr. Wallace as saying: 

 

Give us 25,000 copies and we‘ll get them in the hands of the affiliates of the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labor. 

 

I see that he has managed to do this to some extent, because the 



February 5, 1969 

 

 

162 

Members across the way have been waving them around rather freely all afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — He also warns thought that it is not all roses because he says: 

 

 We may need you to get up early in the morning and come to some plant gates with us. He said he 

 would help raise union money for a provincial edition of The Carillon. 

 

That is the end of the quote from the newspaper. Obviously the Commonwealth newspaper is in for 

some stiff competition. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that some of the students present had the temerity to 

enquire how much union money Mr. Wallace had undertaken to raise for constructive purposes at the 

University. I know that many of his fellow union members would be much more interested in such an 

undertaking. It was also rather a revelation to note the apparent lack of communication which the Leader 

of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and his seatmate (Mr. Blakeney) have with the union people who are 

supposed to be their supporters. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Wallace. 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — The Leader Post report continues to quote Mr. Wallace as saying: 

 

 The only university graduates a union man meets are personnel managers, lawyers against labor union

 people on negotiating teams, and doctors who oppose medicare and try to cut down compensation. 

 

I wonder if some of the friends of the Opposition who are in the community clinics would quite agree 

with that description. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Of course Roy would. 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — The Socialist credibility gap is evidently much greater than we ever had any reason to 

suspect. Perhaps the Hon. Members for Moose Jaw will get together with the Hon. Member for Regina 

North East (Mr. Smishek) and arrange to introduce themselves to their leaders at some opportune time 

during this session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Speaking of the Hon. Members for Regina North East, it is interesting, in a rather 

nauseating way to read the account of his contribution to the recent Regina Campus ‗Teach-in.‘ 



 

February 5, 1969 

 

 

163 

According to a report carried in last night‘s Leader Post, he commended abolition or reform of the 

University Senate. He being a member of that Senate is in great position to contribute to any worthwhile 

reforms of that body. I have never heard that he has done anything of the sort. If his contribution to that 

body‘s deliberations has been as negative as his remarks which were reported in the paper, I would 

recommend perhaps that his resignation from the Senate would be a first step in the reform which he 

suggests. It certainly will be interesting to see how he casts his vote on the Resolution recommending 

student representation of which my friend the Member from Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. 

Charlebois) has given notice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really have no intention of commenting on remarks which bona fide students make 

regarding issues which they feel exist on the campus of our University. However, I just cannot remain 

silent when attempts to gain political capital from their activities are made by the party whose members 

sit opposite. I do have what I hope will be more pleasant remarks to make at a future time and at this 

moment I would ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned 

 

ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE FEBRUARY 7 – FEBRUARY 13 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Provincial Secretary): —I move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Education (Mr. 

McIsaac): 

 

 That when this House adjourns on Friday, February 7, 1969, it do stand adjourned until Thursday, 

 February 13, 1969. 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): —Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask a question. On the Monday, Tuesday and 

Wednesday, 10
th

, 11
th

 and 12
th

, if any of the Members are in, will the Chamber be open so that they 

could work? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Yes, I think so. I am sure there is no problem, it will be available to the Members. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:11 o‘clock p.m. 


