



















































Hansard: February 24, 1969


555 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

15th Day 

 

Monday, February 24, 1969. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Lumsden): — It is my pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you and through you to 

the Members of this Assembly 40 students, junior and senior students from the upgrading classes at Fort 

Qu‟Appelle. They are accompanied here today by their driver, Jimmy Jaques and by their teachers, Mrs. 

Robertson and Miss Kommos. On my behalf and on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. McFarlane) who represents that area, I would like to say a word of welcome. I would like to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that a number of these students in these upgrading classes come from the Pasqua Reserve 

in my constituency and the Muscowpetung Reserve in my constituency. I know that you would want me, 

Sir, to extend your best wishes and the best wishes of all the Members of the Assembly to these students 

as they come here today to observe democracy in action. They have had a very busy day thus far, and 

they have several other visits in the city before they go home. I know that we welcome them and wish 

them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to introduce to you and through you to the 

Hon. Members of this Legislature, a group of grade 12 students from the Blaine Lake School Unit now 

seated in the Speaker‟s gallery. They are accompanied by four teachers from the four high schools. They 

are Mr. Skrupski from Leask, Mr. Morris Cheveldayoff from Marcelin, Mr. Gunderson from Hafford, 

and Mr. Tomchuk from Blaine Lake high school. I want to welcome them to the Legislature on your 

behalf, Sir, and I trust that their presence here will be educational and informative. I hope that their 

return back home is safe. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to welcome a group of 

students from Central Collegiate in my constituency. They are in the west gallery, some 75 in number. 

They are here with their teacher, Mr. Lemon. I would also like to welcome the 28 students from the 

vocational school, Saskatchewan House, Regina. They are here with their teacher. I want to welcome the 

Central Collegiate young men and women here. This school is a great school for sports and for academic 

learning. We hope that they will learn much today with regard to the 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

556 

 

Legislature and the making of our Provincial statutes. The vocational group I must say, Mr. Speaker, are 

a very fine group of young men. I don‟t know if there are any ladies here or not, but I do attend many of 

their functions and I appreciate the opportunity, and I know the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) 

does too. I see he is not here today, but we do welcome them and I hope they will gain much from their 

visit here today. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, many of the students appearing here today from 

the Blaine Lake school unit that have just been introduced by the Hon. Member from Redberry (Mr. 

Michayluk) constituency are also residents of the Shellbrook constituency and I refer particularly from 

the Marcelin and Leask schools. There are probably some of the students as well from the school at 

Blaine Lake that reside in the Shellbrook constituency. To each of these students, Sir, we welcome their 

visit here and we want to extend to them, through you, Mr. Speaker, the good wishes of the Legislature 

both during their visit here as well as on their return trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and 

through you to the other Members of this Assembly a group of approximately 37 students from St. 

Edward school in the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. They are located in the east gallery and I 

understand they are accompanied by Mr. Fisher. I hope that their stay here this afternoon will be 

educational and entertaining and I am sure all Members join me in hoping that they have a safe journey 

back to Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF ALEX HARPER 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Before the Orders of the Day I wish to inform the House of the 

appointment of Chief Alex Harper of the Onion Lake Reserve in Northern Saskatchewan to the Board of 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones. Chief Harper is a young man 44 years of age with a family of 

five. He is a farmer and trapper and a recognized leader in community activities among native people in 

this part of the province. One example of his leadership activity is the important part which he played in 

the establishment of the new community hall opened recently on the Onion Lake Reserve. Chief Harper 

has been Chief of the Onion Lake Band since May of 1968. I am confident that he will have an 

important contribution to make to the Board of Saskatchewan Government Telephones. I think Members 

on both sides of the House will welcome this further step in the Government‟s policy of ensuring that 

our native citizens are represented on all such important bodies. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

557 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

NO INCREASE IN PREMIUM RATES 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have an 

important message for the motorists of Saskatchewan. We are pleased to announce that once again there 

will be no increase in the premium rates for private passenger cars and farm trucks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — One of the most encouraging factors was the reduction in the number of motor vehicle 

deaths this year. This is of major importance when we consider that both the number of drivers and the 

number of vehicles on the road have increased substantially. While accident results cannot at any time 

be considered satisfactory, we are pleased that the stress we have placed upon driving habits is being 

heeded by the motorists to the extent that the increasing trend in automobile accidents was halted in 

1968. Several factors are responsible for continuing the premiums at the present rate. Stiffer penalties 

against impaired drivers have had the desired effect, decreasing the number of fatal and non-fatal 

accidents. The method of surcharging motor vehicle operators found to be fifty per cent or more 

responsible for accidents has also had the desired effects. The surcharge will remain the same for the 

year 1969-1970. If we are to continue with this privileged rate for insurance coverage, we must 

constantly impress on the operators the necessity of defensive driving at all times. We ask you to do 

your part in reducing accidents in the coming year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERLY PAYMENT OF DEBTS 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I have an 

announcement that I know will be of interest to all Hon. Members and everybody in the province. There 

was included in the Throne Speech a proposal to implement an Orderly Payment of Debts Program for 

Saskatchewan. The Government feels that a program in this regard is now warranted and is a logical 

extension of the Consumer Protection Program of the Government. I am pleased to announce, therefore, 

today that on April 1, 1969, Part X of The Bankruptcy Act will come into force in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Orderly Payment of Debts Program will provide a means of relief to those persons who have 

incurred a number of debts and who find themselves in difficulty when it comes to repayment. Credit is 

an economic fact in our society. Credit used wisely creates no difficulties for the buyer of goods and 

services. However, buyers at times over-extend themselves or, may find themselves in a position where 

the meeting of all their 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

558 

 

obligations creates economic hardships. The hardships fall not only on the persons who have received 

credit but also on creditors, who sometimes are not paid or in some cases receive payment in part only. 

 

Under the program a person having a number of small debts may approach the official administering the 

program and request a consolidation of these debts. The official receives particulars of the debts and, 

after notice to creditors of the applicant, decides whether to make an order directing that all debts are 

consolidated. If an order is made, the debtor is required to pay to the official a determined amount each 

month that in turn is paid to creditors on a proportional basis according to the amount of the debt held by 

each creditor. Appeal provisions exist in the program, thereby empowering a court to maintain certain 

judicial control. The program in no way affects the right of creditors who hold security for the amount 

owed to them. We propose, Mr. Speaker, to utilize our court officials and our Mediation Board officials 

throughout the province to administer this program. 

 

I am sure that this Act will prove beneficial both to the creditor and the debtor. I believe that this 

program will take its place with the other dozen or so Acts passed by this Government which form the 

most comprehensive umbrella of citizen‟s and consumer‟s protection legislation of any province in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Steuart (Provincial 

Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. 

Blakeney. 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, several moments ago I had the pleasure of 

introducing to you and to the Hon. Members of the Legislature the grade 12 students from the Blaine 

Lake School Unit, and I inadvertently omitted Mr. Tomchuk. It‟s a pleasure to have you here, Mr. 

Tomchuk. May I take a moment to congratulate the members of the unit board, the principals and all 

those who made it possible for this group to travel from Leask, Marcelin, Blaine Lake and the Hafford 

high schools to be here with us this afternoon. 

 

When I adjourned the debate last Friday, Mr. Speaker, I expressed my concern over the exclusion of 

radio stations CJNB North Battleford and CJSA Lloydminster from the network, together with the fact 

that this Government is not very anxious to continue the broadcasts. The Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) made the Government‟s position abundantly clear in March of 1965 and was reported in the 

press as saying, “House Leader Dave Steuart said in the corridor outside the Assembly 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

559 

that the broadcasts may end another year.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, because the Provincial Treasurer and this Government do not give education top priority, 

taxes because of rising costs of necessity must be borne by the already overburdened taxpayers. Mr. 

Speaker, the property owners of this province are subjected by the Members opposite and particularly by 

the Premier (Mr. Thatcher), to large nine digit figures respecting this Government‟s contribution to 

alleviate the cost of education. What has this kind of talk meant to the property owners? Very little, Mr. 

Speaker. During the last six years of the CCF government, school taxes on property remained almost 

constant. Mr. Speaker, the average school unit mill rate under the CCF Government in 1964 was 31.2 

mills. When this Government, Mr. Speaker, had a hand at tax reductions in 1966 the average mill rate 

rose to 33.8 mills. In 1967 a further increase and the rates rose to 36.7 mills or an average 5.5 mills 

increase. There was a further increase of almost two mills in 1968. If the units held their mill rates 

services were cut by the same amount, Mr. Speaker. The average tax increase for the last six years from 

1959 to 1964 under the CCF Government was only .7 mills, a little over half a mill. The Budget just 

brought down, Mr. Speaker, again demonstrates that top priority of this Government for the year 1969-

70 is not the Government‟s concern with the rising educational costs. An over-all increase of slightly 

over $2 million for operational grants will of necessity force the school taxes to continue in the direction 

established since the election of this tax-cutting Government, and that direct, Mr. Speaker, is up and up 

and up and only up. 

 

Just for the record, Mr. Speaker, let‟s take a look at a few specific areas or school units. In Estevan 

School Unit No. 2, in 1964 the school mill rate was 29.5 mills. In 1968, Mr. Speaker, up to 39 mills or 

an 8.5 mill increase in the Estevan School Unit. In the Melfort School Unit in 1964, 28 mills, in 1967 

after some Liberal tax reductions, and incentive grants, it jumped up to 39 mills and in 1968, Mr. 

Speaker, up to 42 mills, a 14 mill rate increase since the election of this Liberal Government. In the 

Blaine Lake School Unit, Mr. Speaker, where I have the pleasure to be on staff, in 1964, the mill rate 

was 34 mills rural and 40 mills urban. There was a reassessment of the urban and some rural areas. The 

over-all assessment increased by 10 per cent, the rural mill rate went up from 34 mills in 1964 to 40 

mills in 1968, in terms of dollars, Mr. Speaker, almost $75,000 tax increases since the election of these 

tax reducers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the over-all Provincial budgetary revenues have increased from $207 million in the 1964-

65 fiscal year to an estimated $367 million in 1969-70, an increase of $158 million in five years. Mr. 

Speaker, a $158 million increase is only $49 million less than the entire Provincial Budget of 1964-65. 

This large increase in the Budget was squelched by this Government since its election and also last 

year‟s taxes imposed by the present Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). Is it any wonder that the 

taxpayer realizes that this Government 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

560 

 

places its financial emphasis with its philosophy in looking after the interest of their free-enterprise 

friends whom they represent. 

 

What did the Members opposite promise to the voters in 1964-67. Well, Mr. Speaker, let‟s peruse the 

Saskatchewan Liberal of April 10th, 1964. I want the Members to pay careful attention as I quote in 

part, “Find ways of reducing land and property taxes.” Then, further down may I quote again, “Greatly 

reduce taxes on farm land and property.” Then, Mr. Speaker, in 1967, a snap election and a promise of 

more tax relief by this Government. To Ross the Roadbuilder, as my hon. friend from Hanley (Mr. 

Heggie) referred to the Premier, that may be good political strategy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency is mainly rural with some small towns and villages, so that basically the 

small urban communities and businesses are closely tied to the economic well-being of the agricultural 

industry. Hon. Members who have already spoken from this side of the House have presented the 

economic problems besetting our farming people, so that, Mr. Speaker, all that I would like to add at this 

time is that those problems in my constituency are more so compounded not only by damp grain but by 

unharvested, frozen and unsold grain. Large areas in North Central Saskatchewan were hit by an early 

August frost causing severe damage and losses. Many of the fields were left unharvested. Some fields 

were cut for straw fodder only. Mr. Speaker, I have received complaints from farmers whose areas may 

qualify for PFAA payments, that the inspection surveys are slow and drawn-out. 

 

Farmers have unpaid gasoline, grocery and repair bills, and unpaid land taxes because of these delays, 

Mr. Speaker. Many of our businesses, gasoline dealers and retail outlets who have extended credit to 

farmers are being forced almost into ruinous positions. Some of them are receiving goods on a cash on 

delivery basis. This situation is not a healthy one, Mr. Speaker. I am of the opinion that if this 

Government can help and extend assistance to free enterprise industries, so should it extend assistance at 

this critical time to the agricultural industry, this assistance, as in the past, to be shared by the Federal 

and the Provincial Governments, whether it be for the drying of damp grain or assistance to those areas 

where crops are under snow. The farmers at this time, Mr. Speaker, do not know how much of this crop 

they will be able to harvest in the spring and by that time, Mr. Speaker, the situation may become 

appreciably worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Swift Current (Mr. Wood) referred to the Premier‟s comments 

during the session of 1964. I would like to refer to relatively later comments and statements when the 

Premier who as Treasurer brought down the 1967 Budget. In his address he said: 

 

I remind the People of Saskatchewan that we have reduced 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

561 

the sales tax from 5 to 4 per cent, reduced the income charges from 6 to 5 per cent, we have given the 

farmers the privilege of using purple gas in trucks. 

 

At the conclusion of his remarks, Mr. Speaker, he baited the 1967 election hook with the following 

election vote-catching remarks: 

 

This Government feels that the burden of provincial taxpayers is already too high, I am therefore 

proposing no tax increases in the Budget. 

 

This was before the 1967 election, Mr. Speaker. In the 1967 Budget Debate, I referred to that Budget as 

a juicy, spiced-up, healthy financial bird, not the real specimen but an adulterated species contrived to 

deceive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Last year my appraisal of the Budget was justified, Mr. Speaker, as the bringing 

down of last year‟s Budget took the wind out of the Provincial Treasurer and the money out of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any tax reduction was countered by tax increases in other areas. What this Government did 

was merely make a tax shift. Since 1964, the tax reducers opposite have increased taxes so that the 

burden fell most heavily on people least able to carry them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s examine some of these tax increases and their effects on Saskatchewan families. In 

1968 a 38 per cent increase in the hospital and medical care premiums, $20 per family and $10 per 

single self-dependent person. The Government that puts people before politics had the gall to take out 

from the home of the -Saskatchewan families $5,200,000. Last year‟s deterrent fees increased this 

amount by an additional $7.5 million; tobacco tax, automobile premiums increased by an estimated $8 

million; soap and detergents five per cent. I call it, Mr. Speaker, a tax on dirts amounting to one-half 

million dollars. Next, Mr. Speaker, it was the turn for the tax-free purple gas users. The gasoline tax 

went up to 15 cents per gallon for automobile and non-farm truck users. This amounted to 50 per cent of 

the revenue lost by the Treasurer and recooped by this one bold stroke. Mr. Speaker, the $2.5 million 

was the penalty Saskatchewan automobile and non-farm truck drivers had to produce. Hospital tax, new 

tax. Tax on meals, tax on hotels and motels. Telephones, telegraphs, grazing fees up, vital statistics up 

100 per cent. Surcharge on automobile premiums. Liquor prices up. Mr. Speaker, a 40 ounce bottle of 

rye whisky in 1964 was $9, in 1969 it was $10. Sacramental wine up $1.10 per gallon. Scotch whisky up 

65 cents for a 25 ounce bottle and the contents reduced by 1½ ounces. A $3 million tax on the users of 

power. Mr. Speaker, the CCF Government reduced its rate six 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

562 

 

times as corporation profits increased. What does Ross the Builder do? No tax reduction to the 

consumer. Three million used to balance the Treasurer‟s Budget. The end is not yet in sight. In this 

year‟s Budget an estimated $4 million from the power users will go to balance next year‟s Budget. But 

the cruellest cut of them all was the Liberal first, Mr. Speaker, a tax on farm fuel, gasoline and diesel. 

The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), Mr. Speaker, made sure that the farmers must be constantly 

reminded of the blessings the purple gas in farm trucks gave them. To the $2.5 million they already paid 

on automobile gasoline, an additional $8 million was imposed at the time when the farmers in the 

agricultural industry are battling to overcome the farm price squeeze. An additional $12.1 million 

imposed by the increase of the sales tax from four to five per cent. Mr. Speaker, it is roughly estimated 

that a total increase imposed by this free-enterprise, tax-reducing Government has taken from the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers an estimated $80 million or more since its election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because this Government has failed to recognize the need of tax relief for property owners, 

because of rising costs of education, and because it is unwilling to assist the taxpayers, and because of 

the total disregard of the need of assistance for drying of damp grain, I will vote against the motion and 

support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — I welcome the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, of commenting on the 

Government‟s legislation and particularly with respect to what the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

purports to do in this Budget that he has outlined. I must congratulate the Provincial Treasurer for his 

efforts and for his presentation of a very difficult job which I think he did fairly well. But, of course, all 

of us here, Mr. Speaker, recognize the difficulty and certainly the impossibility, for even the best of 

men, even the Provincial Treasurer who doesn‟t range in that category, but no one can make a silk purse 

out of a sow‟s ear, and certainly not the Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the more commentary that one hears, particularly from those who attempt to defend this 

Budget, the more obvious it becomes just how really shallow this Budget is. I am convinced that 

Saskatchewan people are again being voted into a financial fantasy that is equalled only by those fantasy 

budgets which resulted in the tax crash of 1968. It is without doubt that Saskatchewan people will 

appreciate that there are no major tax increases in this 1969 Budget. At least there are no tax increases 

which show in the Budget without a more diligent search of the facts. But in face of these facts, Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest Saskatchewan people had better brace themselves now for the increases in health and 

hospitalization taxes that will come before the end of the year, I think that they should as well prepare 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, to pay for their X-rays 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

563 

and for their physiotherapy and laboratory services, if these services are to be conducted outside of the 

hospital. I suppose that, while Saskatchewan people are still in the mood, Mr. Speaker, that they might 

just as well be prepared to face the municipal and school taxes that will increase undoubtedly from 5 to 

20 mills. This is the direct result of what the Provincial Treasurer chooses to call a balanced or no-tax 

Budget. 

 

But just to show how this Government is already running scared of its own Budget let me refer to an 

incident that occurred in this House on Friday, last. An unprecedented incident that brought the Hon. 

Premier (Mr. Thatcher) rushing into this debate, pushing his backbenchers out of their speaking order 

and for one-half hour flailing the airways in this debate, not about the Treasurer‟s Budget and not about 

the $365 million that it proposed to spend, but a red herring which he calls tax rebates. Then he got up 

and stomped out of the debate hoping to have sufficiently camouflaged the sad and sagging commentary 

of his Provincial Treasurer‟s Budget, hoping at least that he might have confused the issues of the 

Budget. I urge my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, not to get taken in on this sucker bait that has been thrown 

into the debate but rather press on with the issues of this failing Budget, and particularly the issues of 

this stagnating Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, no one could have expected that a $35 to $40 million tax 

increase in 1968 would have lasted only one year even under a Liberal Government. I referred earlier to 

being goaded into a financial fantasy and I am more convinced than ever that this is the current state of 

our existence. The Premier and the Provincial Treasurer and the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane) have paraded in this Legislature and have glibly referred to the approaching disaster in 

agriculture as something, they say, is temporary, something they say is short-term, something which 

they continue to say can be resolved by a diversification of the farmers‟ interests. For anyone to make a 

statement such as this can only emphasize the fact that this Government has lost touch with 

Saskatchewan farmers and with the Saskatchewan farming communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — This increasingly bad situation is made worse by the lack of legislation and by the 

lack of budgetary support for the depreciating root problems of education, problems, Sir, that are not 

only associated with student and teacher unrest, but equally the grim financial problems that face school 

unit boards and municipalities which have already stretched their mill rates to a point of a serious 

backlash. This Government continues to lay fault on the doorsteps of the sick, continues to lay fault on 

the senior citizens and continues to lay fault on the handicapped as the misusers of the health and 

welfare services. In the face 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

564 

 

of this situation it prides itself by saying that it is able to produce the largest Budget in Saskatchewan‟s 

history. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that out of $365 million that Saskatchewan people can and 

Saskatchewan should expect something more than a deterrent tax on the sick. They should expect 

something more than a lower standard of teachers and they should be expecting more than a depreciating 

educational system. I also say they should be expecting something more than economic depression in the 

farming community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I say as well that they should be expecting something more than the constantly 

increasing municipal school taxes. It is true that we should expect something more, but I suggest that our 

expectations are without any real foundation as long as we have this died-in-the-wool philosophy of the 

private motive or the private enterprise system, that system which is so desperately clung to by this 

sinking Liberal ship, the Government of Saskatchewan. Private enterprise policies is a system that is 

outmoded by its own vagaries. It is a political system that is geared to sustaining the rich from the 

pockets of the poor. It is a system that creates poverty and depression in the midst of plenty. I suggest 

that as well it is a system that cultures a smug minority that grows fat on political pork barrels of the 

public treasury  . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: —  . . . or from legislation that is geared to subsidize the corporate elite from the public 

purse. There is more than ample evidence to conclusively demonstrate that what I have said about the 

private sector has full application to the Saskatchewan Liberal party and its Government. It is they, Mr. 

Speaker, who pride themselves as being the epitome of the private enterprise system, and what a false 

pride they have in this regard. So I say that, while a vestige of financial crisis in Saskatchewan 

agriculture and education stands on the very doorstep of our province, the leaders of the Liberal 

Government raid the Saskatchewan taxpayers‟ pockets, not to subsidize the farmers but to subsidize one 

of the United States‟ largest corporate giants in the pulp and pulp manufacturing industry, Parsons and 

Whittemore of the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I suggest that that subsidy alone will cost Saskatchewan people more than they will 

get from all of the renewable resources, the forests, the fisheries and the wildlife, annually as long as 

they maintain that contract. One of the great political pork barrels in Saskatchewan is operated under the 

pious disguise of the Saskatchewan Department of Highways. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

565 

The Minister himself in this House last year admitted that he did build political highways. I suppose 

that, if we take the 29.7 per cent of the current highway budget — and this is the amount that the 

Saskatchewan highway construction cost exceeded the next highest construction cost in Canada for 

1963-66 — you have an $18 million figure which the Provincial Treasurer chooses not to call political 

graft, Liberal party funds or supporter payoffs, or whatever else they may be called. 

 

So I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this deficient Government with its obsessed and defiant leader has not 

only lost touch with the grass roots of its own party but has lost complete touch with the rural and urban 

life of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I say that the Liberal Government is out of touch and out of tune with the people of 

this province, because its legislation does not address itself to the basic issues that are presently 

confronting the Saskatchewan population and consequently will confront all small urban centres in the 

near future. I say this with a considerable amount of justification after a two-week visit into all areas of 

my rural constituency just prior to this Legislature beginning. And I judge, Sir, that my rural 

constituency will not be greatly different from other rural areas of Northern Saskatchewan and perhaps 

many others in mid-central and Southern Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find that there are a growing number of farmers who are unable to pay their power bills. 

Some of them have now up to their third billing, which means that they are nine months in arrears. 

Elevator agents and farm supply centres and merchants and implement dealers tell me that they are 

carrying staggering farm accounts or that they are unable to carry any longer. The inevitable result is the 

repossession of farm goods or machinery or to close the door of the small businessman in the smaller 

urban centres. The inevitable result, of course, is the repossession of farm goods and farm machinery. 

Farm supply people tell me that there are a large number of farmers, even those of the more buoyant and 

the larger type operators, that owe the major part of their fertilizer and chemical accounts dating back to 

1966. 

 

There is evidence of farmers selling and trading their current grain stocks now for as low as one cent a 

pound or 60 cents a bushel for No. 2 and 3 dry wheat and oats and barley on the comparable basis to 

this. Mr. Speaker, these farmers are not doing this because they want to. They are either doing it or they 

face repossession orders. They either do or do not pay their power bills. They either do or do not pay 

their grocery bills. They either do or do not pay their heat bills. And what alternatives do they really 

have? Many have not yet delivered even their unit quotas. So I say that the backbone of Saskatchewan 

economy is being driven into a blackmarket operation that permits the private grain companies and the 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

566 

 

meat packers to make multi-millions of dollars from the Saskatchewan farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — The realistic question to ask is: where is this Liberal private enterprise 

Government? And it is right where you would expect it to be. It is aiding and abetting the grain 

companies and the meat packers by ignoring the Canadian Wheat Board regulations and by ignoring the 

plight of agriculture in this year‟s Budget. No wonder the Premier hotfooted in and out of this Debate in 

order that he might confuse the issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be in my constituency a major shortage of seed grain. Needless to say there are 

no cash reserves in my constituency to obtain this kind of seed in the spring. I see many farmers that 

have taken maximum cash advances on farm-stored grain that will not have sufficient stocks of grain on 

hand to make the full repayment of those orders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not that old nor have I forgotten, or am I that young that I can‟t remember, when it 

took a wagon boxful of wheat to buy an apple boxful of groceries. And it was about that same time 

when those Liberal politicians were driving through our country with a team and sleigh delivering that 

dry, salted codfish and hairy bulk cheese and those dry beans to keep the farming population alive. I 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this Legislature is just not that far removed from passing legislation that will 

in principle do the same thing. This, of course, is the pinnacle of the private enterprise system. This is 

the epitome of the Liberal philosophy. This is what I say is the depression in the midst of plenty or 

survival of the fittest at the expense of the poor. But there is one consolation indeed, that is when the 

private enterprise system reaches this point in time, there is no other place to go but down and out. I say 

that Saskatchewan political history of 1944 will be rewritten in 1971 and for the same basic reasons. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, much has been said about the damp grain in Saskatchewan. However, 

because of the response of the Premier and his Government, it demonstrates the need that much more 

must be said. A simple reduction of Government verbiage and actions in this House emphatically says 

that it is saying to Saskatchewan farmers. “Solve it however you will boys, but damp and poor grain is 

still the farmers‟ problems.” I say this, when the Federal Liberal Government representatives are saying 

that it was partly their fault and the Canadian Wheat Board as well admitting that same situation. While 

it is one thing to get these fellows to admit their mistakes, I suggest the rarity of getting them to accept 

the responsibility for them is indeed much more remote. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

567 

Mr. Speaker, I see that my time has expired. I have other things that I would like to say. However, 

because of the fact that the Government is not supporting Saskatchewan people in its Budget, I must, 

therefore, urge all Members of this House to take stock of the real issues of this Budget and to support 

the amendment and not the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F.K. Radloff (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, today I have been informed by our French Whip that this 

is the day. I do want to say today that I congratulate the Member from Shaunavon (Mr. Larochelle) on 

his appointment and say that he is doing a very excellent job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — One other problem that I am faced with today is that in the press gallery is a man who 

has lived in Nipawin, a man who is an excellent speaker and a man who is also an outstanding 

newspaper man. I am somewhat concerned about what his reaction is going to be to about what I have to 

say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problems that I have outlined are coupled with the critical attitude of the NDP 

Members. They could make this a somewhat difficult day. However, I do not mind the NDP so much if 

they would only discontinue their efforts to have me banished from the Legislature. They have tried 

every trick in the book so far and have failed. Mr. Speaker, I have one consolation and that is that my 

eight majority is more than the number of people that they had at their caucus meeting in the town of 

Carrot River. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — I am told that the NDP members had to scrape the bottom of the barrel so that they 

could even open up the meeting. Many people were so afraid of the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) and 

his beard that they stayed off the street so that they would not be roped into the meeting of the 

presidium. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as one of the men in Carrot River said, the only NDP poor Woodraw — I think he meant 

the Member from Biggar — could find were those that he had planted in a timber board while he was 

Premier of the Province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so much has been accomplished in the northland, the pulp mill at Prince Albert, the 

vegetable plant in Nipawin, the chipboard plant in Hudson Bay and, of course, in the district of Carrot 

River the oiled roads, the housing, bridges, new agricultural lands, that after the caucus meeting the 

Member from Biggar and his gang considered joining the Liberal Government. However, Mr. Speaker, 

it is rumored that the head office in the Kremlin heard about the move and the 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

568 

 

boys were told that Cuba was doing a good job in keeping South America stirred up and that they were 

depending on the Saskatchewan boys to look after the North American end of the revolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Mr. Speaker, who would think that the Members opposite with their sweet smiling 

innocent faces would have such black hearts, revolutionary tendencies and instincts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that over one year‟s grain sales have been lost because of strikes, slow 

downs and interference by NDP manipulations and irresponsible labor support. Mr. Speaker, farm 

people need to be continually aware of NDP plans for the final solution to the farm program. The NDP‟s 

final solution is nationalization of all lands. Several weeks ago NDP young people at a provincial 

convention at Moose Jaw supported the principle of nationalization of all lands. Now I can say that the 

people of Carrot River district know what that means. It was the location of the infamous Smokey Burn 

Co-op farms. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Smokey Burns  . . . 

 

Mr. Radloff: — That is the area where people suffered needless hardship in order that the NDP have the 

opportunity to prove the communal way of life. It is too bad that I do not have more time to talk about 

this venture. I can say that the people of the Nipawin constituency do not want anymore of that type of 

treatment. I can say that that experiment was a complete fiasco. Mr. Speaker, I was back in the 

constituency last weekend and many people, CCF, Tories and Liberals alike asked me to congratulate 

the Saskatchewan Delegation to Ottawa for an excellent job well done. Mr. Speaker, all people feel that 

the Saskatchewan Delegation did an amazingly good job in portraying the feelings and the needs of 

Saskatchewan people to the other people of Canada. Many people also asked me to request Premier 

Thatcher to slow down and take life a little easier. All the people say that we need Ross on the job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — He is doing wonderful work for the people of this province. Mr. Speaker, last Friday 

and today I listened to several long harangues, one from the Member from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) 

and the other from the Member from Redberry (Mr. Michayluk) and I am still trying to figure out 

exactly what they are trying to talk about. I think they are trying to confuse the public on the issues of 

the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with gratification that I speak today 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

569 

in support of the 1969-70 Budget. I am indeed happy to support a Government that can present a 

balanced Budget without major tax increases at a time when other provinces present a much different 

picture, that of deficits. The Provincial Treasurer, the Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) is 

to be congratulated on his sound responsible Budget. I say that the people in Prince Albert are indeed 

fortunate to have a man of this calibre representing their constituency. 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Sit up Dave! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Many peculiar accusations are being made against the Government by NDP people, but 

Premier Thatcher and his Cabinet cannot be accused of lack of action or lack of fiscal responsibility. 

Twenty years of regressive, reactionary Socialist NDP rule now demands sane, sensible, long-overdue 

Government policies, responsible to the people‟s needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Premier Thatcher is receiving much undeserved NDP criticism, criticism for trying to 

make organizations and public leaders recognize their responsibilities to the public and the taxpayer. Mr. 

Speaker, I can say that it hurts the NDP feelings that the vast majority of Saskatchewan taxpayers 

support the Liberal Government in its efforts to hold the line this year. It is an excellent record, five 

consecutive balanced budgets for a new government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Mr. Speaker, it was a Budget Speech outlining the Government‟s sound financial 

program at a time of serious inflation, a program which the NDP Members of the Legislature yell at with 

envy and chagrin. Last week we listened to a tirade desperately trying to pick holes in the Budget. Many 

people say it sounded like sour grapes and one even said that it smelled like sour grapes. As usual the 

Members in Opposition want to consider and promote all their old policies of subjection, regulation, 

persecution and control by trickery. People easily recall when the NDP Government juggled things 

around to fool the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Members in the Opposition are partly responsible, if not fully responsible, for the 

insidious propaganda program being carried on throughout the province and throughout the Dominion, 

propaganda with the avowed purpose of creating chaos, distrust, suspicion of responsible people and 

responsible institutions, propaganda to discourage sound financial progress and good management. NDP 

policies are aimed at destroying the best of our civilization, individual freedom of responsible thought 

and action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, NDP organizers and sympathizers are everywhere becoming integrated into our society. 

They are at every level 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

570 

 

of administration, of our churches, of our schools, universities, labor organizations and government. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, must shoulder increasing responsibility to 

contain this growing threat, dedicated to destroying the morals of our youth, the faith of our fathers and 

the sound foundation of our society. 

 

As Members of this Legislature we have a responsibility to maintain and hold our hard-won freedoms 

and to keep our valued institutions intact and responsible. We must reject the nihilistic notion of the 

irresponsible few that the structure of our society should be destroyed beginning with our universities. 

Mr. Speaker, our universities are intended to broaden and develop the mind, not to blow the mind. I 

commend the Liberal Government for its continued efforts to improve the aims and ideals of our public 

institutions. The Liberal Government‟s deep and serious concern for the individual‟s rights and needs 

are apparent at all levels of this Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget as outlined by the Provincial Treasurer confirms the desire and the 

determination of this Government to recognize the acute problems and provide the answers, answers not 

always as palatable as we would wish but answers that go a long ways toward solving difficult situations 

and conditions. It is my hope that Premier Thatcher and his Cabinet will continue to face up to all 

situations with the same clear foresight and purpose. There will be many difficult days ahead, calling for 

the same clarity and action and decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, industrial development, increasing population and changing approaches to living are 

creating many complex problems. These problems call for new solutions and different answers. I am 

happy that the Premier and his Cabinet have recognized one of the most acute problems of modern 

living — pollution, pollution of the air, water and land. I must congratulate the Government for the 

proposed assistance to cities for the purpose of sewage control and elimination of pollution from our 

most important rivers in the Saskatchewan River system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us have a responsibility to protect our natural resources and to manage our natural 

resources to the maximum possibilities. The efforts of the Government could well be to guide all people 

in planning to control pollution, control for the benefit of our wildlife and for all mankind. I can say that 

there is no room for complacency or satisfaction. We must roll up our sleeves and work hard to meet this 

growing problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today teachers and school trustees alike are making decisions and taking action that could 

be detrimental to the educational progress and stability of our province. Mr. Speaker, we are a civilized 

people and power groups such as teachers and trustees should be able to settle all their disputes, if not by 

mutual agreement at least by arbitration. All citizens alike could suffer from hasty decisions taken in a 

moment of heated argument. There is nothing more certain 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

571 

than the fact in democracy, the maximum benefits for all people can be obtained by debate and 

consultation. In general, the public accepts the fact that good education is expensive and the expense 

must be borne, but it is clear that the public will no longer tolerate unneeded services and extravagance. 

Some of our citizens appear to have developed a philosophy that all they have have to do is call the tune 

and the public will pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has had many affluent years and has made major contributions to education. 

Now that agriculture and economic conditions are not so buoyant and rural taxpayers are hard pressed to 

meet the increasing tax bill, we can be in real trouble if we continue to try and meet all the demands. 

Premier Thatcher and his Cabinet have done everything possible to provide increased grants for 

educational purposes. Mr. Speaker, teachers have benefited from rapidly increasing salaries and vastly 

improved working conditions with many fringe benefits. With Premier Thatcher‟s leadership Provincial 

grants for education have risen from $30 million in 1964 to some $69 million in 1969, more than double 

after only five years of Liberals in office. This fiscal year after drastically paring Government expenses 

and expenditures, Premier Thatcher and his Cabinet are again taking this maximum from Government 

revenue to provide for ever-increasing educational costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — Mr. Speaker, needless to say it would appear that there is not enough money in the kitty 

to meet the extensive financial requests unless the Government resorts to deficit financing or heavy tax 

increases. It is an unfortunate fact of life that a responsible government must give full consideration to 

all the other needs of the citizens. Roads, health welfare, industrial development, agriculture programs, 

they all need a cut of the pie. When the people‟s rights are neglected or trampled on by any group or in 

any way, reaction is bound to set in. I can say that the consequences sometimes can be unjust and 

sometimes extreme. If teachers and trustees are going to maintain their authority and maintain the 

respect of the public, it would be prudent for these people to consider all aspects of their problems when 

they are presented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps it would be well to remind all people of Saskatchewan that there could be no 

consideration of increased demands had it not been for the industrial mining and oil development. 

Development encouraged by special Liberal policies and programs, Saskatchewan‟s continued industrial 

expansion will bring increasing revenues with ever-increasing benefits for patient people, teachers and 

civil servants alike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as one of Saskatchewan‟s northern MLAs and at a time when people are concerned about 

provincial revenues, I should say a word about one of the newest developments or discoveries brought 

about by the Saskatchewan Liberal 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

572 

 

Government‟s Pre-Cambrian incentive program. Premier Thatcher, Minister of Industry and the Hon. 

Alex Cameron, Minister of Mineral Resources deserve the acclaim of Saskatchewan people for this 

initiative and success in promoting the incentive program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — The incentive program has encouraged many prospectors and mining companies to 

take a look at Northern Saskatchewan. During the last few days of November 1968, Gulf Minerals 

Company hit pay dirt in the Wollaston Lake area. Since that time over 160 companies have taken out 

exploration permits, permits covering over 30 million acres and assuring Saskatchewan of a multi-

million dollar work program. If further exploration and drilling substantiate the existence of a major ore 

body it takes little imagination to visualize what will happen to the economy of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past several years, the Government under the leadership of Premier Ross 

Thatcher has done more for the Indian and Metis people than all the past governments. Premier Ross 

Thatcher is to be complimented on his recognition of the serious plight of our long-neglected citizens. 

As announced, a new department of government has been established for the particular purpose of co-

ordinating the efforts of the various government agencies to assist these people to become self-

supporting and independent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Radloff: — There are two Indian reserves in my constituency, Red Earth and Shoal Lake. The 

community of Cumberland House is also adjacent to the Nipawin constituency and I am aware of the 

many new programs and policies being undertaken. A short visit to these communities will soon indicate 

the vast changes in conditions. Power lights, roads, schools, housing and recreational facilities are now 

available to the people. In the case of Cumberland an amazingly successful agriculture development is 

being completed. More and more our Province of Saskatchewan is becoming a land of hope and 

opportunity for the Indian and Metis people. 

 

The Hon. Darrel Heald asked me what I was going to talk about today and I replied the Nipawin 

Constituency. His retort was, “Surely we don‟t have to listen to all that again.” This I have considered, 

however, for the Nipawin Constituency and the welfare of the citizens are important to me. There are 

some problems that need government attention. The people the Nipawin Constituency realize as the 

saying goes, that Rome was not built in a day. The people ask only that they be given consideration 

when it is feasible and possible by the Government. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

573 

I‟m going to briefly state a few things that I would like the Hon. Dave Boldt (Minister of Highways) to 

consider and that is a traffic bridge for Nipawin — he has done some work on this problem; the need for 

complete rebuilding of the Highway 55 from White Fox to Meath Park and the traffic bridge south of the 

town of Carrot River, which is now inadequate for the traffic. Mr. Speaker, the citizens of the Nipawin 

Constituency welcome the many visits of the Premier and Cabinet Ministers to the constituency. 

Councillors, trustees, and Chamber of Commerce and Board of Trade members appreciate the co-

operation and the concern of the Members of the Government regarding their requests. The citizens of 

Nipawin support the Saskatchewan Government in its work and efforts to build a better province with 

greater rewards for all people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the larger new comprehensive school under construction in Nipawin promises many 

opportunities and rewards for the young men and women who will apply themselves. All Saskatchewan 

will benefit from the completion of the highway outlet to The Pas, Manitoba from Carrot River. This 

outlet will provide entrance to the large market of new mining communities and to the shipping facilities 

of the Port of Churchill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the wish of the people of my constituency from the town of Snowden to the Shoal 

Lake Reserve that I should support and vote for the motion and against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, it is a great privilege for me to speak in this 

debate and to present to the Legislature a detailed $60 million highway program for the next fiscal year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The early spring season, the partially wet summer, the above-normal rainfall in the fall 

and the extremely cold winter has made the 1968-69 fiscal year a very challenging one for the 

Department of Highways. Despite all the advantages and disadvantages I am pleased to report that the 

overall objective set in the spring of 1968 has been met. I want to give credit to the Department officials 

who are responsible for the various branches within the Department for the administration and 

supervision and to every individual in the Department who assisted in the maintenance of our highway 

system and for the completion of the 1968 program. There must also credit be given to the private 

contractor, who at times was forced to work under extremely difficult conditions. The 1968 program and 

budget was the largest ever experienced by the Department of Highways. It was part of a fulfilment of a 

commitment made to the electorate that this Liberal Government would spend $250 million on our 

highways in its present term of office. This year‟s Budget is again directed towards that end and is an 

indication that the commitment will be met. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

574 

 

Despite the rumblings from the Opposition in the last session that the Budget be cut by $20 million, I 

have repeated requests from them and from representatives from their constituencies, particularly 

numerous municipal delegations that they want better highways in their respective communities. 

Ironically, not one delegation from the Socialist constituencies was ever accompanied by the Socialist 

Member. They would have been embarrassed to ask for assistance in the present of their sitting Member 

who advocated no highway program but social aid hand-outs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record of accomplishments of the Department of Highways in the last four years is a 

proud one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — We have reconstructed a good number of old highways; we have constructed a 

considerable mileage of new highways, particularly related to our potash mines and the pulp mill; and 

we have added to our four-lane projects on No. 1 Highway, with the result that today we have a total 

mileage system of 10,371 miles as compared to 8,712 miles in April of 1964. Of this mileage, 64 per 

cent is dust-free and only 36 per cent or 3,713 miles are gravelled highways. Paved roads represent 

2,477 miles or 24 per cent and oil-treated highways represent 4,116 miles or 40 per cent of the total 

mileage. Needless to say, about 90 per cent of the highway-travelled miles are now on dust-free roads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The Highway Department since 1964 has had a very active bridge building program. Five 

major bridges have been constructed since we took office. About two and one-half years ago the South 

Saskatchewan Landing Bridge was officially opened; then following were the Idylwyld Freeway Bridge 

in Saskatoon, The Battlefords Bridge, the Deer Creek Bridge and the Gabriel‟s Bridge east of Rosthern. 

A start will be made on another bridge this year. The site will be announced later in my report. 

 

The Department of Highways has made a concerted effort to improve the safety of the existing 

Provincial highway system. More than $500,000 will be spent on highway safety improvements this 

year on various projects to improve alignment and reliability, preceding oil treatment and to remove 

accident-prone railway crossings. The Opposition has at times criticized the maintenance of our 

highways, but let me inform this House that in 1963-64, the last year in office when they were the 

Government, $6.6 million were voted for highway maintenance as compared to $10.6 million last year. 

Our highways compare very favorably with any on the North American Continent. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

575 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — To complement our highway safety program we have now completed 23 highway 

interchanges of which 18 were financed by the Province, and five interchanges in Saskatoon were 

constructed on a cost-shared basis. Two interchanges are presently under construction in the city of 

Regina, also on a shared-cost basis. Our highway safety program is paying off. The Government and a 

large number of citizens have expressed a deep concern regarding the number of vehicle accidents in our 

province and the amount of the funds being paid out under The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. As 

Minister in charge of both Highways and Insurance I have repeatedly warned our motorists to exercise 

extreme caution on our highways. I am pleased to report that, in spite of many more miles travelled on 

our highways, accidents on our highways represent only 10 per cent of all accidents as reported by 

police files, while 32.5 per cent of all accidents occur on our rural roads other than highways, and 57.5 

per cent or more than half the accidents occur in our cities, towns and villages, with Regina and 

Saskatoon the greatest offenders. If the citizens of Regina would elect a Mayor instead of a politician 

who would tend to business and clean up our streets, I might have been able to announce a reduction in 

the insurance rates this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — When we come into office in 1964 a research team reported that we had inherited a 

highways system that would take us 20 years to build into a modern system. The building of modern 

bridges, wider grades and wider driving lanes, a four-laned highways, interchanges and clover-leafs, all 

have proven to us that these expenditures have saved lives and avoided accidents, and yet we are 

accused of spending too much money on highways and putting dollars before people. I maintain that the 

improvement of our highway system is a very worthwhile investment when considering human and 

economic values. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The year 1968 saw the completion of a number of major projects, and the capacity 

crowds that showed up at some of our official openings is a sure indication that the people of 

Saskatchewan would want us to continue a vigorous highway program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This past year we witnessed the completion of the Deer Creek and Gabriel‟s Bridges, No. 

5 Highway from Saskatoon to the Borden Bridge, the four-laned freeway from Saskatoon to south of 

Dundurn, the four-laned freeway through Swift Current, 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

576 

 

the cut-off of No. 10 Highway from Melville to Yorkton, the paving of No. 5 Highway from Kamsack to 

Canora, and numerous other large and smaller projects commenced which will be completed this year. 

 

The Department officials and I will be meeting shortly with the Hon. Gordon Taylor and his officials to 

discuss the possibility of providing a highway to Uranium City. No decision has been made to date of a 

possible route to follow. There are some alternatives and the one that will be discussed at this meeting is 

the possibility of a route to the west of Uranium City. This would involve participation of the Alberta 

and the Federal and the Saskatchewan Governments. An all-Saskatchewan route is also being studied. 

Regardless of the route followed, a highway for Uranium City will involve millions of dollars. We will 

be very careful where the tax dollar will go. 

 

The recent mineral interest in the Wollaston Lake area makes it apparent that a highway could be in 

demand for that area. At present we are moving ahead rapidly on Highway 102 to Reindeer Lake. When 

this connection is completed, winter access will be possible to the mining area west of Wollaston Lake. 

The Government will do everything possible, should mines be developed in that area, to make it possible 

that business supplies can be obtained from Saskatchewan centres. 

 

Because of the high cost involved in constructing highways through the Pre-Cambrian Shield, 

consideration must be given to providing alternative service immediately, if required, such as providing 

landing strips in the north, adjacent to a highway. 

 

The present Government, through its incentive program, has revolutionized Northern Saskatchewan and 

we will not shirk our responsibility of providing transportation facilities when warranted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — We will continue our vigorous program of four-laning No. 1 Highway between Moose 

Jaw and Swift Current. This portion should be completed in the next two or three years and then we will 

proceed eastward from Balgonie to the Manitoba border. 

 

The grading and paving of the new two-lane facility between Lumsden and Dundurn should be 

completed in the next two or three years. We would then commence the rebuilding of the existing lanes 

to provide a four-lane expressway between Regina and Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Highway No. 14 east of Saskatoon to the Manitoba border has become a very important 

highway to the mining industries that have been established along this route since we took office. The 

next two or three years will see the completion 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

577 

of the re-grading and paving of this highway from the Manitoba border to Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Saskatchewan will then have another major route across the province. Work will also 

begin this year on Highway No. 14 in the Wilkie area. The Government and Department consider 

Highway 102 a very important route to our industrial development in the North, and an all-out effort will 

be made to push this roadway through to Reindeer Lake. 

 

I stated earlier that I would announce the start of a new bridge this year. Aside from this one, the 

Department has under consideration two other major bridges which will be well under way within the 

next two years. One will be located on the South Saskatchewan River, and the other in Northern 

Saskatchewan. Incidentally, for the Members opposite, I would like to inform them that none of these 

bridges will be built in the Rosthern constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Now for the benefit of the Members I would like to outline in detail the projects that are 

within this year‟s Budget. 

 

On Highway No. 1, we will complete the resurfacing from Wapella to Percival; paving the access road 

from 9th Avenue North in Regina to the Inland Cement plant, another one of our industries that we got 

in our province; paving and completion of grading from Boharm to Mortlach; grading from Rush Lake 

to Swift Current, including a railway overpass; completion of paving from Swift Current to No. 32 

Highway; and the interchange at No. 32 Highway. 

 

On Highway No. 2, resurfacing from No. 14 Highway to the junction of No. 5 Highway; completion of 

paving from Spruce Home to Waskesiu Junction; completion of grading and gravelling west and north 

of Montreal Lake; oiling from Holdfast to No. 2 Highway; and oiling from No. 2 Highway to Mossbank. 

 

Highway No. 3, paving from Hudson Bay to Veillardville; the commencement of a bridge and this is the 

major bridge that will be in our program this year. It will be between Prince Albert and Birch Hills by 

re-routing No. 3 Highway or shortcutting No. 3 Highway into the city of Prince Albert. The completion 

of oiling from Spiritwood to Glaslyn; grading and gravelling from Bolney to Deer Creek and oiling near 

Paradise Hill; paving from Junction No. 3 Highway to Star City. This is a city or a town that was 

bypassed by a highway under the former Government‟s Minister of Highways from Melfort-Tisdale 

(Mr. Willis). This Government sees the need for a highway connection through the town of Star City 

and we are rectifying that situation. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

578 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No. 4 Highway, the grading and gravelling of the Swift Current bypass; completion of 

grading and gravelling from Midnight Lake to south of Meadow Lake; the grading and paving from No. 

304 Highway to Meadow Lake and the oiling from No. 55 Highway to Dorintosh. 

 

Highway No. 5, the completion and paving from Kamsack to Canora; completion of grading and dust 

control from Wadena to Watson; and the oiling from No. 5 Highway to Bruno. 

 

Highway No. 6, completion of grading and gravelling from Ceylon to No. 13 Highway; resurfacing 

Regina to twelve miles south; seal coating south of Dafoe; paving and completion of grading of service 

roads at Melfort and resurfacing from Silver Park to Melfort. 

 

Highway No. 7, the grading and paving from Vanscoy to Delisle; completion of grading and paving 

from Harris to Rosetown; the grading and gravelling of service roads at Kindersley and the oiling from 

Brock to No. 7 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 8, oiling from the U.S. Border to No. 13 Highway; and oiling from Churchbridge to 

Wroxton. 

 

Highway No. 9, paving from the South Junction No. 13 Highway to south Junction No. 16 Highway; 

grading and paving from Canora to Stenen; and the grading from Hudson Bay to the south. 

 

Highway No. 10, the grading and gravelling from Melville to Duff. 

 

Highway No. 11, spot resurfacing from Regina to Lumsden; grading and paving of old lanes from 

Lumsden to new Junction No. 54 Highway; the completion of paving from Bethune to Chamberlain; 

grading from Chamberlain to Davidson; commencement of paving from Davidson towards Girvin; the 

completion of grading and paving from Hanley to Dundurn; completion of Idylwyld Drive Freeway on 

the north side of Saskatoon; paving from Saskatoon to Rosthern. 

 

Highway No. 13, paving from Carlyle to Arcola; resurfacing from Griffin to Weyburn; completion of 

oiling from Cadillac to No. 37 Highway; grading and gravelling from Shaunavon to Eastend; oiling from 

Robsart to No. 21 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 14, this is a very important highway and we are spending many thousands of dollars on it, 

the completion of grading and gravelling from Saltcoats to Yorkton; the paving from Yorkton to 

Springside; the completion of grading and gravelling from Orcadia to Springside; the grading and 

gravelling from Springside to Insinger; the oiling service road at Wynyard; completion of paving from 

Wynyard to Dafoe; completion of grading and paving from Lanigan to No. 2 Highway; the grading from 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

579 

No. 2 Highway to Clavet; the completion of paving access roads to cement plant at Floral; the 

commencement of grading from Wilkie to Unity; oiling from Scott to No. 14 Highway; and the 

completion of another one of our access roads to the Alwinsal potash mine. 

 

Highway No. 15, grading and gravelling from Broderick to west of Outlook. 

 

Highway No. 17, paving from Lloydminster to No. 3 Highway. Perhaps the NDPs would like me to 

delete this one. This is in the Cutknife constituency. 

 

Highway No. 18, resurfacing from Manitoba boundary to No. 8 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 19, oiling from No. 43 Highway to Hodgeville; completion of oiling from Chaplin to 

Central Butte. 

 

Highway No. 20, completion of grading and gravelling from Humboldt to Fulda. 

 

Highway No. 21, oiling from No. 13 Highway to Cypress Hills Provincial Park. 

 

Highway No. 22, paving and completion of grading from No. 8 Highway to Esterhazy. 

 

Highway No. 23, oiling from Chelan to Crooked River. 

 

Highway No. 26, oiling from St. Walburg to Loon Lake and a bridge over Beaver River plus grading 

and gravelling of approaches. 

 

Highway No. 27, completion of oiling from No. 2 Highway to Aberdeen. 

 

Highway No. 30, oiling from No. 30 Highway to Coleville. 

 

Highway No. 31, oiling from Stranraer to No. 30 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 32, grading and gravelling from No. 1 Highway to Success. 

 

Highway No. 35, grading and gravelling from Colgate to Weyburn; oiling from Francis to Qu‟Appelle; 

commencement of grading from Wadena to No. 49 Highway; and resurfacing Tisdale north. 

 

Highway No. 36, oiling from Coronach to Willowbunch. 

 

Highway No. 37, oiling at Climax. 

 

Highway No. 39, oiling service roads at Weyburn and the completion of the paving from Weyburn to 

Yellow Grass; grading and resurfacing from Yellow Grass to Ibsen; the completion of 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

580 

 

oiling from Corinne to Junction No. 339 and paving from No. 1 Highway to Junction No. 339 on 39 

Highway. 

 

Highway No. 40, oiling from Battleford to Wilbert. This is another road we are doing in a NDP 

constituency and I wonder whether they would want me to delete this project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Grading and gravelling from east of Neilburg to Marsden and the completion of grading 

from Marsden to Alberta border. 

 

Highway No. 41, grading and gravelling from Aberdeen to Saskatoon. This Highway No. 41 is a 

completely new road and is a start of the Wakaw cut-off. 

 

Highway No. 42, oiling from Central Butte to Riverhurst. 

 

Highway No. 44, completion of oiling from Dinsmore to Elrose. 

 

Highway 45, completion of oiling from Birsay north to No. 345 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 49, oiling from Preeceville to Okla and the completion of grading and gravelling from 

Okla to Kelvington. 

 

Highway No. 54, grading and gravelling from No. 11 Highway to the Regina Beach. 

 

Highway No. 55, paving from Meath Park to the pulp mill; grading from four miles east of Meadow 

Lake to Meadow Lake; paving from east of Meadow Lake to west Junction No. 4 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 102, grading near McLennan Lake. 

 

Highway No. 120, completion of grading from Meath Park to Candle Lake. 

 

Highway No. 163, grading from No. 109 Highway to 9 miles west, the completion of grading and 

gravelling from No. 23 Highway to Smokey Burn. 

 

Highway No. 209, paving at Kenosee and Junction No. 9 to the camp grounds. 

 

Highway No. 264, completion of paving from No. 2 Highway to the Waskesiu Townsite. 

 

Highway No. 319, oiling from Ferland to No. 19 Highway. 

 

Highway No. 332, grading and gravelling four miles west of No. 32 Highway. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

581 

Highway No. 361, oiling from Lampman to No. 47 Highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the program that we will try and complete this year. I must apologize that there will 

be perhaps some of these projects that were announced last year, but due to the tough season that we had 

they will be finished and completed this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, the other day the Opposition, the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) again tried 

to paint a picture of gloom and doom as to the affairs of the Government and the effect it has on the 

Province. A year go, Mr. Speaker, he peddled the same bunk. Only a lawyer capable of speaking at great 

lengths and say nothing can do this. Last year it took him two hours and 40 minutes to peddle his 

garbage. This year he re-read his speech and was able to do it in one hour and 40 minutes. I only want to 

make one comment on his remarks which related to priorities. He stated that percentage-wise, 

Saskatchewan spent more money on highways than any other province in Canada. Is it any wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, that we do? For 20 years they shortchanged the Highway Department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Why shouldn‟t we spend more money than any other province because we have 30 per 

cent of all roadways in Canada. 

 

I accused the Socialists last year of spreading hate, deliberate untruths during the last election. 

Apparently it has registered with some of the rank and file members of their party. I would like to 

remind this House of some of the conclusions formed by some of its members when reporting to their 

convention last summer. And I am referring to one gentleman, called Rod Thompson, NDP Member of 

Parliament for Battleford-Kindersley, who had this to say when speaking on a panel on publicity and 

propaganda. This was the way it was reported in the paper and they admit they‟ve got some propaganda 

going. He said this, the Leader Post reports him on July 20, 1968: 

 

We‟ve been very, very negative as people in the last few years. 

 

Here is one of their own sheep telling them they are negative. And I want to agree 100 per cent. Nothing 

positive has come from them since 1964. Mr. Thompson goes on to say in this report that a Commission 

— and I suppose he means a public opinion poll put out by the NDP — had made a survey which 

indicated many people consider the Saskatchewan NDP to be “old, self-righteous and smug.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

582 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This was an NDP. He goes on to say and I quote: 

 

We should leave the Liberals alone. 

 

The Saskatchewan Liberals had taken the right tack, Mr. Thompson said. He went on to say: 

 

Premier Thatcher promised to do something positive. He promised to clean up Socialist stagnation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — He goes on to say: 

 

He may have been wrong, but at least he was going to do something. He was positive. 

 

These were the words of Mr. Thompson. And he went on to say: 

 

We should be selling something. We should be promising something constructive, even if it‟s just 

removing Ross Thatcher. 

 

Well, this is no revelation, Mr. Speaker. We have known for 25 years that the NDP were and are feeble 

minded, self-righteous, sick of heart and mind, do-gooders and in no position to give positive thinking, 

let alone positive government. Oh they must have had quite a lively panel there as the news report goes 

on to say: 

 

Another panellist picked up the spirit and said Mayor Henry Baker had refused to give one-minute 

television commercials for the NDP during the Federal campaign because he was afraid it might 

damage him locally. 

 

Here we have fence-riding Henry again. 

 

A Regina schoolteacher got into the thick of it, and in the discussions as reported in the Leader Post, he 

said: 

 

95 per cent of Commonwealth subscribers never read it. It‟s good doormat material. 

 

Well, we‟ve known right along it‟s a real filthy rag and I wouldn‟t even want to claim it as cleaning 

material. 

 

Now, after this conference a new movement was about to begin. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) grew a beard, and many of his followers were alarmed that he might want to join the Hippie-

Yippie Movement. But he took to the hills. After some weeks in the wilderness and some meditation, he 

really got confused. Believing he represented Moses, he came down from the Mount with a 10-point 

program on how to solve the damp grain problem. Prayers were said by his caucus members and New 

Year‟s resolutions made by the hundreds of Socialist believers, hoping 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

583 

that their Leader would find himself before they would find him in Yorkville. I am glad the beard is off, 

but I am still bewildered as to what he tried to prove. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to note that very little has been said about the last year‟s $60 million 

Highway budget. I suppose, after last year‟s session, when the Members returned to their constituencies, 

they were taken over the coals by the electors for criticizing the Highway Budget. 

 

You will recall that I asked for highway project deletions from their constituencies if they felt we were 

spending too much on highways. Not one Opposition Member indicated to me that the project in his 

constituency should be deleted or postponed. Here again they were real hypocrites. During the course of 

the summer I received letters from the NDP MLAs asking for more roads. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East Cumberland): —    that not a single Member in this House 

had asked the Minister last year to remove a project? I asked in this House that you remove a project 

from the Pulp Mill to Spruce Home. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I told you then that wasn‟t your road! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You said the same thing last year, “Not in your constituency.” He knows better. 

He doesn‟t know the Province of Saskatchewan, he doesn‟t know his constituency. He doesn‟t know 

what he is talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Withdraw, withdraw! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am asking the Minister to withdraw that statement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I said during the course of the summer I received numerous letters from NDP MLAs 

asking for more roads or to hurry up some projects that were announced. Some Opposition Members 

were requesting more compensation for individuals, for the right-of-way that we had offered, which 

would have further increased the cost of constructing highways. Here in the Legislature they talked 

about the increased cost of highway construction and when they get back to their constituency they want 

more roads, more compensation for right-of-way and more expenditures for maintenance. When it 

comes to highways, Mr. Speaker, the NDP Members have completely ignored the facts, they don‟t tell 

the truth, and cling to premeditated dishonesty. What 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

584 

 

else, what else is happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that could tend to increase our costs? 

 

Unqualified land appraisers are taking Saskatchewan farmers for an expensive ride when it comes to 

selling right-of-ways needed to proceed with road building projects. The land appraisers operate under 

the name of Farm Surface Rights Consultants Ltd., which are retained as consultants by the 

Saskatchewan Farmers Union. We all know, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan Farmers Union and the 

NDP are bed-partners. As soon as a highway project is announced and our surveyors and our negotiators 

are sent out to pick up the right-of-way, the Farmers Union gets on the scene sending out these 

consultants and asking farmers to hold out for exorbitant prices, as much as four to five times the actual 

value. These consultants request an initial retainer fee of $100. This supposedly covers the land 

appraisal. Then real cost of acting on behalf of the farmer and possibly court action begins. These 

consultants acting on behalf of the Saskatchewan Farmers Union are not qualified as appraisers by the 

Appraisal Institute of Canada. In fact they are not even members of the Institute. A number of farmers 

are already regretting their decision to retain these appraisers. In spite of all this agitation by the NDP 

and the Saskatchewan Farmers Union, over 95 per cent of the agreements are settled. 

 

I want to warn the farmers of Saskatchewan to stay clear of these consultants who are urged upon you 

by the Saskatchewan Farmers Union and the Socialists, just to embarrass the Department. These 

hypocrites have the nerve to come out and state that the Department of Highways is wasting public 

funds! 

 

We admit, Mr. Speaker, that costs have gone up since we took office. So have wages, teachers‟ salaries, 

health and welfare costs. When we took office there was hardly any activity in highway construction, 

and if Saskatchewan was to get moving, large sums of money had to be spent immediately. The review 

made by Highway personnel, which was set up under the NDP when they were the Government, 

indicated that we are 15 years behind in highway construction. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — That far eh! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The NDP would have done nothing to promote industries, such as the pulp mill, potash, 

oil and minerals, all which require roads and we intend to build them for these industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might at this time inform the House that road construction has gone down since 1967, 

1968 and I am sure that this will take the sting out of the NDP. Earth excavation per cubic yard has 

decreased by 23 per cent over last year. Bituminous surface course, less haul per ton, has decreased by 

13.6 per cent. Base course, less haul per ton by 4.5 per cent. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

585 

The sub-base course, less haul per ton, by 9.2 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Never heard of it! 

 

An Hon. Member: — You were right all the time. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You can‟t take it, eh! It is no secret that contractors find competition extremely keen and 

there will be some who will find financing difficult. However, we had a difficult year and I hope the 

contractors will have a better year next year. If they do, the Department will also have a good year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about our students at the universities. I am convinced that 

95 per cent of them are good, respectable, hard-working individuals, but the 5 per cent that cause all the 

problems must be a real concern, not only to the Government and the Board of Governors, but to every 

sensible taxpayer in the province. 

 

Why is it that this 5 per cent get all the publicity, when a good number of the press, radio and television 

reporters are the same kind of kooks as those who cause all the problems on the campus. Until the news 

media gets rid of these punks we are in for trouble. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — That‟s a slur on the press! 

 

Mr. Boldt: —The editor of The Commonwealth is one of them! Let us and them talk about the positive 

students, the students that have a genuine desire to study, to accomplish and to serve this nation upon 

completion of their studies. It is the duty of the Government and the citizens of Saskatchewan to support 

the Board of Governors, the President and the faculty, where genuine sincerity of administration and 

conduct of the campuses is shown. I believe we have such a Board of Governors and a president who 

believes in this principle, and they merit our support. 

 

It must be made clear to students when registering for admission that riots, take-over of buildings, 

marches, burning of campus buildings and dissident students demanding wholesale resignation of 

president and faculty, will not be tolerated by the Board of Governors and its president. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — It doesn‟t exist in Saskatchewan! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — You can speak later. I‟m speaking now. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I‟m going to! 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

586 

 

Mr. Boldt: — In my judgment, as stated by a president of an American University recently, those 

students who would destroy the educational institutions which their fathers and mothers and Canadian 

people have provided for them should be deprived of their Canadian citizenship and should hereafter be 

men without a country. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why don‟t you just shoot them! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about the damp grain. As a farmer, I would like 

to say, by experience that what we have seen in the last couple of months, that the NDP think this is a 

big issue, where they can capitalize on the farm vote. 

 

The Socialists to your left would want the two senior governments to give outright grants to the farmer 

to dry his grain. The Saskatchewan young NDP have a different idea. At their recent convention they 

voted to press for the nationalization of all farm lands in Canada, to decrease investment currently 

required to operate an economical farm unit. Not only that, this is only half of what they want. The 

resolution has never really been read in full. Not only do they want to socialize the farming industry, but 

they also passed a resolution to press for government action to improve the farmer‟s position by 

controllers of his input and output markets. They want to go all the way. Government-owned and 

Government-operated farms. Exactly, Mr. Speaker, what the Communists are doing today in Russia. If 

this were to happen we would be importing wheat in Canada inside of two or three years after the 

government takeover. 

 

Many farmers in this province have thousands of bushels of grain in storage. Much of it is dry from the 

year before. Many of these farmers have other sources of income than just wheat. Why should the 

Government give me a cash grant to dry my damp grain, if I had some on hand? But, Mr. Speaker, this 

is always Socialistic thinking. Their philosophy is, when a man is in trouble, the easiest way to get rid of 

him is to give him a cheque. That‟s the way Sandy Nicholson operated the Welfare Department. First 

come, first served and look what a mess he left when we took over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I believe the farmers of this province are capable of looking after their own affairs 

without too much government interference and they don‟t want social aid. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Kick them when they are down! 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

587 

Mr. Boldt: — They are too proud for that. The Member from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) shouldn‟t 

judge the majority of the farmers by his own farming. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — 60 cents a bushel. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — My constituency has perhaps as much damp grain as anywhere in the province, not one 

farmer has written to me so far for any assistance whatsoever. How many letters have you got? 

 

The NDP have tried in vain to stir up the farmer against the Government, but have utterly failed. The 

farmers of Saskatchewan know the record of the NDP party with the labor bosses when it comes to 

strikes affecting the movement of grain. The farmer is a free enterpriser and will remain so, and there is 

no need for the NDP to shed their communistic tears over them. They will manage without your 

interference and your sob stories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) has done a marvellous job in presenting a 

balanced Budget. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Presenting what! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This is an accomplishment! You don‟t know what a balanced budget is, you‟ve been 

deficit farming. You told us here a few minutes ago you were deficit farming all your life. If Sandy 

Nicholson was on this side, he‟d give you welfare. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Cash payments! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This is an accomplishment that few provinces will be able to compete with. I am 

confident that with a few more wheat sales, a few more oil wells, or another mine development or two, I 

might get the few extra dollars to spend on highways than what we will be voting for, and I might be 

prepared to spend it in an NDP constituency. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Very thoughtful! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Since 1964 the Socialists have tried to get support from the public on various issues, but 

have utterly failed. For five years they have tried to arouse support claiming that we are selling 

Saskatchewan short. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Why weren‟t you here instead of there in the last election? 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

588 

 

They are claiming that we are selling Saskatchewan short, Liberals place dollars before people, they 

said, the Liberals are against the poor. They criticized our work for relief under a Liberal Government. 

They shouted that this is the way the Liberals will do it. Last year their slogan was, “Liberals tax the 

sick.” This year they have forgotten about that slogan to a good degree and they say, “damp grain.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Liberals tax the sick. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What is that part about lawyers again! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Yes, I said here, while the Member wasn‟t in, that only a lawyer was capable of speaking 

an hour and a half and saying nothing! 

 

An Hon. Member: — He‟s talking to the Attorney General! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — The other day, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) talked 

about an ailing and a failing Government. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that they are the spent force. They 

are a tired group. They are old and sometimes even unshaven. Mr. Speaker, they are damper than the 

farmers‟ grain. Their party is in need of good airing and drying facilities. They are in need of a new 

leader, a new front row, and a new program before they can expect to get any reaction from the public. 

Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in supporting the main motion and not the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise in the debate I can‟t help but smile when I 

look at the Hon. Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), he is such a cheerful chap. It‟s a good thing he is 

over there, because he lifts a little of the sadness on our part after we are forced to listen to the kind of 

diatribe that we just heard from that side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I absolutely would not at any time be dragged into this kind of debate and even attempt to 

try to answer the kind of tripe and filth that the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) just peddled in this 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year the Budget was brought down on a Friday, that is now the famous or infamous 

„Black Friday‟ of 1968. This year this Thatcher Liberal Government, and last year as well, had to face 

the moment of truth with a crushing $35 millions of tax increases placed on the shoulders of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

An Hon. Member: — $37  . . . 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

589 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, $37 it will be this year, or it might be closer to $40 this year, Davy! 

 

Taxpayers had been told by Liberal speakers during the snap election of 1967 just a few weeks before 

that Saskatchewan had never been so prosperous, and that we had never had it so good. Their battle cry 

was, “Keep things moving in the new Saskatchewan.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Backwards! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, backwards, and down, down and out! Well, we found out how they were moving 

last year, when the Premier admitted he couldn‟t hack it and turned the Provincial Treasury over to the 

loquacious little leprechaun from Prince Albert, hoping that he could no doubt bring some magic out of 

his little black bag. But there was no magic. There was no way that the Liberal party could cover up the 

truth any longer. They could not hide the fact that they had been improvident, wasteful and extravagant. 

They could not hide the fact that the bounteous treasury they had inherited had been stripped in three 

short years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — So last year we had the Black Budget and Black Friday and the people of 

Saskatchewan knew the truth about taxes, and the truth about Thatcher, or taxer. People are now 

referring to him in other Provinces as Premier Taxer. They aren‟t spelling it right anymore. 

 

Thirty-five million dollars of new taxes placed on the backs of Saskatchewan taxpayers who had been 

promised in 1964 that, if a Liberal Government was elected, it would cut taxes, promises, by a Leader 

whose battle-cry was that the people of Saskatchewan are the highest taxed anywhere in Canada. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, you can say one thing about the Premier, it wasn‟t true then, but he sure made an honest 

woman of himself since. It is certainly the truth today. Let us not forget, when we consider this year‟s 

Budget, that last year‟s $35 million chicken is still on the roost and it‟s got a lot fatter! It‟s got a lot 

bigger! People of Saskatchewan will pay an extra $35 million again this year, plus the increases that are 

quite natural, in an inflated Liberal economy. 

 

Over the four year period, or maybe more, until Homecoming 1971 at least, the people of Saskatchewan 

will pay some $150 million because of the Budget that was brought down last year, in spite of the 

mumble jumble Budget that is being introduced this year. Even the press seem to have been gulled on it, 

to swallow the trash and even they talk about a balanced Budget. Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 

from the truth. I propose to point out to this House that this cry-baby Budget of 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

590 

 

1969 is another cruel hoax on the people of Saskatchewan. Last year we had Black Friday, this year we 

have Tearful Tuesday. 

 

I propose to prove to this House that this Government has been guilty of extravagance and waste, and 

guilty of placing a continually greater burden of taxation on the ordinary taxpayer and that their 

priorities continue to be wrong. I will show that through these unhappy five years the Liberal 

Government has been ruling Saskatchewan, millions of dollars have been drained off into the pockets of 

the wealthy, while the ordinary businessman, farming and working people have been forced to cough up 

more and more tax dollars. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Real nice, pour it on! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — If you took my constituency and a small area around The Battlefords  . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They will never take it! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — No, they won‟t, that‟s right! If they take this area you just look at a small corner. 

That‟s all I‟m looking at, Turtleford, the school units of Meadow Lake, Medstead, Turtleford, more than 

$.5 million increase in school taxes alone in those four areas in the last three or four years, and more 

again this year. It will be up by another $200-$300,000 in that area. The people of my city of North 

Battleford, nearly $.5 million more taxes than they were paying in 1964, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — One city! Is it any wonder that the population of The Battlefords has not continued to 

grow as it had in the previous years to 1964, when it was the fastest growing city of its size anywhere in 

Western Canada. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Wrong, look at Yorkton! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, with apologies to Yorkton, possibly, but you had a smaller beginning! 

 

This is the situation, if you take a little larger area, $5 million increase, out of the pockets of the 

taxpayers by this Government that was going to cut taxes. That is only in general taxation, that‟s the 

property tax in our area. Mr. Speaker, there are people in North Battleford with only a fairly modest 

home, that have to pay nearly $100 per month to live in their own house in taxation today. That is after 

years of a tax-cutting Government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A modern home? 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

591 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, fairly so. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where abouts? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — 1992-99th St. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who lives there? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Garret Nyholt. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A modest home? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — A modest home, yes. I think it‟s modest, it isn‟t a shack. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Even in Henry‟s paradise  . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, you can make the inquiries when we‟re out of the House. I‟ll give you a few 

more, Davy. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You should stick to that speech somebody wrote for you. You get a little confused, you 

get away from it! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Are you speaking to me, Sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Everybody in general, keep going! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Our Premier has fought long and loudly about the costly Socialist experiments in 

Saskatchewan over the last 20 years. When he is all through with the wind and guff, any Saskatchewan 

person that has been here for more than 25 or 30 years and knows the province, knows very well that 

those 20 years were Saskatchewan‟s best in history. History will record it so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — That was when government was placing people before dollars, and people before big 

shots! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where is your own Fines? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Very good! The people of Saskatchewan became a bit forgetful, reckless, and they 

listened to that siren song from the Liberals. They believed that things could be better, believed enough 

at least to allow this Government to squeak in in 1964 and squeak in again in 1967. There is one thing 

that I know as a farmer, that once a hog gets its nose through the door 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

592 

 

he‟s awful hard to stop. That‟s one thing the people of Saskatchewan didn‟t realize. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Yeah, we‟ve now made it! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Now we‟ve had five years of capitalist experience. The public of Saskatchewan have 

paid heavily for the result of the 1964 and 1967 elections. Millions of dollars have been lost or wasted, 

squandered, in this Thatcher experiment. An old gentleman that is a fairly good economist said to me the 

other day, “You know,“ he said, “if the people of Saskatchewan, if we just indulge in a bit of fancy, had 

been smart enough to have been able to say to Thatcher and these people that sit to your right, Mr. 

Speaker, here‟s $100 million, get out of Saskatchewan, don‟t ever come back. Saskatchewan would have 

been better off.” Saskatchewan would have been better off, it would have been cheap. It would have 

been cheap. This costly capitalist experiment has cost the people of Saskatchewan closer to $200 

million; give-aways of resources; losses to our institutions. Future generations will only know what the 

cost really is. 

 

I list but a few: $50 million potash give-away; at least $5 million in sodium sulphate: $35 million 

through bad dealings with Ottawa; pulp subsidy, I‟ll be generous, at least $5 million; $5 million Hatton 

oil field gas give-away, and I think I‟m putting that one low; $10 million in extra insurance costs, and 

that‟s putting it low, through playing hanky-panky with the private insurance companies and raising 

rates unnecessarily; $25 million, at least, in extra property taxes because this Government has not 

brought forth the necessary grants to take up the slack; $9 million interest on highway borrowing and 

another $25 million waste, at least, in highway spending. I notice that the Minister of Highways (Mr. 

Boldt), who gave first of all a pious speech and then the tirade of the year, is not in his seat. Five million 

dollars a year. Mr. Speaker, at this particular time I would like to say that I‟m a little shocked at the 

Minister (Mr. Boldt), when he will stand here in this House and threaten Members of the Legislature 

that if they dare to criticize any item of his budget, there will be no work, there will be no work done in 

their particular constituency. Well, as far as I‟m concerned, that‟s up to him. I‟ll let the public in my area 

decide what the score is when the elections are on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I intend to stand here and criticize what I think is wrong. I intend to give the facts as I 

see them and call the shots as I see them, without any threats from the Minister of Highways (Mr. 

Boldt). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, this is not 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

593 

the only loss. I‟ve only listed about $150 million of losses so far. This Government has also been guilty 

of complete neglect and lack of imagination in taking advantages of the Federal programs, the ARDA 

program and the FRED program. In Manitoba in the Interlake region, there‟s a $100 million program in 

the submarginal areas where the Government of Manitoba, even though a Tory Government, has had 

imagination enough to move out into this hinterland where there are submarginal farmers, farmers that 

couldn‟t quite make a living, fishermen that were marginal and a lot of the native people. The Provincial 

Government has gone in there with about $80 or $85 million Federal money. It is building roads, 

hospitals, schools and clearing land and creating a situation whereby these areas will be rehabilitated. 

This could have been done in Saskatchewan, if this Government had not been so busy running down to 

the United States and courting big business in order to get a few industries in here while forgetting about 

the people of Saskatchewan and the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — It has failed Saskatchewan once again, and the Minister (Mr. Steuart), the Provincial 

Treasurer, knows this and also that there is danger of losing these shared programs. It may be too late 

now but I certainly want to point out that we had better get on the ball. We‟d better start taking a look at 

what other provinces are doing. We‟ve lost more billions of dollars because this Government has failed 

miserably in taking advantage of the monies that are available, the programs that are available, the 

resource people that are available, to move out into our hinterland and do the job that is necessary. 

There‟s more to this business of taking care of the native people than setting up a Department. Far more. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Why didn‟t you do it? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — We certainly did plenty and there‟s even the programs that we had started, Mr. 

Speaker, at that time, were thrown away. The only $75,000 that the Federal Government ever gave to 

Saskatchewan was in 1964 on a work program that was not winter works and not a formal program. I 

got that $75,000 from the Hon. Mr. Nicholson. What did this Government do when it took office? Every 

one of those sawmill programs, those forestry programs stopped dead. The portage programs may have 

been continued. They didn‟t do one thing. The work was started and it was you people that failed and 

that is the reason you have problems, because a new generation has grown up and new approaches are 

needed. I can give you another speech on that, Mr. Speaker, but I don‟t intend to do so now. It will be a 

waste of time. Liberals don‟t understand, obviously they don‟t understand. Mr. Speaker, they don‟t 

understand because they‟re not interested. They don‟t care. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

594 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Socialism in the bush up there. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Ho, ho, Charley-boy is erupting again. Well, Mr. Speaker, talk about millions, I‟ve 

pointed out $200 millions of losses. It would have been cheaper to have paid the Liberal party $100 

million to get out and stay out. Saskatchewan would have been better off. How can you measure the 

losses and the failures to provide technical training? How can you measure the losses in the other 

education areas? How can you measure the losses in the health field? Last year, after we‟d been telling 

them for three years, they brought in Dr. Frazier. He told them they would have to spend at least $2 

million to salvage the Saskatchewan Mental Health Plan. The Government offered a miserable 

$500,000. It offers another miserable $500,000 again in the Budget. That puts it just exactly $3 million 

behind what Dr. Frazier said was the minimum that was needed to get our mental health program back 

on the rail. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The Government is $3 million short this year, and over and above that, as it was 

pointed out the other day in the House, there‟s another $700,000 of the mental health program we didn‟t 

spend last year. As we hear that pious, self-righteous individual from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt) preaching 

about what should be done and what shouldn‟t be done, pretending that he is the second John the 

Baptist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has been guilty and continues to be guilty of extravagance and waste. The 

prime example has been its highway program and I suppose this is going to lose me all the highways in 

N.W. Saskatchewan, and all the highways, so be prepared. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — It continues to take millions of dollars and talks about millions of dollars of increase in 

highway spending. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan taxpayer wants to know where the highways really 

are. It is all very well to build a few miles of super highways around the perimeter of cities and in certain 

high priority constituencies, but the average Saskatchewan citizen is asking what about us. Where are 

the highways being built? Where are the millions being spent? Not only are they asking where this 

construction is, but they want to know what kind of construction it is. This improvident Government has 

failed to take care of the miles of highway that already exist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

595 

Mr. Kramer: — Maintenance of our highways throughout this province is a shocking example of 

mismanagement. Right from the first year, 1964, when the Premier said that patching and re-oiling 

black-top highways was just Socialist nonsense, and they‟ve been going downhill ever since. Our 

formerly good highways have deteriorated to the point where they‟re unsafe for traffic in many areas. 

This short-sighted policy has cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan several more millions of dollars. It will 

cost more millions to bring them back to their former good state of repair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — And it admits this in this Budget. For the first time it is telling us in this Budget that it 

is going to have to spend more money on maintenance, and it is locking the barn after the horse has been 

stolen. In the field of construction, it scarcely matters where you go in this province you see expensive 

stretches of road that have been started, postponed and mismanaged. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yeah, Russian thistle pastures. We can take a look at the hundreds of thousands that 

have been spent on 21 miles, that‟s in that New Democratic constituency that Dave (Minister of 

Highways) was talking about, Cut Knife, stopping and starting at tremendous cost to the public purse, 21 

miles from Lashburn to Lloydminster. I‟ll quote an example of the cost. Original contract was called for 

$686,000. Final cost, not $800,000, not a million, $1,577,000 on 21 miles. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame, where‟s the Highways Minister now? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — He‟s there. Sitting on the floor. $1 million and it took four years to do it to perform 

this wonder. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s a good road. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, certainly, it ought to be at that price. For years the people that were coming into 

Saskatchewan, and going out of Saskatchewan, had to take their lives in their hands in order to get 

through that stretch, and there were a lot of serious accidents. Again the pious statements of the Minister 

(Mr. Boldt) don‟t fit very well when we know that the delay and mismanagement caused several serious 

accidents in that stretch of road. 

 

I want to say that we have two new bridges on the North Saskatchewan River, one at Battleford and the 

other one at 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

596 

 

Lloydminster, located by politicians against the advice of engineers. Hundreds of thousands of dollars 

have been spent and more will be spent in an effort to correct these costly mistakes. Can you imagine a 

Premier so brazen and reckless as to fly in the face of engineering advice which advised locating a new 

bridge at the present site in The Battlefords, on a landslide. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Here he comes. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — And who also located the bridge at the Deer Creek Crossing, not to benefit the people 

of Saskatchewan, not to consider the public purse but to please a few friends located in the Province of 

Alberta, friends whom he hoped would make his Primrose Pipedream come true, but have since deserted 

him to better and greener pastures in the Province of Alberta. This was the political leader who stomped 

up and down through the length and breadth of this province telling the people of Saskatchewan that 

what we needed was sound business administration. The Premier still goes abroad and, depending on 

how far he is away from home, still tells the tall tales of how he saved Saskatchewan from the foils of 

Socialism. This sound businessman, who locates bridges on landslides, 30 miles from an already 

existing bridge in the Province of Alberta, locates a bridge where there was a certain and sure ferry 

crossing, flying in the face of engineers and his own Minister of Highways (Mr. Grant), the present 

Minister of Health — not the present Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) — vetoed the wishes of the 

majority of the Saskatchewan taxpayers all the way from Kindersley, Unity, Cut Knife, Maidstone, 

Turtleford, Edam, Glaslyn, and other points and built the bridge where he thought his buddies would 

like to have it. He decided against locating the bridge at the Maidstone ferry to replace an uncertain 

ferry, a location which would have benefited the greater portion of Saskatchewan and would have even 

benefited the Treasury of Saskatchewan. It would have provided the people of Northern Saskatchewan 

with a clear choice of two cattle markets and two trading centres, because they could have crossed that 

bridge at Maidstone and made the clear choice to go east or west. Because of that bridge location, today 

a great deal of business is being funnelled off into Edmonton and other parts of Alberta, rather than into 

Saskatchewan, to the disadvantage of Saskatchewan businessmen and to the disadvantage of the 

Saskatchewan Treasury. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Good business judgement, Mr. Speaker? Good business Government? I will leave it to 

the people outside of this House to judge, and also inside. The Deer Creek bridge is already know to 

residents of Northwestern Saskatchewan as Thatcher‟s folly. We sincerely hope that both these bridges 

can be stabilized without too much cost, but we shall not forget that the thousands of dollars already 

spent on corrective measures 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

597 

would not have been necessary, if the Premier had not taken it upon himself to fly in the face of 

engineering advice and to locate these bridges on the basis of political judgement rather than 

engineering advice. The public cannot afford to locate $4 million bridges at the whim of the Premier, 

built on landslides. The tragic part of all this, Mr. Speaker, is that, while the Premier and his Ministers 

go blindly ahead with political judgements, blindly ahead with decisions that cost the taxpayers millions 

of dollars with no regard to cost, these people become cautious and parsimonious when it comes to 

building features into highways that will provide for public safety. We heard something about public 

safety, insurance costs this afternoon, again from the pious Member from Rosthern (Mr. Boldt). 

 

Right at this same location, Mr. Speaker, within this costly, badly planned bridge and highway complex 

at North Battleford, this same Department proceeded to locate a death-trap level-crossing, which even 

the most naïve bystander could see was impossible and dangerous. This Department of Highways that 

can build costly interchanges and overpasses where they are not needed, becomes saving and 

parsimonious when it locates the by-pass at North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw your 

attention to the fact that the Saskatchewan Department of Highways two years ago built overpasses at 

Swift Current that have hardly been used yet, waiting for some far-off, distant day when it may complete 

the highway in the Swift Current area. I wager that these cost a half a million dollars and they haven‟t 

used them yet. This while the people in my area, the residents of North Battleford and the travelling 

public were exposed to death and destruction, because the Government failed to provide the necessary 

safety features at the crossing of No. 5 and old No. 4 in the southeast corner of my city. Mr. Speaker, 

this callous disregard of public safety, this penny-wise and pound-foolish attitude of this Government in 

failing to provide the necessary overpass on the top of that hill or at least a four-way stop of speed limit 

has resulted up to August of last year in accidents involving 40 cars, dozens of people hospitalized and 

injured and three dead. The Minister in charge of Government Insurance should remember this when he 

talks abut who is responsible for the rising cost of insurance. The public has already paid very dearly, in 

lives, dollars and wasted insurance money. They have paid very dearly for the overpass that the 

Government failed to provide. The Government does not understand the danger signals, the warnings 

from countless people, it did not understand or listen to the city police, the Chamber of Commerce, the 

city council of North Battleford as well as myself, as the elected Member. The Government said there 

was no problem. It was not until several serious accidents and two deaths that it made a weak attempt at 

some kind of slow-down warning for the through traffic on No. 5 in April of last year. I warned the 

Minister at that time, once again of the dangers involved and was told that people would have to learn to 

obey the law. The Fuehrer had spoken regardless of the consequences and that was once again by the 

present Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt). It was at that time that I told him 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

598 

 

that, if the Department of Highways did not take the necessary action, I would see to it that something 

was done in the interest of public safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, throughout the summer there were several more serious accidents until that sad 

day in early August when another fatality occurred. A young family returning from a holiday in 

Winnipeg to Alberta collided at that crossing with a local car. The mother was killed, the husband and 

the two girls were seriously injured. The lady driving the local car was seriously injured and some of her 

passengers also. It was at this point, Mr. Speaker, that I decided that some drastic action was necessary. I 

decided that the Premier and his Minister could not understand written language, spoken language. They 

could not recognize the facts when they stared them in the face. I decided they might possibly 

understand sign language. I erected four signs on Highway No. 5, two large stop signs on either side of 

that intersection, 600 feet back on either side of the intersection I erected a stop warning. During the 

next 24 hours the travelling public enjoyed a safe intersection, for the first time since the road was built. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Apparently the Minister and the Premier did understand sign language. We finally got 

through to them because, when they removed those temporary signs, the Department of Highways did 

create a 40 mile an hour speed zone with warning flashers on either side far enough back for the traffic 

to slow down and be warned. They also installed two more red flashers on either side of the highway to 

warn the local traffic of the danger and the necessary stop. Further, they narrowed the right-of-way on 

No. 5 for the through traffic to allow the local traffic a better chance of scampering across that right-of-

way. While I do not think that these installations are necessarily the complete answer, I can at least say 

that there has been no serious accident at that point since the Government finally bowed to public 

opinion and did what it had to do to ensure public safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — At this time it is studying the possibilities of an overpass, the cost of which will be 

much greater now. Once more it will be a greater cost to the businessmen of that area because business 

will be disrupted again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the people who talk about efficiency, sound business and public safety. They 

piously talk about reducing the cost of insurance and who is to blame for insurance, 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

599 

and try in the cheapest fashion possible to point their finger at the Mayor of a municipality, suggesting 

that he might possibly have something to do with it. The Minister called the tune here this afternoon and 

I have given him some facts. These facts can be repeated in many other places. I am sure that the 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald) knows about some of these places and I hope, and I am sure that he will, 

attempt to do something about the safety hazards. 

 

There are two more between North Battleford and Saskatoon and I draw them to the attention of this 

House now. There is going to be a serious accident before too long at the weigh scales just out of 

Borden. There is an accident hazard there. It is only good fortune that there has not been a death at that 

point, because these big trailer trucks have to cross the right-of-way to get to that scale and have to cross 

it again when they pull out again and they can‟t take off very fast. A bit of fog, the wrong circumstances, 

and you could have a multiple death. I suggest that the Government had better take a close look at that. 

On the highway, on the south side of the C.P. bridge there is another bad spot, that curves onto that 

bridge. I suggest that the road should have gone over the hill. I don‟t know why it wasn‟t taken straight 

on, but at that particular point in certain light conditions, the bridge is almost invisible. That bridge 

should either be lighted or striped with some reflecting material; I refer to the Borden bridge, the south 

end. There is a hazard there. 

 

There may still be some doubt, Mr. Speaker, about the improvidence and inefficiency of the 

Government that sits to your right. I would like to cite another example of absurd foolishness, 

extravagance and waste of taxpayers‟ dollars. For three years now, more than a $1 million according to 

the Government‟s own figures has been lying up in the swamps in Northwestern Saskatchewan. 

Northwestern Saskatchewan became a few years ago the proud possessor of the Premier‟s Primrose 

Path. I have mentioned it before in this House and I shall mention it again many times. This million 

dollar highway plus interest on $1 million for the last three years, starting nowhere and ending nowhere 

from Canoe Lake to within a couple of miles of Cummin Lake, 45 miles of wasted money and wasted 

effort by this Government that had to impose $35 million in new taxes on the people last year, to impose 

a tax on the sick and bleed the education grants and cut off assistance programs. This same Government 

can afford $1 million to gratify a pipe dream of the Premier‟s, an expensive publicity stunt. When I 

raised this matter last year and the year before, there were cries from across the House, “Wait a while, 

wait and see.” Well, we have waited another year and I can report once again this year that the only 

useful purpose that this $1 million baby of the Premier‟s provides is a race track for moose and timber 

wolves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The odd trapper, while he 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

600 

 

laughs about it in the Canoe Lake area, will tell you that this is the only super highway in Canada that is 

used exclusively by snow toboggans. These are only a few examples of waste in a small corner of 

Saskatchewan. There are many more I could cite that would involve less money but an equal amount of 

stupidity. 

 

Let‟s just go back to the Primrose Path for awhile. 

 

An Hon. Member: — The moose are now getting stuck. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes! You know if you took a traffic count on that you would have possibly four or five 

bush rabbits a day, a few ptarmigan, maybe the odd timber wolf. It would be quite a motley crew. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, on April Fool‟s Day the Premier was exuberantly holding forth at a great meeting at 

Meadow Lake and there was going to be a tremendous industry established called Primrose Forest 

products, according to the Premier. Yes, there were several press releases and they were going to 

employ hundreds of people. I think the Premier in his exuberance said thousands of people. That is not 

unusual. Like the pulp mill with the thousands it was to employ I think that when I hear Steuart‟s TV 

program the other day he was talking about 150 to 200 people permanently employed. Some thousands! 

Well let‟s go back and see what has happened in Meadow Lake since that time. April Fool‟s Day 1965, 

April Fool‟s Day 1966, April Fool‟s Day 1967, April Fool‟s Day 1968 and April Fool‟s Day 1969 will 

roll around and still no Primrose Forest product mill, but a million dollars plus interest, and that is plenty 

on $1 million invested in a “do nothing” highway and it hasn‟t even got the gravel on it yet. But the 

moose aren‟t objecting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The timber wolves are complaining because their feet are slipping. No, Mr. Speaker, 

what has happened in this Mecca of the Premier‟s? In the last couple of years or so let‟s see what has 

happened. I remember years ago back in the „40s there was a Liberal candidate, Mayor Jack Davis, who 

talked about what a ghost town Meadow Lake was. He said that if you shot a rifle up the main street you 

wouldn‟t hit anyone on a Saturday night. That was Jack Davis. Now, what has happened in Meadow 

Lake since the Premier introduced the new boom up there and since we have this Government that was 

going to bring prosperity to the people of Saskatchewan and bring prosperity to the north, let‟s see what 

is happening! G and E Junior shop gone to Richmond, British Columbia, closed down. Buhler Electric 

appliance shop, closed. Building sold. But don‟t worry too much about this you know. It is sold to the 

LID to make more room for the Department of Social Welfare. This Government that was going to do 

away with Social Welfare! We heard something today about the mess which they found Social Welfare 

in. Millions of dollars more are being spent by the Department of Social Welfare, millions more. And 

not only that, 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

601 

there was a Mr. Elliott and two stenographers who handled the social aid in Meadow Lake at one time. 

Today there is a staff of over 20 handling the social aid in the same area  . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —    and possibly more, they have to rent more space. The new industry for Meadow 

Lake, Mr. Speaker — more social aid. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Let‟s go on. Meadow Lake TV and Radio, closed, moved to Alberta. Buhler Electric, 

sold, moved to British Columbia. No electrical shop at Meadow Lake at the present time. A few years 

ago, three shops, all were doing well. All three electrical contractors were doing well but now there‟s 

practically no construction in the Meadow Lake area and only one contractor can exist. Fletcher‟s Ladies 

Wear Store, moved to Alberta — Fletcher doing well. Polar Auto Body, sold out to Arrow Motors, 

moved to British Columbia. Three body shops in town before, only one left. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Let‟s look at Arrow Motors. You know Polar Auto Body sold out to Arrow Motors, 

one of the larger operations in Northwestern Saskatchewan which is now burned down and does not plan 

to rebuild in Meadow Lake. The Airport Service station coffee bar, closed. A number of operators tried 

to make a go of it, at least three during the last two or three years and failed. G and E Men‟s Wear, sold 

out, moved to B.C., doing well. Serve-U Store, went bankrupt, moved to Alberta. And now we have the 

real gem, you know, Erickson‟s Box Factory. We heard about box factories in this House, remember, for 

many years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Erickson‟s Box Factory — used to be pointed out as the epitome of private enterprise. 

It could always make a dollar  . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —  . . . when there was a CCF Government in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — It could always make a dollar before. Erickson‟s 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

602 

 

Box Factory went bankrupt. Machinery, equipment in the hands of the Industrial Development Bank, 

taken over by the Liberal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Oh, yes! Arctic Fur and Tailoring, owner closing shop on March 25, going to the 

Coast, the only tailor shop in town, since there is no future for his business in Saskatchewan. One of the 

Meadow Lake Medical Clinics has been closed — doctors moved to B.C. Well, there‟s the prosperity. 

No wonder, no wonder and small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier made that announcement on 

April Fool‟s Day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — April Fool Meadow Lake. I hope the Member for Meadow Lake carries my regards. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a suggestion that eventually the people of Meadow Lake, 

if they went into some agricultural products manufacturing, alfalfa seed, dehydration or something like 

this, I think there is room for it. The Department of Industry should investigate. Possibly somebody can 

put Meadow Lake on its feet. I suppose then they would have an actual industry that they could take 

credit for in their own right. I heard the Member for Nipawin (Mr. Radloff) talking about Agric Oil 

Vegetables as an industry that was also started by the Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — When did Inland Cement Company come to Saskatchewan? The Liberals cannot take 

credit for these! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is what happens when you build roads, starting nowhere, 

ending nowhere, as I said  . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —  . . . as publicity stunts. They wonder why we criticize, why these New Democratic 

Members criticize and say, “They are spending the money and using the wrong priorities on highways.” 

We don‟t mind you spending money, we want you to spend money on good highways, but we don‟t 

want you to let it go down the drain and waste it. That is the difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Again it is timely to quote 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

603 

the figures quoted by our Leader in debate last year which indicate according to The Dominion Bureau 

of Statistics that during 1963-66 construction costs in Canada based on a cubic yard of material were up 

by 26.8 per cent. But that costs of highway construction based on the same cubic yard of material in 

place in Saskatchewan went up 63.5 per cent, not double the increase in cost for the rest of Canada, but 

nearly triple. This again under the guidance of a government that was going to bring sound business 

administration to government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That‟s the way they do the job. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I am sure that the Premier and his Ministers have not singled Northwestern 

Saskatchewan out for all their mistakes. And I am sure that these costly errors have not been the 

exception but rather the rule. I am sure that every Member in this House can bring the same kind of 

examples of the same kind of frivolity, the same penny-wise and pound-foolish attitudes in every area of 

Saskatchewan and in almost every area of Government spending. There should have been no necessity 

for this cry-baby Budget of 1969. There should have been no necessity for cutbacks in health, education, 

parks, recreation and other important programs. Last year, tax increases; this year, reduced service. And 

it calls it a balanced Budget. I don‟t care whether a budget is balanced in money, but if it is not balanced 

in service, Mr. Speaker, it is not a balanced budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — As I said earlier, this Liberal party electioneered in 1967 just a year and a half ago on a 

program of prosperity, telling the people that all was well and followed that three months later with tax 

increases of $35 million, the highest that this Province has ever seen, every one of these taxes bearing 

the heaviest on the low-income groups, farmers and working people. This Government has not balanced 

its Budget this year. It has never balanced any Budget since it has been in office. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That‟s right. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — It was proven by our financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) the other day and other speakers 

that the Treasury has been ransacked, that the only cleaver thing that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) and the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) has done is to juggle figures and mislead the press and some of 

the public during their period in office. Their priorities have always been wrong, but always predictable. 

Anyone could have predicted when this Government took office that it would be a government for the 

privileged, for the wealthy and against the average business, farm and working person in this province. 

Of course, anyone could tell that this Government had some political debts 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

604 

 

to pay and it has paid them. And it is continuing to pay them. It has paid them unblushingly and with a 

complete disregard for the public welfare and the public purse. They had scarcely taken office when the 

Premier and his Ministers made the completely unnecessary concession to the potash industry. The 

potash industry was here, Mr. Speaker, the concessions that were made by the former CCF Government 

were necessary in order to get the exploratory work done. 

 

Mr. Coderre: —  . . . 1981? 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, 1981 and I‟ll get to that, I‟ll get to that. The first three plants were given 

concessions and rightly so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — All right, the first three plants. But, one thing that you people don‟t know is that you 

don‟t have to run after a bus once you are on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is just one more example of the situation that we find ourselves 

in. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Tell us about the concessions. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Oh, yes. Well anyway, it proceeded to give the same concessions to all the rest of the 

potash developments and thus gave away approximately $50 million, we know that. 

 

Another election debt that the public is gradually paying off and will continue to pay is the wrecking and 

under-the-table sell-out of Saskatchewan Government Insurance through raising rates and costs and 

through poor business management. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —  . . . paying for political propaganda through the same channels. This Government is 

seeking first of all to create less competition for private business and secondly to run administration 

costs as high as it possibly can. In many cases it is forcing agents, forcing them out, deliberately 

discontinuing policies in order to benefit private insurance companies. And of course when the big chief 

of the insurance companies was here in Regina last summer, he made no secret of the fact when he 

openly and boldly suggested that the Saskatchewan public ought to get on the same wave length as the 

Premier. This Government will eventually sell or break Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

605 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few things more about the priorities of this Thatcher 

Government and to point out further how they continue to provide Socialism for the rich by taxing the 

poor and taxing the producer and consumer. As I have said before, last year they placed an added $35 

million largely on those least able to pay. Pensioners, low income groups and farmers all felt the sting of 

the Liberal taxation whip. This cry-baby Budget of 1969 continues to do the same thing. It makes very 

little difference, Mr. Speaker, whether you increase a tax or withdraw a service. The people of 

Saskatchewan are the losers. We used to hear a great deal from Members opposite when they were on 

this side of the House about the former CCF Government crying to Ottawa. Who‟s crying to Ottawa 

now? Who‟s blaming Ottawa now? My colleague, the Hon financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) called this a 

panic Budget and I agree with him. This Budget could also be called the “Liberals‟ Whine in ‟69.” 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t give any Liberal credit in Saskatchewan or Ottawa. I don‟t give them 

much credit for common sense but one can hardly blame the Trudeau Government for not providing 

more money to these reckless spendthrifts  . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —  . . . these incompetent bumblers that sit on the Treasury benches in Saskatchewan. In 

fact, I think it‟s the first lick of common sense that the Trudeau Government has shown. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Things must be pretty bad, Mr. Speaker, when a Liberal Government in Ottawa takes a 

look at a Liberal Government in Saskatchewan and says, “Fellows, we‟re not giving you any more. You 

just can‟t be trusted with it.” I don‟t want to draw too much of a line between the Liberal Government at 

Ottawa and the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan because when the chips are down they‟re really all 

alike. The Liberal party in Canada and Saskatchewan, both provincially and federally, has proven one 

thing over the years and that is that they‟re a progressive party with a lot of good ideas — out of office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — And that they become the most right-wing reactionary Government you can find — 

the most parsimonious, patronage-peddling Government you can find — the most bungling, inefficient 

Government you can find when they‟re in office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

606 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Our financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) has pointed out in this debate how the Liberals lost 

Saskatchewan $35 million through bad management, incompetence during the time when the Premier 

was the Provincial Treasurer at earlier Dominion-Provincial meetings on fiscal matters. He proved his 

inability to speak for the people of Saskatchewan at that time. After all if the Premier insists on going up 

and down the length and breadth of Canada and North America talking about how wealthy the province 

has become overnight — after the election of his Government — we shouldn‟t blame the Federal 

Government for taking him at his word. Why shouldn‟t it spend the money in other provinces where 

government have the economic sense to know what their needs are and what their financial position is. 

But sometimes one gets an idea that this must be some kind of a sham battle, that possibly Mr. Trudeau 

and Mr. Thatcher are like the two cats on the ark that fooled old Noah into thinking they were fighting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I say this because when the Premier and Old Shorty go down to Ottawa crying for 

money, and while the Provincial Treasurer stands up in the House and lectures other sectors of this 

society about how to run their business, how they should practise more economy, Mr. Speaker, what is 

this Provincial Government doing? Last year through the introduction of deterrent fees on behalf of the 

Federal Government it collected approximately $3 million out of the pockets of the sick for the Liberal 

Government. It took $7 million altogether but approximately $3 million went to the Treasury of Ottawa, 

money that the Federal Government would gladly have given if it had not imposed these deterrent fees, 

because, if we had presented the bill for an extra $7 million, if there hadn‟t been any deterrent fees, that 

money would have been paid to Saskatchewan. So the deterrent fees, whatever advantage it thinks it 

may have had, you can nearly cut in half or a little more than half. 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Good business! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Yes, good business for the Federal Government that it is pretending to fight with. 

Small wonder that Ottawa thinks it a fool, not worthy of consideration and that it cannot be trusted with 

cold, hard cash. Either that or Trudeau and the Premier are playing some behind-the-scenes games. It is 

difficult to tell at times what they are doing. The only thing I would say by golly, and I don‟t think either 

one of them should expose their arrears. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: — If you need another example of tax giveaways to Ottawa, let‟s turn once more to the 

$5,200,000 of extra cash which this 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

 

607 

Budget puts into the hands of the highest paid profession in Saskatchewan, a profession which is among 

the highest paid in Canada. It is pretty obvious again that out of this $5,200,000 nearly $2 million will 

wind up in Mr. Trudeau‟s pocket, back in the pocket of the Dominion Treasury in income tax. We admit 

that there ought to be an upward rating for general practitioners and doctors in areas of Saskatchewan 

that do not lend themselves to high incomes. But it is certain that 85 per cent of the practising doctors in 

Saskatchewan were the last ones to need an increase at this particular time, when all the rest of the 

people, farmers, workers, and the teachers are asked not only to pay the $35 million of Liberal tax that 

was put on them last year, or the $37 million that will be put on this year once again in Liberal taxes, 

while they‟re being told by the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer that they must hold the line, that the 

economy can‟t afford any increases. While this Government is embarrassing school boards throughout 

this province by not providing the necessary funds to pay the minimum increases — increases to 

teachers that must be paid to keep abreast with the cost of living and Liberal inflation, the Government 

boldly and brazenly moves to pay off an election debt to the highest paid profession in this province, 

 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kramer: —  . . . to a profession that for the most part openly admits that they do not need an 

increase except possibly for some of the hierarchy in that profession. Most of them would have been 

content to go along with the former schedule of fees. But this would be breaking their promises and of 

course the Liberals never do that, especially when they have been promises to a few of their friends in 

the medical profession, this would-be business Administration, this Government that proceeds to put a 

20 per cent increase on the people that need it the least and in so doing puts nearly $2 million income tax 

into the Federal treasury, the Federal Government that they pretend to be fighting with. There‟s a lot of 

folks that would like to get into a fight like that. I‟m satisfied that the most peaceful in the world would 

like to get into this kind of fight, Mr. Speaker, and it is small wonder when they behave like that that 

Ottawa says, “You can‟t be trusted with the money, go home boys and paddle your own canoe.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious from what I‟ve said that I will vote against the Budget, but support the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the first time this year to take part in this 

debate. I have a good deal to say in regard to the Budget and I wish to answer some of the comments 

made by the Opposition Members. I would therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. 



 
February 24, 1969 

 

608 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:26 o‟clock p.m. 


