



















































Hansard: March 11, 1969


1116 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

26th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 11, 1969 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. D.M. McPherson (Regina South West): — It gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and to 

this House 30 grade eight students from Athabasca school. They‟re sitting in the west gallery. They are 

here with their teacher, Mr. Culham. I would just like to say on behalf of the House how pleased we are 

to have you here today and we hope that your trip to the Assembly will be both interesting and 

educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, to you and to this Assembly, I would like to introduce a 

group of 44 grade eight students from the Bruno public school. They are seated in the Speaker‟s gallery 

and with them today are their teachers, Mr. Marshack and Mr. Pentella, also their bus driver, Mr. 

Levschen. I am very happy, Mr. Speaker, to introduce this group of students because with them today is 

my oldest daughter. I hope their trip to the Legislature and to Regina will be both informative and 

educational and may we all wish them a safe journey back to their homes. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, through you it is a pleasure to introduce to all 

Members 31 alert, young grade seven students from Rosemont school in Regina North West. They are in 

the east gallery with their teacher, Tom Laubman who is a former student of the Hon. Member from 

Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica). Their visit is a social studies project, I understand. All Members join me I am 

sure in welcoming them and expressing the wish that their stay with us will be both pleasant and 

educational. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, from Regina North West in the Speaker‟s gallery two groups of special interest to all 

Members are seated with their teachers, Mrs. Katherine Bell of St. Patrick‟s annex vocational school and 

Mrs. Elaine Johnston of Saskatchewan House. The two groups of eleven and twelve adults are learning 

occupational English. They came to Canada from Czechoslovakia late last year. The teachers tell me 

they have decided to become Canadian citizens. At present they have above average educational 

standards in their own language. May I say to these people, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Canada have 

watched with consternation the political predicament that Czechoslovakia finds 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1117 

 

itself in today. Our sympathy and admiration are extended to the gallant people of their nation. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The calibre of your countrymen is known to us. Their contribution to Canada and 

Saskatchewan speaks for itself. All Members of this House, I‟m sure, welcome you to the Province, to 

this country and to this Assembly. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if we could have these two groups stand so 

that the Members could have a look at them. They‟re seated at the front in the Speaker‟s gallery. Would 

you stand, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — With Members on this side of the House, I would like 

to join with the remarks expressed by the Hon. Member from Regina North West. The 25 students that 

we have in the gallery, as he pointed out, under the direction of Mrs. Bell and Mrs. Johnston, represent 

two classes out of about 18 such classes that this Province has provided in co-operation with the 

Department of Manpower, for the sum total, I believe, of about 350 Czech immigrants who came to 

Saskatchewan in the past few months. I think it‟s another excellent example of the co-operation of the 

two governments in providing services to immigrants such as the people we have today, the people from 

Czechoslovakia. They came to Saskatchewan, of course, as the Hon. Member pointed out, when they 

were forced to flee their home country due to the terrors of Socialism over there and we hope they never 

have to do that here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of 

Education and the Member for Regina (Mr. Whelan), who first introduced the students from 

Czechoslovakia and assure them of the warmth of the welcome which they have here in Saskatchewan. 

May I say to the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) he should really get a bit of his history 

straightened out. What a lot of the students in Czechoslovakia were trying to do was to establish 

democratic Socialism not run away from it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — There is a very considerable difference. 

 

While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Legislature to recognize and through you, Sir, to 

welcome a 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1118 

group of students in the east gallery. They come from the McNabb Park school in Saskatoon. They have 

been attributed to the constituency of my colleague from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank). 

However, Saskatoon Mayfair doesn‟t take in all the people who seem to live in Saskatoon. There is an 

area just on the edge of Saskatoon housed and provided with services at what used to be the airport 

facilities and accommodation. A number of these visitors are from that area which is in my constituency. 

They‟re with their teacher, Mr. Thiel and, Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure we welcome them to the House today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — May I crave the indulgence of the House to also express a few words in connection 

with the people from Czechoslovakia who are in the Speaker‟s gallery. It is within the confines of the 

constituency of Saltcoats which I had the honor of representing. It contains one of the first groups of 

Czech settlers who came to Canada. Many of them are now in their third and fourth generations in this 

country. On behalf of the Czechoslovakian people in my constituency, I extend a very sincere and warm 

welcome to those who have recently arrived from that noble country. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

COMPULSORY AREA BARGAINING NEGOTIATIONS 
 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Education. In view of the fact that most of the steps in his compulsory area 

bargaining negotiations have failed to date, what steps is the Minister taking to remedy the situation 

immediately. 

 

Hon. J.C. Mr. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Member we 

are still awaiting concurrence from at least two of the teacher area negotiating committees as to whether 

or not they wish to proceed with voluntary arbitration procedures. The answer to this we hope to have 

very shortly, this week later on. 

 

COMMENT RE TRACK-TYPE SNOW VEHICLES IN HUNTING 
 

Hon. J.R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I 

wish to make a comment because of the numerous complaints being received by the Government 

respecting the use of track-type snow vehicles, particularly the motorized toboggans or skidoo, in 

hunting and destroying predatory wild animals especially coyotes and foxes. The tremendous upsurge 

and the use of this type of vehicle has and is causing great concern to the public as well as to the 

Government. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1119 

 

It is quite legal to use these conveyances to pursue predators until they are exhausted and then destroy 

them by using a firearm or other weapon, a club for instance. It is illegal, however, to carry a loaded 

firearm in or on any vehicle including this particular type or to kill or injure any wild animal with such 

vehicles by driving over or against them when exhausted. While the practice of driving over these 

animals is illegal, it is exceedingly difficult to enforce and obtain the necessary evidence with which to 

convict. However, I wish to assure the Members of this House and the general public that the RCMP and 

our officials are giving special attention to this particular problem in an attempt to put a stop to this 

inhumane and brutal practice of using these vehicles to kill or injure the exhausted animal by driving 

over it. 

 

It is hoped that the combined efforts, Mr. Speaker, of the RCMP and DNR officers will result in the 

apprehension of offenders in such cases and the removal of the basis for the current complaints. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

GULF MINERALS AT WOLLASTON LAKE 
 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Before the Orders of the Day, Members will 

recall that last night there was a considerable discussion about Gulf Minerals and the so-called one hole 

discovery. I had said last night that I had every confidence that before long we would be receiving other 

interesting announcements from this particular company. I am sure Hon. Members didn‟t realize they‟d 

be coming so quickly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Tell „em the facts, tell „em the facts. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Gulf Minerals this morning announced the completion of the second hole in the 

Wollaston Lake property. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cameron: — This is the first follow-up hole since the original uranium discovery last fall. 

The hole is some 400 feet removed from the former hole and the drilling encountered what appears to be 

further ore grade uranium mineralization. Tests will be immediately carried out to analyze the amount of 

uranium mineralization in the ore and further extensive drilling will be carried out commencing 

immediately to determine the size of the this ore body. If this drilling continues to follow-up in the same 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1120 

manner and if the follow-up drilling confirms a substantial ore body, it could place Saskatchewan in a 

most favorable position as a supplier of uranium to the world markets. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — What it may mean to Saskatchewan is evident, when we realize that the world 

demand for uranium is such that estimates place the requirements of the non-Communist world by 1980 

to be four times the 1967 production. Spring activities in Northern Saskatchewan could not have been 

ushered in, Mr. Speaker, on a more optimistic note than this announcement this morning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

BATTEN COMMISSION REPORT 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, while I am on my feet, I think Hon. Members 

would be interested in knowing that some time ago the Prairie Economic Council designated a Minister 

from each of the three Prairie Provinces to look into in detail and make recommendations in respect to 

the Batten Commission Report. It was decided at that time that a meeting would be held between the 

Ministers of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba with the Hon. Ron Basford, Federal Minister of 

Consumer and Corporate Affairs to make recommendations to him with respect to possible 

implementation of portions of the Report. 

 

I am pleased to tell the Legislature that this meeting between myself, representing Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Patrick representing Alberta, and Mr. Carroll representing Manitoba, will be held with Mr. Basford on 

Monday next in the city of Winnipeg. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, may I say that I welcome the announcement and 

I‟m glad that the enquiries from this side of the House have spurred the Attorney General into action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to that, the enquiries and activity commenced a long time 

ago, long before the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw‟s motion in this House. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

SALE OF ESTEVAN BRICK LIMITED SHARES 
 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a question to the 

Government. I wonder if the Premier or some other appropriate 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1121 

 

Minister could advise us whether or not there are, in progress or completed, negotiations for the sale of 

the shares of Estevan Brick Limited to some person other than a Government agency? 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — I may say that negotiations are under way. We hope that we may 

be able to make an announcement shortly although the final negotiations are not yet completed. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister can advise 

whether or not a Mr. Ron Thatcher is part of the group which is purchasing or negotiating for the 

purchase of the plant? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — No, no. 

 

ORDERS FOR RETURN 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, the 

Attorney General tabled one Return. I wonder if he could say when he‟s going to table the two Returns 

ordered last year and still not brought down? 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — My recollection, Mr. Speaker, is that it‟s not two. It‟s one 

and we‟re in the process of chasing that down. I was told there was only one left, but if there are two, I‟ll 

undertake to see that they are tabled very shortly. 

 

MOTION FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 71 
 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 71 showing: 

 

The number of new persons placed on the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan in 1968 (a) through new 

applications; and (b) through transfers from the categorical plans. 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to make a few comments and 

then move an amendment. First of all, I certainly have no objections to providing the information that 

the Member has requested, but in asking and requesting for all applications, I don‟t know if he 

appreciates the fact that this would include transient aid, people that stop for a meal at the Salvation 

Army. We have all kinds of agents located in various towns and communities across the province. I‟m 

sure that what he is really interested in, at least I anticipate that what he is interested in, is those new 

applicants that have been long-term clients of the Department 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1122 

over the past year and, therefore, I would like to move the following amendment. 

 

That all the words after “applications” in line two be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(a) of over three months duration and (b) through transfers from the categorical programs. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 — HIGHWAY TRAFFIC AND SAFETY 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino) moved, seconded by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the immediate implementation 

of recommendations submitted by the Special Legislative Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety 

on December 31, 1966. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in introducing this motion what I really had in mind was the recommendation that 

we made in 1966 when we were on the Special Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety and it reads 

as follows: 

 

That the Standing Committee of the Legislature be initiated to continue the study of traffic problems. It 

is the opinion of the Committee that a continuing review of traffic safety is necessary to ensure 

progress in this area. 

 

Now, I want to congratulate the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) for the progress that he has made in 

highway safety, but there is a lot more distance to go if you put it this way and I don‟t think that we 

should stop there. I think the Committee should be re-instated or re-formed to continue the study. We 

have problems that change from day to day. We have better cars and worse highways and this is part of 

the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Of course when we look at the records and go back to 1960, we had 164 deaths on our 

highways. Now, I can also say that in 1961 I also brought in a Resolution on highway safety. It‟s been 

close to me and I‟m always very concerned about it. If people want to read Hansard you go back to 1957 

when the former Minister from Humboldt made quite an issue about the breathalyzer and it didn‟t help 

the situation any. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1123 

 

At the present time you have co-operation from both sides of the House. When you have a Committee 

working on a problem of this kind, it takes the politics right out of it. This is one of the reasons why I 

say we should continue with the Committee. But going back to the question that was placed on the 

Order Paper on traffic deaths last year, it showed that in 1960 we had 164. When we got to 1963 we had 

200 deaths on the highway, but then from 1964 to 1967, we had an upsurge of 287, 87 more from 1964 

to 1967. Then in ‟68 we had a drop to 269. We can say we started to pull the traffic deaths down. 

Perhaps we hit the alcohol question a little hard, but I say traffic safety is a combination of factors and I 

think it‟s got to be attacked on all fronts. The only way we can get this attacked properly is with the 

public and get to the Legislators. There is no better place than the Legislative Committee to deal with a 

situation of this kind. 

 

I think research should continue. I have sat in the court rooms and watched proceedings when people 

were coming in to pay their fines. I don‟t know if it‟s much of a lesson. When the people walk out of the 

court room grinning, laughing sometimes and if they‟re guilty or not guilty, so much money. I don‟t 

know whether it‟s the best place to train our drivers. It may improve some of them but I think we could 

do a little better than that. There is also talk of research in the safety of farm machinery. I think the 

Safety Committee could work in that area also. You have such complaints as made by the Member for 

North Battleford (Mr. Kramer) about an intersection in the city where he decided to put up his own 

signs. Maybe he could have come to the Committee and had a little quicker reaction than he had from 

the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt). 

 

Nevertheless I don‟t approve of breaking the law but once in a while you know, sometimes it‟s the only 

way you can get your point across. It‟s a bad way but with the Highway Safety Committee, the man 

would not have had to perhaps break the law as you‟ve said to get his point across. We would have got 

after the Minister of Highways to wake up and say, “Look here, Buster, get to work there.” 

 

Now, I think that another area that can be worked on is to have the local government have a highway 

safety committee on their council to promote highway safety or road safety in their towns and in their 

municipalities. That‟s another area that perhaps could be worked on. In order to throw the matter open 

for discussion, I‟m not going to take too much time, I‟ll just mention different things in passing. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, the Government would like to have a few comments 

on this Resolution, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 10 — POSTAL RATES ON PERIODICALS 
 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood) moved, seconded by Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1124 

That this Assembly urges the Provincial Government to protest the action of the Federal Government 

in raising postal rates, in some cases by several hundred per cent, on newspapers and magazines 

sponsored by farm, co-operative, consumer and church organizations and similar groups, whose 

publications are non-profit and non-commercial in nature. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in moving this motion under my name I do so because I believe it‟s a vital issue 

not only to the agricultural economy, not only to the Province of Saskatchewan, but to the well-being of 

the democratic process in Canada. 

 

I believe that all Members of this House will agree with me that newspaper media are still the best and 

the most effective way of our citizens getting all sides of the question and then being able to judge the 

pros and the cons of that question. Certainly I will admit that the instant coverage of radio and TV does 

get the headlines of the news, but for all the details of the story most of us turn to the newspaper or to 

magazines. 

 

When the Hon. Mr. Kierans, Postmaster General, dropped the bomb shell of postal rate increases on the 

Canadian public, his reason for so doing he said was to the effect that the post office was losing $130 

million and that the Government of Canada could no longer subsidize it. Mr. Kierans then went on to 

announce increases which in effect hit harder, newspapers, magazines, especially those non-commercial 

in nature sponsored by farm co-operatives, consumers, church, professional and other associations, than 

any other type of news materials. I can well imagine that they also hit the larger newspapers as well. In 

the October 12, 1968 edition of The Leader Post, a Canadian Press news item dated Montreal quoted 

some comments of Claude Ryan, editor of Le Devoir. I would like to quote from that article: 

 

Claude Ryan publisher of Le Devoir said in an open letter to Postmaster General Eric Kierans that 

proposed changes in postal services will have grave consequences for journalism. Mr. Ryan said in a 

letter published in Le Devoir today that some of the proposals are excessive, disproportionate, 

insufficiently thought out, and liable to cause irreparable harm to the free circulation of ideas and 

information in the country. 

 

The letter goes on to say, 

 

All points indicate that you have not gotten to the root of the matter by imposing increases that will 

satisfy your monetary needs, but will give way to certain prejudices and injustice in some very 

important sectors of the population. For Le Devoir, the proposed increases will reach as high as 275 

per cent of habitual expenses. This increase becomes particularly odious when millions of American 

publications will be distributed at no extra charge. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1125 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ryan did not mention another type of mail that is getting off lightly. This is a great 

pile, what I call “junk mail”. Every day my mailbox is full of circulars, flyers, and sheets, all of which I 

immediately transfer from my mailbox to the junk pile in the post office lobby. More important to me, 

Mr. Speaker, is the effect that these postal increases have had and are having on many of these 

publications mentioned in the Resolution. I would like to put on the records of this House some of the 

problems facing these publications. The editor of the Western Producer wrote three editorials on this 

subject, and I would like to quote from them. The first one is of November 7th, and I now quote in part: 

 

The case of the Western Producer is typical of the rest. The cost of bulk mailing will rise by about 230 

per cent, from $55,000 per year to $183,000, assuming the same number of subscriptions and the same 

number of pages per issue. Basically the increase is from one and one half to five cents per pound bulk 

rate, with a minimum of two cents per copy. Some publications with fewer pages than the Western 

Producer claim that the per issue rate will face increases of the order of 800 to 900 per cent over a 

normal year‟s mailing costs in the past. 

 

Then further on it says, 

 

It is hardly necessary to remind our readers that a very considerable amount of the space in each of the 

Western Producers is given to material emanating from various Federal Government Departments. For 

the record, during the year ending July 31, 1968, the Western Producer carried the equivalent of 88 

pages of material from sources such as the Canada Department of Agriculture, the Department of 

Trade and Commerce, Canadian Wheat Board, Board of Commissioners, Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics and others. 

 

In the next editorial which came the following week, on November 14th, they discussed the debate in 

the House of Commons. I now quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

All the way through the debate the most distressing thing of all was the Postmaster‟s stubborn 

insistence that the lower rates on newspaper mailings had been a subsidy to the publishers. As we have 

said before we certainly refuse to accept the formula he is using to come up with an utterly fantastic 

claim about the amounts of that subsidy to various publishers. If there has been a subsidy, large or 

small, publishers have received no part of it. The beneficiary of low postal rates has been the readers 

who purchased subscriptions at minimum rates. It has long been established that one of the basic 

requirements of a democracy is an informed public. The principle is recognized by all democratic 

countries where governments charge minimal rates for postal services on newspapers and periodicals. 

It was and is particularly 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1126 

important to the rural population without access to newsstands and home delivery. The Post Office has 

never subsidized newspapers, it has subsidized subscribers and their rights to information. In this sense 

it has performed a vital public service as essential as any other services it will continue to subsidize. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, in regard to the Western Producer, one more quotation from the following week, 

November 21st, and I now quote: 

 

The more one contemplates the new second-class postage rate, the more confusing they become. The 

provision for a minimum charge of two cents per copy is particularly baffling and obviously unfair, 

since it hits smaller periodicals in a most vicious blow; increases in some cases will be as high as 900 

per cent. 

 

Further on it says, 

 

We‟ve said the same thing before; Mr. Kierans‟ estimate of the cost of handling publications such as 

the Western Producer and the Co-operative Consumer and the scores of others affected in the same 

way is obviously ridiculous. He has not as yet revealed the formula by which he and his staff reached 

conclusions that make no sense at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here in my hand the March-April copy of the Homemaker‟s Digest. I want to just 

put on record their plea for help in this regard. On the second page, they say this: 

 

We need your help, the Post Office has more than tripled the cost of mailing each issue of 

Homemaker‟s Digest to your house. A serious blow to our budget. We believe this is completely unjust 

where they have not applied as steep an increase to other publications, including US-owned Time and 

Reader‟s Digest, whose new rates are less than half of ours. We have asked the Post Office for equal 

postage rates as other magazines, but just because we send ours free to you, they say that we do not fit 

into their definition of a magazine. If you agree that this seems totally unfair, and that your magazine 

deserves at least the same treatment as other publications, we ask you to write the Cabinet Minister 

responsible for this injustice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new postal rates have already closed the doors of some publications. I have here in my 

hand an ad in the Western Canada Livestock Industry, placed there by Bradley Publication, publishers of 

the Westerner. I now want to quote: 

 

An unrealistic ruling which leaves the Westerner insufficient time to raise its subscription price in 

order to meet increased postage rates has prompted a decision to cease the publication following this 

issue. The new 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1127 

 

postage rates represent for the Westerner an average increase of 1989.3 per cent per year. Most of our 

subscribers are members of one or more of eight livestock associations which have over the years 

appointed the Westerner to serve as their official publication. These association subscriptions date 

from January 1st and continue in force for 12 months. An increase in the cost of subscriptions to the 

association requires the attention of an annual meeting. The largest association we represent holds its 

annual meeting in June. Five others have theirs in December, and the remaining two in January. The 

new postal rates come into effect on April 1, 1969. 

 

Then they go on to say that it is impossible for them to publish any further. Let us look at the percentage 

increase on several other periodicals. First of all, the Credit Union Way is up 2,000 per cent. The Union 

Farmer up 3,100 per cent. Free Press Prairie Weekly goes from $2,700 a week to $11,000. The 

Teachers‟ Federation Bulletin goes up by 900 per cent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the Rural Municipal Councillor, the official publication of the 

SARM. I want to quote from a letter from the SARM, signed by Mr. Lorne Wilkinson, addressed to the 

Right Hon. Pierre Elliott Trudeau and to all Saskatchewan MPs, I am not going to quote all of it, but I 

will read three pertinent paragraphs: 

 

This Association is endeavoring to provide a service primarily to the rural municipal councillors of 

Saskatchewan, but in addition to the whole process of government in this country. Our publication 

carries timely and topical articles on matters of municipal and provincial and national concern to our 

readers. Because we want a first class publication that gives the impression of care and pride in our 

work, we use a good grade of paper and recently have taken deliberate steps to reduce advertising 

content to provide a better balanced magazine. 

 

Our Association membership is made up of 294 rural municipalities each with an average of a reeve 

and six councillors and a secretary. Three years ago, when we commenced publication we doubled the 

membership fee on the understanding that $16 would include a subscription of $2 for each. Such 

subscriptions to be mailed to the subscribers home address. In this way we have a basic subscription 

list of about 2,330. In addition to this basic subscription list, we have about 500 subscribers at the rate 

of $2 per subscription. All MLAs and Senators from Saskatchewan receive a complimentary copy of 

our publication as a public service. 

 

Further on he says, 

 

Until now our mailing costs for 3,000 copies have run about $16-$17 per month, which we will admit 

are low, and 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1128 

some upward revision in rates would be reasonable. The shocking blow however contained in the 

recent advice from the postal board means that our mailing costs on our 36-page edition would be eight 

cents per copy or $240 per issue. Our Christmas edition which ran 44 pages would have cost eleven 

cents per copy to a total of $330 per issue. For our average 36-page edition, ten issues per year we 

previously paid $170. Now we are required to pay $2,400, or an increase of $2,230 per year. This is a 

staggering increase for a small subscription such as ours. Postal rates for our type of publication have 

gone from the sublime to the ridiculous. 

 

He goes on and asks for a re-consideration. 

 

Let us consider the answer that SARM got from the postal authorities, from Mr. S. Pajot, Director of 

Postal Rates: 

 

This refers to your application for registration of your publication, The Rural Councillor, voice of the 

SARM, as second-class mail matter. A review has been made of your application and of the copy of 

publication which indicates that Rural Councillor is being published by or under the auspices of the 

association. Under the terms of Section 11(1)(i) of The Post Office Act, as amended by Chapter 5 of 

the Statutes of Canada 1968, a publication which is published by or under the auspices of an 

association may not be transmitted by mail as a second-class rate of postage. Consequently, it is with 

regret that we inform you that second-class mailing privileges may not be granted for your publication. 

 

I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the attitude of the Federal Government is callous, it is 

discriminatory and it‟s anti-Canadian. Now I ask why anti-Canadian? Let us look at Maclean‟s 

Magazine, really the only true national magazine in Canada. It is in trouble too. I want to quote from the 

Sheaf of February 11, 1969. The headline is, “Maclean‟s is dying.” They point out here, although the 

magazine‟s recent change in size superficially looked like an idea that changes style and sparks up its 

image, but in actuality the size change is a sign of impending death. The change in size is supposed to 

reduce printing costs and it probably hides a decrease in content, but the real malaise that is affecting 

Maclean‟s is the lack of advertising revenue, the backbone of a national magazine. Maclean‟s is in 

competition with Reader‟s Digest, especially with Time Magazine for the advertising revenue in 

Canada. Time with 800,000 subscribers in Canada in the Canadian edition is only charging $2,700 a 

page for advertising to cover printing costs and its minimal Canadian staff. Its subscription campaign is 

phenomenal as witnessed by the inserted card every time a book is bought at our book store. Maclean‟s 

is truly a Canadian operation with 700,000 subscribers. To stay in business it is necessary for them to 

charge $4,600 a page. Later on it says: 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1129 

 

A 1969 Royal Commission headed by Senator Gratten O‟Leary recommended that Canadian 

corporations be prevented from deducting as business expenses the cost of advertising in non-Canadian 

publications where such advertising was directed at the Canadian market. But in 1966 when most of 

O‟Leary‟s proposals were made law, Time and Reader‟s Digest were made exceptions. Observers at 

that time felt the decision came as a result of direct pressure from the American government. Senator 

O‟Leary condemned the exceptions and warned that they would cause dire repercussion. 

 

I might point out that Maclean‟s has had an increase of 136 per cent, but Time Magazine has had an 

increase of only 59 per cent. Here I detect either anti-Canadian or pro-American bias. The great lobby of 

1966 by American interests won out again. Once again our Dominion Government bowed to the wishes 

of American interests, once again, Canadians get the dirty end of the stick. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I detect something else in the actions of Mr. Kierans and the Liberal Government in 

Ottawa. The actions also smack at being anti-farm, anti-co-op, anti-labor. Here we have new postal rates 

from which organizations suffer most: farm papers, such as the Western Producer, the Free Press Prairie 

Farmer, the Stockmen, the Farm Union paper, labor publications, the Co-op Consumer and so on. All 

these publications supply people with necessary information. All are really non-commercial and feel the 

axe swing by a ruthless money-made government dominated by American corporate enterprises. 

 

I submit that Claude Ryan is right when he states that the proposals are excessive, disproportionate, 

insufficiently thought out, and liable to cause irreparable harm to the free circulation of ideas and 

information in the country. I would like to quote from a resolution passed by the Board of Directors of 

the Saskatchewan Credit Union League, and the Co-op Credit Society on January 24 last and sent to 

Prime Minister Trudeau and the Hon. Mr. Kierans. It said this and I quote: 

 

Whereas Canadians and Canadian society value and constantly work for the ideal of democracy and 

whereas democracy employs many informed people, capable and willing to participate in 

decision-making of all levels, and whereas recent postal rate increases have killed some publications, 

which provide people with information and will stop more, and whereas these postal rates affect 

mainly publications of the credit unions, co-op, fraternal organizations, churches and trade unions, 

which do much to keep the fence of democracy mended, therefore, be it resolved that the Government 

of Canada should seriously re-consider the recent action in acutely increasing postal rates as it 

diversely affects publications mentioned above. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel that this Resolution spelled out the situation very clearly. I want to suggest that the 

situation is serious. I believe that it would be for the betterment of 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1130 

Saskatchewan and Canada if this Resolution were passed unanimously and presented to the Government 

in Ottawa. I believe that injustice has been done. I ask all Members to support this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, one of the really big boosts in the ever rising costs of 

living, be it business, social, religious, education, recreation, is this savage boost in postal rates in one 

fell swoop. Only a millionaire, I think, bent upon stamping his dollar sign upon a totally different area 

than that in which he had operated up to the present, namely, the Montreal Stock Exchange, could be so 

ruthless. My colleague from Touchwood has outlined the case for representation to the Federal 

Government on this matter very well. I am not going to deal at length with it, Mr. Speaker, but if you 

will bear with me, I want to quote extensively from the Co-op Consumer of November 12th, 1968, in its 

column, “It‟s your business.” My first quote is merely covering first class mail. 

 

On November 1st, the cost of posting a letter rose to six cents, whether the letter is going across the 

city or across the country. That is a 20 per cent increase for out of town mail and a 50 per cent boost 

for local letters. 

 

I am sure that I don‟t have to remind anyone who sent out Christmas mail regarding this. As I said a 

moment ago, that covers first class mail. Some of it up 20 per cent, and some of it up a 50 per cent 

increase. 

 

Now let us look at third class mail. Again let me quote from the Consumer. 

 

On the same day rates for third class mail went up by equally large amounts. Third class mail includes 

circulars, bulletins and post cards and advertising material. The basic rate on addressed material of this 

type went up from two cents to three, and on addressed material from three cents to five. Clubs and 

churches and other such organizations are going to find the cost of mailing their bulletins and meeting 

notices and newsletters has gone up by five cents, more than first class letter rate has been. That will 

also be the rate for Christmas cards this year. 

 

I am quoting from 1968 as I pointed out. 

 

Let me continue with my quotation from the Co-op Consumer covering another class of mail. As I 

pointed out, clubs, churches and so on were going to find this very difficult. I want to turn now to the 

second-class mail. Again I wish to quote: 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1131 

 

Starting April 1st next, second-class rates will begin an even greater rise. These are the rates that apply 

to newspapers and periodicals and any newsletter and bulletins published for members by clubs and 

trade unions, co-operatives and credit unions, now qualifying for second-class rates, but they will be 

excluded under the amended Post Office Act. 

 

I wish to draw to the attention of the House that from now on they are excluded from the rates under 

which they were formerly mailed. 

 

Between April 1st 1969 and April 1st 1970, they will rise to five cents a pound, but with a minimum 

charge of two cents to mail any newspaper or periodical. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, in total, amounts to a tremendous boost. What is it going to do rather to periodicals? 

Again, I am going to quote: 

 

Almost without exception, the mailing costs of Canadian periodicals will increase by a minimum of 

300 per cent. In many cases, the increase will be much more than that. For the Co-operative Consumer 

our total annual mailing cost will increase by more than nine times. Our cost for mailing papers 

delivered outside Saskatoon will increase 16 times. 

 

Quoting further: 

 

There is no doubt that many periodicals will be unable to stand such great cost increases and they will 

have to cease publication. It may also mean the end of some weekly newspapers. There is no doubt 

also that publications which stay in business will have to raise subscription rates and possibly 

advertising rates to get money for higher postage. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let us turn to what some of these periodicals have to say about their own position. I 

first want to quote the Co-op Consumer‟s own position in regard to these new rates. 

 

The Co-operative Consumer is one of the many publications protesting the severe increase, but we did 

not object to an increase, because our postage is obviously too low for the service provided by the Post 

Office, but we did argue that a 900 per cent increase all at once is both unfair and unreasonable. 

Postmaster General Kierans was hardly sympathetic. He saw no great problem for us at all. He 

suggested that all we had to do was to increase our 35 cent group subscription to 83 cents to cover the 

two cents a copy postage. 

 

The Postmaster General claims that the cost to the Post Office last year for handling the Co-op 

Consumer was more than $280,000, while we actually paid less than 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1132 

$11,000. He seemed to think we would be embarrassed if this information was made public. We are 

not embarrassed for two reasons, first, because we have paid the rate charged by the Post Office and 

second, because we don‟t accept these figures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the position in which the Co-op Consumer finds itself. 

 

I wish to turn now to a quotation from the United Church Observer. And I quote: 

 

An important message to our readers. 

 

This is December 15, 1968. 

 

The new second-class postal rates imposed by Parliament this fall put a heavy burden on all Canadian 

magazines including The Observer. Under the new rates The Observer postage bill is going up 500 per 

cent, from $30,000 per year to $145,200 per year. Out of every $2 the subscriber pays on a family plan, 

44 cents. The Postmaster General Eric Kierans asked for the new rates and other postage increases on 

the grounds that the Post Office must pay its own way. Church periodicals and other magazines argued 

unsuccessfully but other forms of communication in Canada, such as televisions and films are 

subsidized for the common good and the part of the reason for the Post Office deficit is that it must 

deliver large numbers of American magazines which do not pay any Canadian postage. As a result of 

the large increase some small church magazines have already announced that they will stop 

publications. Most large magazines plan to increase subscriptions. 

 

The United Church, Mr. Speaker, is not alone. I have here a quotation from the Canadian Churchmen 

which is an Anglican Church paper. 

 

Tough postal rates faced with an estimated $95 million deficit in the Post Officer operations this year, 

Postmaster General Eric Kierans has announced plans to increase rates. Second-class mailing which 

accounts for nearly half the annual deficit will be raised. The Canadian Churchmen is one of the 

thousands of Canadian publications mailed under second-class privileges. If the rates are raised 

substantially, as Mr. Kierans has indicated, the paper and its diocese and companions along with many 

others will be affected. There are two aspects of this situation. First, the Canadian Government has 

always held the principle of subsidizing the mailing of the press in general because of its importance to 

our national life. Canadian newspapers and magazines are under heavy economic pressure called by 

competition from the United States publications which have a strong appeal to Canadians. Thus 

countless American publications are 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1133 

 

handled by the Canadian Post Office which does not receive any revenue for this service since the 

postage has already been paid in the United States. Under a universal postal convention, all signatory 

governments are required to handle free whatever is passed to them by foreign post offices. 

 

Second, the Government has long recognized the role of the church press as an important educational 

medium in Canada, operating for the common good, Religious publications have enjoyed a preferential 

rate of ¼ cent per pound below that of general magazines along with publications devoted to the 

sciences of agriculture. The church press represents . . . not an economic investment. All the 

publications belonging to the Canadian church press and ecumenical press association, to which 

Canadian churchmen belong, have stated that religious publications operate on the narrowest of 

financial margins. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I will just quote some figures from the Free Press which finds that increased rates 

are going to cost from around $2,700 to $11,000. The Western Producer finds that their postage is going 

to go up somewhere from $90,000 to $100,000 more than it has been. This, Mr. Speaker, is the picture 

that we find right across the country regarding publications of various kinds that they have been taken 

out of one postage rate and placed in another and drastic increases have been levied against them. I‟m 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that the Members of this House to your right are just as aware of this situation and 

just as concerned about it as many to your left, Mr. Speaker. I‟m sure that they will give this motion full 

support. I have great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in seconding this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I had no intention of entering into any 

debate as to the value to Canada of the publications that have been spoken of by the mover and seconder 

of this Resolution. They certainly do make a great contribution to the life of the Canadian people. 

However, I also have a very definite feeling that things that are worthwhile are usually worthwhile 

paying for; the example of Time magazine, which I can well remember costing me less than 25 cents, 

now costs me 50 cents. I believe that that magazine is worthwhile buying otherwise I wouldn‟t buy it. I 

don‟t think that our Canadian postal rates are necessarily there to subsidize magazines and periodicals 

remaining at the same subscription price which they had many years ago. I really don‟t feel too happy 

about asking the Canadian public to subsidize the cost of my sending out Christmas cards. This is just 

one of the things that comes out of a discussion such as this and I think we have to look at all these in 

the light of changing times. For the past few months, I have been very interested in observing the actions 

of a man who I think is a very 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1134 

intelligent and a very demanding Federal Minister of the Crown. He is attempting to solve the problems 

of providing modern postal services for our modern times. Many of our postal rates and the patterns of 

services which have grown up over the past few years have had really very little reference to a sound 

pattern, either in an administrative pattern or an economic procedure. Certainly there is good reason for 

the Postmaster General to examine the subsidies which have wittingly or unwittingly been provided to 

certain users of postal service. I certainly do not believe that this Legislature should attempt to stand in 

the way of a thorough overhaul of this Federal agency. I therefore propose the following amendment, 

seconded by the Hon. Member from Bengough (Mr. Mitchell): 

 

That all the words after the words “Provincial Government” in the first line be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

to congratulate the Postmaster General of Canada for his efforts to put the operations of the Post Office 

on a sound financial basis, while at the same time, urging him to study the effect of postal rates and the 

service provided by rural post offices on newspapers and magazines sponsored by farm and church 

organizations and similar groups whose publications are non-profit and non-commercial in nature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Mitchell (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, I take great pleasure in seconding this amendment, but I 

would like to say a few words that I think are quite important to rural people in their mail deliveries. I 

think something that is much more important to rural dwellers than the cost of magazines is the right to 

be able to go to a post office and get mail. Now in this last year or so we‟ve had, I think, throughout the 

province and certainly in my area some closures of small post offices, suggesting that these people can 

drive 10 to 12 miles to pick their mail up. I know, for instance, and I just cite an example, of one that 

was closed this fall on a paved highway. There was no extra expense for the post office to deliver the 

mail to it but it necessitated these people driving 10 and 12 miles further to pick up their mail. At the 

same time we boast for instance in the rural areas around Regina, and I assume they are the same in 

Saskatoon, we boast of rural mail and deliveries to the mail box. This is very fine and it‟s real handy for 

people to be able to just go out to the end of the lane and pick up their mail, but I think we certainly 

should give some consideration to our ratepayers and citizens who live in the rural areas. I would 

certainly urge this Government to bring pressure to bear on our Federal Government to give a lot more 

consideration to these post offices that they are considering closing and probably to re-open some that 

they already have closed. I think it is very important to our rural people to have the opportunity to drive 

for their mail, four, five or six miles and not have to go 15, when for 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1135 

 

some people all they have to do is go out to the end of their lane to pick it up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I‟m rather amused by the Resolution 

brought in my the Member for Touchwood . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I‟m just wondering what is the motive of this Resolution? Here two Members from the 

Opposition speaking on the Resolution hid behind the smoke screen of this Co-op Consumer, for United 

Church Observer and many other publications. I say it is a smoke screen, but a smoke screen for what? 

Take note, Mr. Speaker, of The Commonwealth of March 5, 1969, that‟s what they are fighting for, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — That‟s what they are fighting for. They aren‟t concerned with the other publications. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — 

 

The Commonwealth is in a fight and you can help. The Trudeau Government‟s new postal charges are 

destroying many small publications, but The Commonwealth is going to carry on and fight back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I‟m just wondering how inconsistent my Socialist friends can be. They talk with 

forked tongues as I have often said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — They cannot stand by their basic principles because they have no principles. I‟ve heard 

of Resolutions in this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, and in Ottawa, and I‟ll quote from Hansard, February 

17, 1966, and everybody will know this man‟s name, Max Saltsman, who is he? Everybody knows 

Stanley Knowles. Who is he? A Socialist. Everybody knows Mr. Regier, he‟s the unfortunate follow 

who gave his place up to Tommy so that Tommy could get elected and get knocked out later on. But, 

however, what did these famous Socialists say? They say one thing in 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1136 

this House today but they say another thing in Ottawa. And just for the records, Mr. Speaker. I could 

read the whole thing but if you don‟t mind I‟ll read out of context but if you want me to read all of what 

Max Saltsman said, I‟ll say it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Go ahead, read the whole thing. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — All right, I think it is best because it is rather short and interesting. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Read the whole thing. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Saltsman, NDP MP for Waterloo South, that‟s the one . . . I don‟t know who 

speaks with a forked tongue, whether it‟s Saltsman or Meakes or the other fellow, I don‟t know. But 

Saltsman said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I directed a question to the Postmaster General and the question resulted from a 

recommendation made in the report of the Auditor General to the House of Commons in which he 

said: „That early consideration should be given to ways and means of covering the loss sustained by 

the Post Office Department in handling second-class mail. I think this is a matter of considerable 

urgency since it is not the first time that the Auditor General has made this request to the Postmaster 

General.‟ 

 

Now Max Saltsman is really pushing for this now. 

 

In his report last year on page 704 he pointed out the loss sustained of $35 million as a result of 

handling a second-class mail by the Post Office Department. This sad history of losses in connection 

with second-class mail goes back for a long time. I think it is time to plug this leak of the taxpayer‟s 

dollar. I think it is time to raise second-class postage rates in the country to overcome the deficits of the 

Post Office. 

 

Then he asked who benefits by these? Then he goes on to say: 

 

I do not believe by any stretch of the imagination that we could consider these people really need the 

taxpayer‟s help. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who is that? The Commonwealth? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — No, that‟s Max Saltsman carrying on. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1137 

 

I feel that the fellow who is working in this shop might have just cause to feel somewhat miffed when 

he knows that some of his hard-earned money is going in that particular direction. 

 

There you are, our Socialist friend speaking with forked tongue as usual. 

 

I just thought, Mr. Speaker, that this should be brought into the records and much more could be said 

about it. But there is so much inconsistency in the position that these Socialists have taken whether in 

Ottawa or elsewhere. They do not try to be honest to their own philosophy. If they are going to be 

honest, let‟s say so but not go contrary to the basic philosophy of their own party. They speak with 

forked tongues. It‟s evident, Mr. Speaker, that I will support the amendment but I won‟t support the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I want now to add just a very few words 

to the discussion which up until a few minutes ago was rather meaningful. I‟m afraid I can‟t say that it 

continued to be meaningful during the course in which the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) was on his 

feet. But he did ask one question and that question was to the effect of why Members of the Opposition 

have raised this matter in the Legislature. There is a simple and very direct reason for that. Mr. Speaker, 

I had a letter from the Secretary of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. To this letter 

he attached a copy of his protest, the protest of that organization to the Federal Minister. He attached 

also the copy of the reply which they got. The Secretary of the SARM in his letter to me said, “If there is 

any way in which you can help getting this matter reconsidered, please do so.” And as a result this 

motion is on the Order Paper now, as a result of that letter. I feel reasonably certain, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Government got the same kind of a letter from the Secretary of the SARM, and I was reasonably 

convinced that the Government would do nothing about it. Consequently Members on this side of the 

House have taken the initiative in raising this matter before the House. They have taken the initiative in 

asking this House to request the Federal Government to do something about a problem that is of great 

importance to farm people and many other people throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, there is no concern on the part of Members of this House for the 

commercial-type mail to which Mr. Saltsman was referring. Certainly nobody who spoke about it on this 

side of the House referred to that type of mail. As a matter of fact the Members who from over here 

spoke on it definitely excluded this from their consideration. The Member from 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1138 

Touchwood in particular referred to the great mass of this commercial, unsolicited and unwanted stuff 

that comes through our mail boxes every day and said specifically, “This kind of material ought to be 

paying more.” But this kind of material contributes nothing to the flow and the distribution of 

information and ideas. It is those periodicals which perform a service to their members and to the 

country at large that we are concerned with. Let‟s face the facts. Some of them have gone out of 

business, others are going to go out of business unless something is done about that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — That‟s the reason why, in spite of the meanderings of the Minister of Labour who took 

his seat, this Resolution is on the books before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn very briefly to the amendment which has been offered. There is nothing 

particularly objectionable about the amendment I suppose. It says, “We congratulate the Postmaster 

General for his efforts to put the operations of the Post Office on a sound financial basis.” Well and 

good. We all over here enjoy apple pie too and we respect motherhood also. And so we can certainly 

support a statement, already considered I‟m sure by the MLAs in the House, to congratulate the 

Postmaster General for his efforts to put the operations of the Post Office on a sound financial basis. We 

do not congratulate him, let that be known very solidly, for his efforts which are going to put a lot of 

very valuable publications out of business, efforts which are going to result in a decrease of dialogue — 

to use a favorite term of the Prime Minister‟s, efforts which are going to result in a lessening in the 

amount of important information available to people all across the country on which to plan their 

operations and around which to develop their ideas. 

 

The second part of the amendment urges him to study the effect of postal rates and the service provided 

by rural post offices on newspapers, magazines sponsored by farm and church organizations and similar 

groups whose publications are non-profit and non-commercial in nature. And in substance of course that 

is what the original Resolution offered. We did not include the reference to service of the rural post 

offices. The Member from Bengough (Mr. Mitchell) has done us a service by including that. The 

difference is of course that the original Resolution was much more direct, it was much more emphatic. 

The original Resolution would have reflected much better the mood of the people in Saskatchewan. It 

would have reflected much better the needs of farm publications and co-op publications and trade union 

publications and municipal publications than does this watered-down somewhat anemic version which 

has been offered in the amendment. However since the Government has offered the amendment it is 

undoubted that the Government Members are going to proceed to support it. There is no problem 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1139 

 

about us in supporting it over on this side. I regret that the Liberals or the Government Members have 

seen fit to so water down this protest. As a result again they suggest to the Federal Government that the 

problem is less than it actually is. I would rather have had a Resolution with some guts and gusto to it, 

such as the original one had than this watered-down version. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I wasn‟t going to speak on this 

Resolution until I listened to the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition when he said he had requests 

from the different organizations and a request from the Secretary of the SARM to bring this matter to the 

attention of the Federal authorities. Now I can indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that something 

has been done by the Government in this regard. Last week the Weekly Newspaper Association, 

especially those who print farm periodicals in this province, expressed their concern to me and indicated 

there was going to be a meeting between the Postmaster General, the Federal Minister of Agriculture 

and the Canadian Federation of Agriculture and asked if, even though the Resolution was on the Order 

Paper in this Legislature, asked if I would bring this matter to the attention of the Federal Minister of 

Agriculture, insofar as it referred to farm periodicals, because Departments of Agriculture all across 

Canada owe a great deal to these various weekly publications that carry the story of agricultural 

developments, agricultural plans, agricultural policies and the whole agricultural situation by means of 

extension to the farm readers not serviced by the daily newspapers in their respective provinces. So last 

week I sent a telegram on behalf of the farm periodicals in Saskatchewan drawing to the attention of the 

Federal Minister of Agriculture the service that had been rendered in the past and the hope that he would 

intervene with the Postmaster General and see if something could be done to alleviate the situation. 

Having received the telegram in Ottawa, I was very pleased last night to receive a telegram in return 

from the Federal Minister of Agriculture, saying that he had met with the Postmaster General, with the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture and that a higher degree of understanding had been reached by all 

groups concerned. So to say that you must wait until you bring a Resolution in front of the Legislature to 

take action on these different matters, I would want to indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that on 

different occasions he says he takes credit for telegrams he has sent to Ottawa. But we haven‟t waited, 

because time was of the essence that something already has been done and I hope it will bear results. I 

will support the amendment and not the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to add a word or two because I 

think that some Members may not be fully aware of just the changes which are proposed or which are 

about to be implemented. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1140 

I heard the remarks of the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) and it seemed to me rather odd that he 

would seek to justify what changes had been made in the Act by the comments which were made in the 

House of Commons by Mr. Saltsman, Mr. Knowles or others. I think they were in fact calling for 

increases in the second-class mail rates. I am not aware of anyone who opposes increases in the 

second-class mail rates, fairly substantial increases, increases perhaps of 100 per cent. What I am 

objecting to is the rather remarkable pattern of application of the new rates. I wonder if Members 

opposite are aware of the fact that, let us say, the Co-operative Consumer — you may know that small 

publication — will now cost at least twice as much to mail through the mail as The Leader Post. I 

wonder if you are aware of the fact that, because of the application of these rates, Time Magazine will 

suffer an increase of less than 100 per cent whereas the Co-op Consumer‟s rates will go up at least 1,200 

per cent, less than 100 per cent for Time and 1,200 per cent for the Co-op Consumer. And this is 

defended by the Minister of Co-ops. The same thing will happen with respect to a trade union paper. The 

cost of sending out a trade union paper will go up roughly from ½ cent or maybe 1/3 of a cent to roughly 

4 cents. So this is defended by the Minister of Labour. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the Minister of 

Labour believes that The Leader Post should be able to be circulated — I‟ve got nothing against the 

Leader Post — at ½ the price of the Lakeview United Church bulletin or of the Sacred Heart Parish 

Church bulletin. This is defended by the Minister of Labour. It seems to me to be quite remarkable that a 

decision would be made to exclude from the second-class mailing privileges a whole series of 

publications put out by groups as diverse as the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, and the Canadian 

Congress of Labour. But whether it‟s put out by the Canadian Chamber of Commerce or the Canadian 

Congress of Labour, it strikes me that it is performing a useful public service. These publications ought 

not to go free, they ought not to go at below cost, but if the cost of sending The Leader Post is two cents, 

surely the cost of sending those periodicals is two cents. And if in fact the cost of sending those 

periodicals is four cents, let‟s charge The Leader Post or Time Magazine or similar publications four 

cents. I think there can be no justification for applying the sharp differential in rates which is applied by 

the new law. I find it absolutely remarkable that the Minister of Labour would stand in his place and 

defend them. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — On a point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, I did not defend. All I said is that the Opposition 

are speaking with forked tongues. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I misinterpreted the Minister of Labour. I thought he was saying that he would vote 

against the Resolution as it was, I took that to be his meaning. I took that from his remarks from which I 

assumed that he is in favor of the changes made. The burden of his remarks was that I ought to be in 

favor of 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1141 

 

them because Mr. Saltsman and Mr. Knowles were in favor of them, and this conclusion he drew from 

quoting Hansard. My comment on his argument is that his conclusion from the comments in Hansard is 

in error. Therefore, his conclusion as to what my position should be is in error. And I suggest to him that 

his position is in error. I suspect that some Members opposite may not have followed that explanation 

but it is perhaps not too important. 

 

The particular point I wanted to make was that the new rules exclude from second-class mailing 

privileges a very wide range of publications put out by church groups, trade associations such as the 

Retail Merchants Association, Co-operatives, trade unions, stockmen‟s association. I am pleased to 

know that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) has lodged a protest or at least a request for 

reconsideration on the part of the agricultural groups, but I would suggest that some of the other groups 

have the same right to consideration as the agricultural groups, not all of them, but some of them. I 

would suggest, therefore, that what has happened is that an effort has been made to balance the books, as 

you might say, out of the non-profit organizations. I regret this because it seems to me that all types of 

publications using the mails ought to bear their fair share of costs. I think that The Leader Post ought not 

to be overcharged, nor ought it to be undercharged, and I say the same with respect to the Sacred Heart 

Parish bulletin or the Wakaw Recorder or the Co-op Consumer, if I may select a few examples of 

different types of publications. I, therefore, think, Mr. Speaker, that the original Resolution was 

preferable to the amendment. I will oppose the amendment. If in fact the amendment passes I will 

support the motion as amended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Also, Mr. Speaker, may I get a ruling, if I can speak to the things that the Hon. 

Member said while he moved the amendment and the speakers who have spoken since. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member for Touchwood is now speaking to the amendment and while speaking to 

the amendment he can answer the arguments of those who moved whatever they were. 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I don‟t want to be on the outs with you, I don‟t mind being on the outs across there, but 

I like to keep in the good graces of Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am only going to speak for a minute or two and mention a few of the things that were said by Members 

opposite. I first refer to the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth). He got up and 

completely ignored the points that I had mentioned about the special treatment that Time Magazine and 

Reader‟s Digest were getting. I think this was one of the important points that I was endeavoring to 

point out. I then 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1142 

turn to the Hon. Member from Bengough (Mr. Mitchell), and I certainly want to agree with him. I am 

glad that he inserted those words about rural post offices. I know that it is going on in my own 

constituency, some of them being closed out and I don‟t think it is right. I think that it is a very good 

item that he brought into it. I then come to the Minister of Co-operatives and Labour (Mr. Coderre), I 

think he really showed that he really didn‟t know what he was talking about. He accused us of hiding 

behind the smoke screen. He accused us of the only thing we are worrying about was The 

Commonwealth. Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote word for word what Mr. Wilkinson, 

Secretary-Manager of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities said in a letter to my 

Leader: 

 

We cannot help but wonder what kind of consideration is given to such pieces of legislation before 

they are enacted. One cannot help but question the motives behind the legislation, such as this, that 

makes economically possible only the large publications with lucrative advertising revenues to operate. 

This is a very serious matter, one with which we believe everyone should be concerned. Please use 

every means at your disposal to have this matter raised again and to correct this obvious error in 

judgment. 

 

So I want to point out to my hon. friends and the Minister of Labour that, even though we are 

politicians, over here we do think of other things besides our own political party paper. And certainly if 

you go about in recent months, picking up whatever magazine or publication that comes into your hand, 

you will read of the lamentations on the terrible increase in postage, the fact that subscribers are going to 

have to be paying much more, sometimes two or three times as much. This, Mr. Speaker, is the reason 

that I agreed to move this motion. 

 

I also want to agree that the Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), I am glad that he moved in 

asking for reconsideration for agricultural publications. I think this is good, but I do also suggest that 

there are other magazines, other newspapers which should have the same consideration as the 

agricultural publications. Before sitting down, Mr. Speaker, I am going to vote against the amendment 

because I believe it weakens down our motion. I think that we should be protesting rather than asking 

consideration. If the amendment does carry I will be supporting the motion as amended. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 11 — ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMISSION TO EXAMINE HEALTH 

PROGRAMS 
 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East) moved, seconded by Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1143 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the establishment of a 

Commission to examine health programs in Saskatchewan and elsewhere, with a view to determining: 

 

(a) the cost of such programs and the various methods of financing them; 

(b) the number, ages and economic status of persons who are deterred by utilization fees from seeking 

health services; 

(c) methods of organizing health services which will control costs without placing obstacles in the way 

of obtaining needed services, and at the same time make possible an improvement in the quality of 

health services. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in opening debate on this Resolution may I say that we in the New Democratic 

party have a very sincere and genuine concern about the rising cost of public health services. At the 

same time, I want also to say that we are equally concerned about the rising cost of health services, 

which at the present time are not publicly financed and administered, such as the cost of drug care, the 

cost of dental care and all those other health services our citizens need and have to pay for directly. Mr. 

Speaker, Members of our caucus have considered these problems on many occasions. We admit there is 

no easy solution. We also differ very strongly with the Government‟s methods of controlling health 

costs. We abhor the introduction of deterrent fees as a means to control rising costs, simply because 

deterrent fees do exactly that. They deter low income earners from seeking health services when they 

need them. They are a barrier between the person needing the health care and the service itself. We 

object to deterrent fees for another reason. They are a regressive tax, they place the burden of health care 

costs unfairly on those using the service, rather than on the population as a whole, based on ability to 

pay. They eliminate the pooling of risk. 

 

Our position is that health programs should be principally financed from Federal grants and from 

Provincial Consolidated Revenues. 

 

In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, since the introduction of the Hospital Services Plan was established in 

1947, we had a flat premium when the plan was introduced. This principle was retained when the 

Medical Care Plan came into being. Premiums are relatively simple to collect; they provide a fairly large 

amount of revenue, and it is even argued by some that the payment of a direct premium has a 

psychological effect of making the contributor feel he is participating and that he has a direct stake in the 

program. This is a very debatable point. My argument is that a flat premium removes equity, it has no 

relationship to ability to pay. A premium of $72 a year for example represents two per cent of income to 

a person earning $3,600 a year; one per cent where the income if $7,200 a year, and only ½ per cent 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1144 

where the income is $14,400 a year. Therefore, premiums have a built-in regressive aspect to them. 

 

Combining flat premiums and deterrent fees results in a double-barrelled hardship on low-income 

earners. Hospital premiums and Medical Care premiums in Saskatchewan have never gone beyond $72 

a year for a family or $36 a year for an individual. When this Administration took over the reigns of 

government, premiums were $52 a year, or $1 a week for a family and $26 a year, or 50 cents a week for 

an individual. As a result of the introduction of deterrent fees last year, the direct charges to a majority 

of people were considerably increased. The Government has announced its intention to limit the 

deterrent fees to $180 a year for a family. No limit has been mentioned so far as I can recall for an 

individual. 

 

Let us take a family who pays over $180 in hospital and medical care deterrents. They will be 

reimbursed as I understand for the amount over the $180 figure. But the direct cost for the two services, 

medical and hospital care, will be the $180 deterrent charge and the $72 premium charge, for a total of 

$252 for a family in that year, or almost $5 a week. This is excluding other taxes that people have to pay 

to help finance the health services. Mr. Speaker, less than five years ago it was only $1 a week and this 

was before the national medicare came into being. Mr. Speaker, I notice the budgetary estimate provides 

that Saskatchewan will receive close to $19 million in the current fiscal year from Ottawa for the 

payment of medicare. This $19 million does not come to Saskatchewan in the form of gratis. 

Saskatchewan citizens will pay that amount plus, in the form of the two per cent social development tax. 

As a result of a ceiling of $180 a year, this tax again falls most heavily on the low-income group. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the last month the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) has repeated several times that he 

feels hospitalization and medical care premiums in Saskatchewan are too low. The Minister argues that 

originally premiums represented 58 per cent of hospital care costs; now premiums represent 17 per cent 

of the hospital and medical care costs. 

 

Taking this argument, Mr. Speaker, in isolation, this may be correct. However, he should not overlook 

the fact that other direct taxes were increased or imposed to specifically help finance hospital and 

medical care. These include deterrent fees, the Federal social development tax, increases in sales taxes 

and others, Mr. Speaker, perhaps one thing the Government and the Opposition Members can agree on. 

For every argument presented by the Government we can present equally as strong a counter argument 

and perhaps vice versa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year we pressed the Government to produce evidence of alleged hospital and medical 

care abuses but no facts were revealed. We now ask again how much money the people of Saskatchewan 

paid in deterrent charges and who are the people 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1145 

 

who are hurt economically by these charges, and because of this, how many do not seek needed health 

service. Mr. Speaker, I want to now refer to the report of the Medical Care Insurance Commission which 

was tabled with us yesterday. I ask the Members to refer firstly to page 40. If you analyze page 40, the 

number of services per 1,000 beneficiaries, if you make a calculation of the various services, office 

visits, complete examinations is 409 per 1,000; regional and minor examinations 1,554; the home and 

emergency services; the diagnostic services; the refractions by physicians and services by optometrists, 

it appears to me that the amount the people of Saskatchewan paid in deterrent fees is somewhere 

between $3½ and $4 million. Mr. Speaker, the Minister yesterday commenting in the news media said 

that the total payment was only increased, last year, by two per cent. The one thing that the Minister 

deliberately ignored mentioning is this $3½ to $4 million the people of Saskatchewan have paid directly 

in deterrent charges. This figure he excluded. Let us take that amount together with the total paid by the 

public purse of $26.8 million, and we will find that last year the cost of health services, as provide under 

the Medical Care Insurance Commission or those benefits that are included under the plan, increased by 

about 14 per cent, not two per cent as the Minister quoted. Mr. Speaker, it is important for us to analyze 

why these costs increased so sharply. Someone has just mentioned this was the worst increase to the 

public and the individuals since the Medical Care Plan was introduced. 

 

Well, Sir, in analyzing the report, I am sorry that time has not permitted to make as comprehensive a 

study as I would like to, because the report was only tabled yesterday afternoon. You are aware we sat 

last evening, and I had a Public Accounts Committee meeting this morning. But let us take a look at 

page 13, and what do we find? That effective July 1, 1968, war veterans, for whom premiums have been 

paid by the Federal Government have been added to the plan, effective July 1, 1968. Indians on whose 

behalf the Federal Government paid premiums have also been added to the plan. The number of 

beneficiaries has increased by .4 per cent. The administration costs increased by over $207,000, this is 

reported on page 33, Mr. Speaker. You will note the tremendous increase of $207,000 in administration 

costs. Mr. Speaker, I submit that this in the main was as a result of the introduction of deterrent fees. We 

warned the Government last year that this would be the consequence when the deterrent fees came into 

being, that the administration costs would rise sharply. The next item which helped to increase the cost 

of medicare was the adding of refractions by physicians as insured services as of July 1st and 

optometrist services being added to the plan effective July 1 of 1968. This is noted on page 21 under 

item 3. I direct you to page 34 of the report. Here we will note that payments to physicians for physician 

services were increased by six per cent for the first seven months of 1968 as compared to 1967 for the 

same period, and a further 14 per cent increase for physician services effective as of August 1st. Mr. 

Speaker, in other words physician‟s fee schedules were increased by 20 per cent for the last five months 

of 1968, compared to the first ten months of 1967. This 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1146 

information as I said is recorded on page 34 of the report. The other cost, as I have already mentioned, 

which was enormous was the imposition of deterrent fees. They added to the total cost of health care 

between $3½ to $4 million. 

 

I noticed that the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) said that the savings to the MCIC last year were 

somewhere in the neighborhood of $200,000 a month. Well, Sir, that may be true in as far as savings to 

MCIC, but the one thing we must remember that for every $2 saved to MCIC, the public, the users of 

the service, paid $3. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, it is also interesting to note what is mentioned on page 26 of the report. 

Take the regional and minor examinations of physicians. The MCIC in 1967 paid $3.05 per service; in 

1968 they only paid $2.68 per service, and the individual had to pay an additional $1.50 in deterrent 

charges, thus, Mr. Speaker, that particular service per visit cost $4.18 in 1968 since the introduction of 

deterrent fees compared to $3.05 in 1967 — a 37 per cent increase — and that increase had to be paid 

directly by the user. 

 

The other important thing for us to note is what the Minister said, that deterrent fees had the effect of 

reducing the utilization by 4½ per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of figures that the 

Minister has quoted previously. I noticed when he spoke during a previous debate he gave us figures for 

certain periods saying it was 3½ per cent reductions, other periods 7.8 and then 8.9. I presume 4.5 per 

cent is an average for the 8½ months. Mr. Speaker, let us always keep in mind that, while he talks about 

a decrease in utilization, it should be recorded here the total increase and facts prove it in his own report 

that the users of the services were in no way guilty of increasing the cost or of overusing the service. 

The 14 per cent increase, as I noted earlier in the cost of medicare, is a direct result of other things, and 

in no way the fault of the individual, the receivers of the services, but as a result of the actions of this 

Government, Mr. Speaker, by the actions of this Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I believe as Legislators, on this important issue, we may be well advised 

to pause and stop reacting from emotion and from bias, nor can we just look at the public purse, as the 

Minister has been doing and forget the individual‟s purse and vice versa. The big question confronting 

all of us as responsible elected representatives is: what are the best methods of financing health services 

and can our services be organized and re-organized where we can achieve economies and at the same 

time improve the quality of health services to the population? 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1147 

 

I am satisfied that no one here including the Minister of Health, including his Department at this time, 

can answer that question conclusively. Each of us has an opinion, but no one has any full proof to go by, 

Mr. Speaker, this is the reason for my Resolution to establish a Commission to examine our health 

services in Saskatchewan and elsewhere. I want to know the effects of deterrent fees. I want to know 

who is deterred and what are the reasons and what are their incomes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for over 30 years studies and experiments have been conducted in many parts of this 

continent to develop better methods of delivering health care to the patients. The organization which has 

led the way in bringing together consumers of medical services and groups of doctors to promote these 

improvements is the Group Health Association of America. The 30 years of experiment and research has 

pointed very strongly to the conclusion that there are two factors which can contribute outstandingly to a 

form of health services which both reduces cost and improves the quality of service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first is the complete prepayment of services so that no financial transaction takes place 

at the time of obtaining the service and so that no financial obstacle stands between the patient and his 

doctor. The second factor is the provision of a comprehensive, family-oriented health service by a group 

of general practitioners, medical specialists and other health personnel working as a team. 

 

In the United States several million people are now obtaining their health services from comprehensive 

clinics based on this kind of group medical practice. The primary purpose of the consumer associations 

and the medical groups which launched these clinics was the improvement of the quality of care to be 

made available to the people. It was discovered over a period of years that as well as improving the 

quality of health services these group clinics were also able to substantially reduce health costs of the 

populations they were serving. 

 

A major factor in cutting costs was found to be the much lower amount of health care required by the 

patients who are getting their services from group clinics. 

 

Members will be interested that the Group Health Association of America approached the United States 

Department of Health, Education and Welfare, and presented statistical evidence to show that many 

millions of dollars could be saved for the taxpayer if there was an extension of group-practice clinics. 

The result was that the United States Department of Health brought before the United States Congress 

legislation which would encourage the development of group-practice clinics, by offering Federal 

financial assistance to co-operatives or medical groups for the construction and the equipping of 

comprehensive group-practice, medical facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1148 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, a similar development has been taking place in Great Britain and in other 

European countries. I am bringing this matter to the attention of the Legislature for a specific purpose. 

Government spokesmen have said a great deal about the costs rising out of proportion. They have made 

proposals and taken certain actions ostensibly to reduce health costs. These have all been negative steps, 

Mr. Speaker. We on this side of the House, have pointed out many times that Government actions are 

bound to be discriminatory and to prevent some sections of the population from obtaining services that 

they need; or steps such as withdrawing financial support from such services as minor surgery when 

performed in doctors‟ clinics; or steps such as those most recently proposed by the Minister of Health, 

the withdrawal of Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan support for physiotherapy treatment and for 

diagnostic laboratory and x-ray procedures, when not performed in the hospital. 

 

All of these steps will result not only in inconvenience to patients and doctors, but also will undermine 

those medical clinics in this province which are currently providing comprehensive service along the 

lines which the Group Health Association of America has found to be the most efficient and at the same 

time the most economical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt at all, that the quality of service available to a number of families in 

Saskatchewan has suffered as a result of the steps taken by the present Government. The Minister now 

proposes a withdrawal of support from non-hospital out-patient services, a further retrograde step. Mr. 

Speaker, the most remarkable aspect of these policies is that, whereas the reason advanced to justify 

them is the saving of tax dollars, there is strong evidence that the result of these policies will be just the 

reverse . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — . . . that they will, over a period of years, result in higher health costs to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have referred to experience in the United States with regard to the saving in health costs 

made possible by an efficient and consumer-oriented organization of services. Experience translated into 

dollar statistics was sufficient to convince the Government and the Congress of the United States of 

America. 

 

I want now to turn closer to home. There are in Saskatchewan community clinics, which are based on 

the philosophy of the Group Health Association of America, and which are organized along the lines of 

the clinics for which these statistics were presented, read and considered by the United States 

Government. These clinics, too, have been collecting statistical information. These statistics show that, 

in the case of the larger community clinics, hospital usage by the patients served is only a fraction 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1149 

 

of hospital usage for the average patient of the city or area concerned and only a fraction of the usage for 

the province as whole — in fact, Mr. Speaker, less than one-half. This means a saving of hundreds of 

thousands of dollars to the people of Saskatchewan. If projected to a larger segment of the population, 

this rate of saving per patient would run into many millions of dollars for the province as a whole. 

 

The community clinics have made no secret of these facts. I understand they have made them known to 

the Minister of Health. In fact, it would be impossible for this information to be kept away from the 

Government as all of the relevant statistics are also compiled by the Government computers. And yet the 

Government has done nothing to encourage these new formations of organizations of health services, 

which have the potential of greatly improving the quality and greatly reducing the costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time has come for the Government to stop trying to reduce costs by hit-and-miss 

methods which are usually destructive in the short run and probably more expensive on the long-term 

basis. The time has come for a serious study of alternative methods of providing services and of 

arranging the financing. The information is available both in this province and elsewhere. The experts 

are available who could analyze the data objectively and impartially. 

 

A report could be made to this Legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan which would provide a 

sound basis for both government action and voluntary initiative in developing a pattern of health care 

and a system of financing health services, which would raise the health standards of the people and 

ensure that the dollars spent in doing so would be spent to the best advantage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I know no better way than the appointment of an impartial Commission 

to be properly represented by those providing, and those receiving health services to undertake such a 

comprehensive study. Mr. Speaker, I might suggest to the Government, if it accepts the idea of 

appointing a Commission, that it consider inviting Mr. Justice E.M. Hall to chair such a Commission. 

Certainly he is eminently qualified. He has gained a great deal of knowledge on the health topic during 

his service as chairman of the Royal Commission on Health Services in Canada. He has gained a 

tremendous amount of experience and knowledge. I am sure he would be well received by all. Certainly 

the Commission would require a good secretariat and adequate staff. This proposal is submitted in all 

sincerity and good faith. It is not a political ploy. 

 

We are mindful of the fact that Ottawa has already served notice to opt out of medicare within five 

years. Mr. Speaker, the Premier has said that he has information that the Federal Government will also 

opt out of sharing costs of hospital care. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1150 

Now, if this is the case, what are the implications for us here in Saskatchewan? The Provincial Treasurer 

(Mr. Steuart) tells us in his Budget Address that the Federal Hospital Construction Grants will come to 

an end early in 1970 and other Federal Health Grants are to be phased out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious to me that we need to look at the total problem now. We can‟t wait for two or 

three years. It will be too late. Mr. Speaker, I urge the Government to give this Resolution their 

co-operation and their full support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that this Resolution if it is 

accepted by the Government will represent one of the most important measures to receive the attention 

of the Government during this session of the Legislature. It provides the opportunity to determine a 

sense of direction for the Government, in place of the irrational and inconsistent approach to health 

matters that this Government has been displaying in recent years. 

 

When I say that this Government has been inconsistent and irrational, Mr. Speaker, I think we need only 

recall a few of the piecemeal attempts by the Government opposite in dealing with matters which 

obviously need a well-organized and long-term approach, if the health needs of Saskatchewan people 

are to be taken care of effectively and as economically as possible. Members will remember well, I 

believe, how this Government rushed headlong into the implementation of the Saskatchewan Mental 

Health Plan in discharging and re-locating mental health patients in the community. The Provincial 

Treasurer, the former Minister of Health (Mr. Steuart) refused to acknowledge that a problem existed, 

until public pressurers obliged him to appoint the so-called Ad Hoc Committee whose recommendations 

he proceeded to ignore almost completely. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, with a new Minister of Health in the harness and with a multitude of problems 

materializing, and with a number of tragic events haunting the Liberal Administration, and with a 

Provincial general election just around the corner, the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) established the 

Frazier Commission, whose report damned this Government‟s neglect, its incompetence and its cavalier 

attitude with respect to the method in which the Saskatchewan Plan was implemented by this 

Government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this sad and morbid story is a part of Saskatchewan‟s history at this stage, but I think 

that it points up sharply the need for a well-organized and a long-range approach to the health needs of 

Saskatchewan people and the need for vigilance in controlling health costs, as is suggested in the 

Resolution that is before us. The over-zealous discharge policy which the Government began in 1965 

resulted in an almost complete break-up of our mental health program which Dr. Frazier described as 

operating on a sustained emergency basis. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1151 

 

This emergency situation has resulted in new demands upon both the 1968 and 1969 Budgets. Each of 

these Budgets has had to provide a half a million dollars in order to begin to set right the emergency 

situation that was allowed to develop during the 24 months following the flood of discharges from the 

Weyburn institution in 1965. This, Mr. Speaker, is one example of the Government‟s haphazard 

approach to the serious matter of providing health services to Saskatchewan people. Today, we are 

seeing the waste which results from short-term plans which fail to take into account long-term 

objectives. There are many more examples of the apparent lack of understanding which this Government 

has shown with respect to health services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Government‟s recent decision to discontinue out-patient physiotherapy and radiology has some 

connotations about it which will, in the final sense we suggest, be costly in terms of both money and 

deteriorating services. I want to ask the Minister of Health what information he has available to him, 

which has led him to believe that hospital facilities would be adequate to fill the need under these new 

circumstances. The Minister of Health has indicated on other occasions that doctors are somewhat 

inclined to succumb to the wishes of the patient in allowing the patient to remain in the hospital for 

longer periods than are necessary, unless economic pressures are placed upon the patient. This was one 

of his arguments for the imposition of deterrent fees. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if there is a speck of 

logic to that argument then the Minister is defeating his own case with the cancellation of out-patient 

payments for these two services. In effect, Mr. Speaker, I think that he is inviting excessive use of 

hospital beds for services which may very well be provided as out-patient services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Similarly, Mr. Speaker, the Commission which is mentioned in the Resolution might be 

properly charged with the responsibility of making a measured and learned judgment with respect to the 

number and location of the smaller community hospitals, which in the light of 1969 circumstances might 

determine if they are providing economic and valuable services. At the same time it might offer an 

indication also with respect to those hospitals which indeed must be phased out. It would appear that up 

until this moment, Mr. Speaker, the Government has proceeded on this eeny-meeny-miny-moe basis 

without any direction like a ship without a compass. 

 

Members will recall, Mr. Speaker, that prior to the introduction of deterrent charges, we on this side of 

the House were, interested in the information that might well have been revealed if a study had been 

conducted in the operation of the Swift Current Health Region. It was known, of course, that deterrent 

charges had been levied in that area for doctors‟ services for quite a number of years. However, it is well 

known, too, that no deterrent charges were applied to hospital services, and it is a matter of record also 

that utilization of hospital beds in 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1152 

the Swift Current area is considerably higher than in most other areas of the province. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, these facts and this kind of evidence should arouse the interest of the Minister of 

Public Health, if he is interested in doing the kind of job that the public expects of a person, who is 

entrusted with what many people consider to be the most important portfolio in the Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — A study into the circumstances in that area, prior to the introduction of deterrent 

charges, might very well have caused the Government to reach an entirely different conclusion with 

regard to the imposition of deterrent fees. The Government may yet discover, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

that another costly mistake has been made. It is the opinion of many people that preventive medicine is 

being discouraged and that, in the long haul, a program that discourages early and frequent care is costly 

in terms of good health as well as dollars. 

 

During the Throne Speech Debate, Mr. Speaker, I pointed out that I had within my circle of 

acquaintances a number of old age pensioners who are deliberately postponing surgery and treatment for 

ailments ranging from hernia to hemorrhoids to thyroid conditions, all because of the difficult financial 

problems which they face. I might add, Mr. Speaker, that they are hoping for an early Provincial election 

in order that the existing situation in this respect may be corrected at an early date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in the meantime no effort is being made to establish who is 

being deterred nor does the Government appear to be concerned about the relative age groups which are 

most seriously affected, nor does the Government seem to be concerned in discovering whether this 

charge has had a most severe effect on low-income groups or which groups are suffering from the 

imposition of deterrent charges more directly. Quit clearly, Mr. Speaker, the Government is satisfied to 

fly blind, blissfully ignorant, concerning the long-term possibilities of the action that it has taken and 

satisfied that some savings might have been achieved. 

 

I think that I can say without question, Mr. Speaker, that there is no group of people in this province that 

is more concerned and more dedicated to containing the cost of health services than we who sit on this 

side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I think that there is every reason to express some concern over the rising cost of health 

services. But Saskatchewan 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1153 

 

is certainly no island in this connection. One needs only to look to other areas of North America where 

there is no public plan in operation to realize that the cost of medical care and hospitalization elsewhere 

is completely out of reach of many people and that without protection financial ruin is an ever-present 

possibility. 

 

It has been the practice for some people who in the past have opposed comprehensive, universal medical 

care and hospitalization to point to rising costs in an attempt to equate the increasing costs with the fact 

that this is a universal public plan. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that an examination of the facts will prove 

that it is just the very opposite. I believe that the only way that costs can be kept within reach of all the 

members of our society is through a public plan. Only the other day, the Member for Weyburn (Mr. 

Pepper) showed me a bill that an acquaintance of his had received after a brief confinement in a hospital 

in California. The cost for only a few days of care and treatment almost staggers the imagination. One of 

my own constituents brought a bill to me for a dependent child who was hospitalized in North Dakota 

for a period of six days. The comparison between Saskatchewan‟s cost per day as compared to the cost 

just across the 49th parallel leads one to believe that we may consider ourselves somewhat fortunate in 

relative terms. 

 

It is to be expected, Mr. Speaker, during a period of inflation such as the one we are presently passing 

through, that costs will rise. Goods and services cost more. It is to be expected that doctors‟ services 

over a period of years will also cost more. I, for one, Mr. Speaker, have no quarrel with the decision of 

the Government in increasing the fee schedule for the general practitioner. I might have some other 

reservations with respect to specialist‟s fees. Certainly, the general practitioner who receives in the 

neighborhood of $5 per office call is not over paid. And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, I am acquainted with 

several doctors who are sacrificing the $1.50 deterrent charge because in some particularly needy cases 

they haven‟t the heart to apply the charge. Accordingly, they are absorbing the cost themselves. I think 

that this is rather unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, when some good-hearted general practitioners find 

themselves in the position of running their own welfare agency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House do not contend that we have all of the answers with respect to 

the organization of health services. I believe we can say though with a degree of confidence that, during 

that period when our group was the Government of this province, a pretty remarkable job was done of 

providing forward-looking programs, introducing new and imaginative concepts in health care and at the 

same time keeping costs of this care within reasonable limits. It should be remembered, Mr. Speaker, 

that since Members opposite formed this Government the Federal Government at Ottawa has come to 

the rescue with approximately $15 million a year also. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1154 

Mr. Speaker, in light of recent financial assistance from Ottawa and increased revenue from other 

sources that were evident in the Budget that was just brought down a few weeks ago, including deterrent 

charges, it would not appear that the problem of the Government should be too desperate, and it is to be 

hoped that the Minister will restrain himself from initiating an increase in the personal premiums, as it 

appears he intends to do as soon as the 59th seat in this Legislature is filled at some future date. A study 

such as the one that is suggested in this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, should precede any such move by the 

Government. 

 

It is to be hoped that the Government will see the wisdom in the kind of action that is recommended in 

this Resolution. A commission, along the lines suggested in the Resolution has the potential to provide a 

valuable service to the Government which could provide a new sense of direction, which I suggest has 

been badly lacking since this Government assumed the responsibility for the health care of 

Saskatchewan people. Too often in recent years, Mr. Speaker, this Government has plunged into 

situations which appear to be based on some pre-conceived prejudice rather than on any well-considered 

plan. In several of these cases it has been obliged to retreat because of the failure to arrive at a reasoned 

judgment before initiating programs or taking legislative action. Too often it appeared that the 

Government has had no real desire to arrive at the facts before applying its own solution. This, I‟m 

afraid, Mr. Speaker, has been too much like a game of Russian roulette with the Government taking 

unnecessary and unwise privileges with long-established health services in our province. 

 

I‟m most happy, Mr. Speaker, to support this Resolution and I hope that Members opposite will also see 

wisdom in the suggestions that the Resolution contains. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would have been almost disappointed 

if we hadn‟t had a good dissertation on utilization fees and I presume that was the real reason for the 

introduction of this Resolution in order to give the Members opposite an opportunity to repeat many of 

the statements they made last year and obtain any political benefit therefrom. It was refreshing though to 

have both the speakers admit that there was no easy solution or they didn‟t know the answers. I have to 

agree with them on this statement at least. I think we must recognize that within the last two or three 

years there has been a tremendous amount of talk across this country about escalating health costs in 

general but very little action has been taken. I believe Saskatchewan was the only province that 

indicated a willingness to try something, even though it admitted that there may be features of it that 

weren‟t completely acceptable to the people, but at least we did something. Other provinces are looking 

at us now and thinking of doing the same thing. I predicted this a year ago 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1155 

 

in this House. I can say at the present time that some other provinces are currently considering the same 

action as we took. 

 

The Hon. Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) indicated that in his opinion the payment of a 

premium had no real good effect on the relationship of the patient to the doctor or to his health services, 

that there is no equity, that it had a built-in regressive tax feature and that in 1963 the premium was only 

$52. I remind him also that the premium was reduced in anticipation of the election of 1964. We merely 

put it back to $72.00 where they already had it in the earlier part of 1963. I‟ll use the expression that I 

used previously, when they were in power the premium for these services went up and down like a 

window shade. 

 

I don‟t think I‟ll clutter up the discussion of the Resolution by arguing the figures that were quoted by 

the Hon. Member from Regina North East. He referred to the percentage of the premium in relationship 

to the cost of the hospital plan and referred to other costs, namely utilization fees, sales tax and the 

Federal tax of 2 per cent. I‟d let him know that we did not introduce the so-called education and health 

tax and it doesn‟t go to the direct advantage of the health schemes anyway. It goes into the Consolidated 

Revenue Account. He wanted to know where the abuses were that we spoke of and who were paying the 

utilization fees. I think it was quite evident from information that we supplied a year ago that there were 

abuses. I went back 19 years for their own edification and quoted Dr. Mott, who referred to abuses at 

that time. The former Government must have anticipated abuses in The Medical Care Insurance Act 

because it provided for utilization fees in the Act when it was passed in 1962, and all that was required 

on our part was passing the necessary regulations by Order-in-Council. So back in 1962 they were 

heeding the words of Dr. Mott and were fearful themselves that something would have to be done; and 

so provided for utilization fees at that time. He seemed to try to leave the impression that the 

administrative cost increase in the Medicare Insurance Commission was brought about mainly by 

utilization fees. I deny this without reservation. Utilization fees certainly played a part in this increase in 

administrative cost, but the increase is quite minimal in line with other years and was brought about, if 

higher than other years, by the new fee schedule, the addition of the war vets, the Indians, the addition of 

refraction services. He mentioned that for every $2 saved that the public must pay $3. Actually the 

reduction in Federal cost-sharing is 16 per cent and this is a far cry from the 33 1/3 which is referred to 

in his figures. I think the public should get that straight. He made reference to the increase in costs as 

referred to on page 26 of the Medical Care Insurance Commission Report, but I would point out that, in 

my figures given in the Budget Debate, a group of citizens not affected by utilization fees, namely the 

welfare patients. Utilization went up about 20 per cent. We anticipate that the same thing would have 

happened to some degree with the other patients without the advent of utilization fees and the cost 

would also have gone up and that the increased administrative cost is certainly not 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1156 

entirely due to utilization fees. 

 

It gave the Members of the Opposition an opportunity to refer to their pet scheme of community clinics 

and their method of delivering medical services. I would point out, Mr. Speaker, to this House that I 

have never, in the two and one-half years I‟ve had this portfolio, impeded or hindered these groups in 

any way but rather I have been very receptive to them. They have only brought one major request to me. 

Action is being taken on this and I‟ll explain later. I refer to an assessment of their method of delivery. 

Reference was made to the withdrawal of certain services and particularly physiotherapy. I would point 

out that they have not as yet been withdrawn. As a result of my earlier statements we are getting some 

action from Ottawa. I would like the Hon. Member to name any of the people that he made a sweeping 

reference to as suffering from the discontinuance of some of these services and that actually rather than 

saving money they are going to result in higher costs. I‟m afraid he would have a hard time proving that. 

 

One statement he made that I‟ll heartily agree with is that we can‟t live in isolation. Likewise the 

success or otherwise of a method of delivery of medical services by the clinics cannot be measured 

solely by the success of the clinics or at least the extent of the clinic use of hospital services, but we 

must measure the quality of the treatment and also the volume of use of Medical Care Insurance 

services. He indicated that the Government had done nothing. He says the Minister had data and should 

take some action. Well, let me explain, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Member is slightly behind times. He 

apparently has not been communicating with his clinic friends, because, when I was approached last 

year to assess this method of delivery of service, I pointed out to the delegation that I thought this 

Government would be the wrong government to assess this service, because, if I proved they were right, 

my colleagues wouldn‟t accept the proof and if I proved they were wrong, they wouldn‟t accept it. 

Consequently I suggested that the logical body to assess it was a Federal group because, if it was good 

for Saskatchewan, it was good for other provinces in Canada. 

 

The Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) indicated that we were inconsistent and operating 

in a piecemeal manner and left the impression that everything was a bed of roses prior to our 

Government assuming office. Well, let‟s look at the mental patient programs. I thought I had made my 

point clearly enough in an early statement in this House about the state of affairs with the mental 

patients, in this province prior to 1964, that they would hesitate to raise the subject again. But apparently 

they were satisfied to not move ahead with the Saskatchewan Plan. They speak of mass discharges. I 

think I explained to the House that there were more patients discharged in the three years prior to 1964 

than in the three years subsequent to 1964, so I don‟t think that we were any more guilty of mass 

discharges than the previous Government, if such were the case. Reference was made as to where these 

physio services are going to be provided. Well, as pointed out, they have not as yet 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1157 

 

been cancelled. I am aware of facilities in the hospitals. I would like to point out that in 1964 a private 

physiotherapist got no payment whatsoever for over three months and during that time I do not recall the 

hospital facilities being swamped with patients. The same Member also made reference to the 

experience in Swift Current, pointing out that with the advent of utilization fees on medical services the 

use of the hospital beds went up to the highest in the Province. Well, this was not entirely due, by any 

means, to the advent of utilization fees. It was due largely to the fact that more doctors came into that 

area at or about the same time as the advent of utilization fees. And where you have more doctors, I 

guarantee you will have more utilization of beds. He also made reference to some serious cases waiting 

for elective surgery and we are going to hold off for an early election. I suggest that they not do so. If 

they do they are not very serious, that they‟d be better off to avail themselves of the services as quickly 

as they can. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is certainly no island, cannot be treated as an island or looked at as an 

island as far as health services are concerned. The CCF have expressed their concern. They admit that 

they haven‟t got all the answers. The Hon. Member for Moose Jaw North said that while they were in 

office they kept costs within reason. Well, I don‟t exactly agree with them. When costs rose from $7 

million to $70 million, I don‟t really feel that he is really sincere when he says he feels they kept costs 

within reason. I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this Government is not guilty of doing 

nothing, that early last year the Prairie Economic Conference was instrumental in setting up the Prairie 

Medical Services Committee, of which I am the chairman, and this Committee has had six meetings 

with some degree of success. The Saskatchewan Hospital Association last summer urged us to proceed 

with an enquiry along the lines suggested in this Resolution. As a result of a meeting last November in 

Ottawa of all Health Ministers with the Hon. Mr. Munroe, there were so many questions raised on the 

problems of health care across this country and the necessity of a co-ordinated approach or study on a 

Federal level, involving all provinces rather than any province doing it in isolation, that the Federal 

authorities in co-operation with the provinces have set up a committee on the cost of health services, 

consisting of about seven or eight different areas which cover all facets included in the Resolution. They 

have had 13 meetings to date and hopefully will be making their findings known to the Health Minister 

in midsummer. To give you some idea of the extent of their enquiry, I would just like to read a few off. 

First of all in the area of hospital care, they are looking at operational efficiency, beds and facilities, 

utilization, out-patient departments, laboratory X-ray utilization, wages and salaries, cost of public 

health services pertaining particularly to preventive services, methods of delivery of medical care, which 

takes in a study of the methods used by the community clinics and by other organizations in the United 

States. I feel, Mr. Speaker, that we would be unwise to proceed with a Provincial study with the Federal 

authorities in co-operation with the Provincial bodies doing such a wide examination of the health 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1158 

problems in Canada, involving hospital people, medical people, Federal and Provincial Government 

personnel and the public at large. In view of this, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment, 

seconded by the Hon. Mr. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre): 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

 

commends the Government of Canada for establishing in 1968, a federal-provincial committee which 

is presently studying the costs of health services in Canada including: 

 

(a) the effectiveness of present delivery systems for health services; 

(b) the scope of community health services and preventive care programs; 

(c) the planning, organization and effectiveness of present health service programs; and 

(d) the responsibility of the patient in financing a portion of these costs; 

 

and which will recommend to the Conference of Canadian Ministers of Health, positive action required 

to contain the cost of health services in a logical, definitive and practical way, but not impair the 

quality or the availability of necessary health services. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I may disappoint the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. 

Grant) by not burdening his deterrent fees, and I may in fact disappoint him further by referring him 

once again to some of the statistics that he has already been made aware of, I believe, and he has 

commented on in some respect. He referred to what he called our pet schemes of community clinics. I 

was happy to hear his comments about referring a community clinic delegation to the Federal officials 

and the result that it apparently has had up to this time in producing the amendment, which he has 

presented here to the Resolution. I am happy to report that this has been done. In order that this 

Legislature gets the benefits of the information which the Minister has, I would like to deal with these 

particular aspects of the method of practice that is provided for in a group medical practice that is now in 

operation in the Province. I want as well, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate my Hon. colleague from Regina 

North East (Mr. Smishek) for moving the Resolution. It has provided the opportunity to impress upon 

the Government the growing urgency for it to act upon what the principle of the Resolution 

recommends. 

 

There has been a continual flow of some alarming verbiage coming from the Government, suggesting 

that health and hospitalization costs are rising at unprecedented rates. It has indicated as a result of the 

costs rising at these staggering rates that threaten even the stability of the health and hospital plans 

themselves. It would seem therefore that it is both apropos to 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1159 

 

the conditions and it is timely as well to accomplish what it, the Government, agrees requires attention. I 

am personally alarmed and this alarm is shared by many of my constituents that the Government is 

proposing to reduce the very important and necessary ancillary services of health care by reducing or by 

exempting from coverage, X-Ray, laboratory and physiotherapy services, other than from hospitals. I 

appreciate the comments that the Hon. Minister of Health made that these haven‟t been withdrawn as 

yet, but certainly every indication has been made that they will be. Seeing that Saskatchewan 

community clinics were highlighted both in the legislative and public comments, I want to deal with 

some of the evidence, which is coming from group medical practice in Saskatchewan, that indeed points 

out the urgency there is for the Government to examine the methods of organizing health services in 

order that the needed controls may be developed to arrest the rising cost. Mr. Speaker, there are areas of 

misuse in almost all segments of our private, corporate and social enterprise society. I would suppose 

that as long as man remains human that these will continue in a greater or in some lesser degree. But, 

because this is true, it makes no brief for any government to impose upon one segment and particularly 

upon the sick the added burdens of those who misuse those services. There are areas of major misuse in 

our medical and hospital plans which I know the Hon. Minister of Health is acquainted with. I‟m also 

advised that his reaction to them was a simple pronouncement. Well so what? If you save $1 million in 

health care, you save the Federal Government $½ million in health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the statistics I wish to refer to have previously been drawn to the attention of the Hon. 

Minister and I am informed that they will appear in the Group Health of America bulletin in the 

February issue. They are the records of a group medical practice now operating in the province, and the 

comparison of which to the Saskatchewan average of utilization figures both in health and hospital 

services shows an unbelievably striking contrast indeed. I am more than gratified, Sir, that after nearly 

seven years I am personally able to convey to this Legislature such strikingly advanced medical 

economics, which come from a group medical practice that officially opened its doors on July 1, 1962 

and has maintained a continuous and growing service ever since. I am proud to say that I am a chartered 

member of that medical centre and that I served as its first board president during the formative years. 

Mr. Speaker, the relevancy of this group practice to the Saskatchewan health scene may be observed in 

the patient-bed per doctor. I use the two years of 1966 and 1967 throughout to indicate the reliability and 

the possible trend which may be in process here. I may say as well that this medical practice relates to 

some 30,000 individual patients in the area that it serves. In 1966 the Saskatchewan average was 814.7 

patients per doctor and the group practice average was 1,618 patients per doctor. In 1967, the 

Saskatchewan average was 819.7 patients per doctor and the group practice average was 1,723 patients 

per doctor. I think this demonstrates without question that it certainly is one of the busiest health 

practices in the province. It therefore suggests 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1160 

as well that the relevancy to the Provincial average is both adequate and meaningful. In the area of 

referrals for consultation per 1,000 beneficiaries it has this striking contrast. In 1966 the Saskatchewan 

average was 68 per 1,000 beneficiaries; that is, the referrals were 68 per 1,000 beneficiaries for the 

Saskatchewan average, and the group practice average was 20.4 per 1,000 beneficiaries. In 1967, the 

Saskatchewan average was 78 per 1,000 beneficiaries and the group practice average was 26.8 per 1,000 

beneficiaries. It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that, although the group practice has a doctor-patient 

loan almost double the Saskatchewan average, they have at the same time almost two-thirds less 

referrals for consultation than the provincial average. This is a great saving in dollars as well a great 

saving in human effort. It is also interesting to note, Sir, that one of the possible measurements of misuse 

of medical care services is in the higher rate of surgical procedures on a Saskatchewan average as 

opposed to the single-group practice. I refer again to the years 1966 and 1967. And here T & A‟s for 

1,000 beneficiaries. The Saskatchewan average in 1966 was 12 per 1,000 beneficiaries; the group 

practice average was 4.5 per 1,000 beneficiaries. In 1967 the Saskatchewan average was 4.4 per 1,000 

beneficiaries and the group practice average in that year was 2.5. It is interesting to observe the surgical 

procedures of the medical group practice in 1967 were all substantially down from 1967, and this was 

not always the case in the Saskatchewan average. The outright cost of medical treatment per patient is 

indeed an interesting analysis. The Saskatchewan average cost per patient in 1966 was $36.28, the group 

practice average was $16.68. In 1967 the Saskatchewan average cost per patient was $37.24 per patient, 

and the group practice average was $15.70 per patient. I believe it is true that the Provincial Government 

receives $14 per capita as the Federal Government‟s contribution toward health services. This means 

that health costs to the Saskatchewan taxpayer originating at this centre was $1.70 per patient in 1967. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the picture would not be complete unless I drew your attention to the extremely sharp 

contrast in the utilization of Saskatchewan hospital services between the group method of health practice 

and the average Saskatchewan utilization rate. And here I refer to the case rate per 1,000 insured. In 

1966 the Saskatchewan average was 235 patients hospitalized per 1,000 insured, and the group practice 

average in that same year was 93.2 patients hospitalized per 1,000 insured. In respect to the volume rate 

per 1,000 insured, the Saskatchewan average was 2,182.7 days in hospital per 1,000 insured, while the 

group practice average was 747.7 days in hospital per 1,000 insured. In 1967 the Saskatchewan average 

in the case rate average was 228 patients hospitalized and the group practice average was 70.9. For the 

volume rate per 1,000 insured in 1967, 2,119 in hospital per 1,000 insured for the Saskatchewan average 

as opposed to the group practice average of 623 days in hospital per 1,000 insured. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the really salient factor in these statistics is that the group practice of hospital utilization 

rates is 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1161 

 

much less than one-half of the provincial average in both years. If the average Saskatchewan rates of 

utilization were as low as the group practice rates of utilization, it would have saved the taxpayers of this 

province $31.5 million on the basis of 1967 costs. In addition, the rates of medical service utilization by 

the single group practice did save an estimated $1 million on the basis of the Saskatchewan average 

utilization rates of medical services. Surely when the citizens of this province acquaint themselves with 

these statistics, it won‟t be good enough for the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) to say, “So what? If you 

are saving $1 million you are saving the Federal Government a ½ million dollars,” and in the face of this 

to legislate a deterrent charge on the sick and reduce the ancillary services in the province, while at the 

same time saying it is the sick of the province that are the gross misusers of the facilities and of the care. 

Mr. Speaker, I have quoted you some statistical evidence which points out the urgency and the need for 

a Resolution of the kind that has been moved by my colleague from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). I 

would like to urge the Government to look with favor on this Resolution for the Commission study will 

dispel the speculating statements regarding the financial jeopardy of health and hospitalization 

programs. It will as well put programs and policy into effect to implement and to maintain the success of 

our health insurance in Saskatchewan. While I personally find favor in the amendment that the Minister 

moved, I would encourage all of those in this House to support both the amendment and the motion. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the 

Minister moved this amendment . . . 

 

The House recessed at 5:30 until 7:30 p.m. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t had time really to look at the amendment except to grasp 

the idea of it. The Minister (Mr. Grant) by amendment is trying to pass on the responsibility of making a 

study to the Federal Government. Now it is quite true that you agreed to the study there, but this is not 

the intention of the original motion. I think what the Minister has been trying — which I suggest was a 

very weak argument — was to evade the real issue of deterrent fees. The Minister could have told us in 

his speech why he didn‟t think it was necessary to have a study made as suggested by the motion. He 

could have told us that he had made studies which apparently he has not done. I know quite well that 

there is considerable material that is available to him, but from his speech it appears that he hadn‟t 

studied any of it. In other words what he suggested is — let George do it. Now because of the fact that 

there are some implications in this amendment that I would like to do some research on, and speak about 

at a later time, I beg leave, Mr. Speaker, to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1162 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR HUMBLE ADDRESSES — HUMBLE ADDRESS NO. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the 

Opposition) that an Humble Address No. 1 be presented to his Honour the Lieutenant Governor praying 

that His Honour will cause to be laid before the Assembly: 

 

Copies of all correspondence between the Minister of Agriculture of Saskatchewan and agencies of the 

Government of Canada with respect to the processing of damp and tough grain in Saskatchewan and 

the transportation of grain during the period of October 1, 1968 and January 30, 1969 inclusive. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I have an amendment to the motion 

proposed by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). The amendment would read: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting the words and figures „January 30‟ where they appear in the 

last line, and the following substituted therefor: „February 28‟; and that the following be added to the 

motion: „and the occasions on which the Minister of Agriculture of Saskatchewan and the Minister of 

Agriculture of Canada met during the period mentioned, at which the matter of processing damp and 

tough grain and transportation of grain was discussed.‟ 

 

I move this seconded by the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt). 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, if I may speak briefly on this . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You will be speaking to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I have no objection to the extension which the Minister (Mr. McFarlane) is proposing 

although, as I look at it, for the life of me I can‟t see how it has meaning or why it makes any sense. If 

one tries to read copies of all correspondence and occasions, copies of all occasions, on which the 

Minister of Agriculture of Saskatchewan and the Minister of Agriculture of Canada met during the 

period mentioned, it really doesn‟t make very much sense. To draw attention to the fact that there were 

occasions on which the matter of processing damp and tough grain and transportation of grain was 

discussed really won‟t tell us very much, but I have objection to the amendment. It does give me the 

information I was hoping to get. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1163 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 — STUDENT REPRESENTATION ON THE SENATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Charlebois (Saskatoon City 

Park-University): 

 

That the Government give early consideration to the approval of student representation on the Senate 

of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, it is now some weeks since the motion 

was first moved and since I was given leave to adjourn the debate. If you recall the Hon. Member from 

City Park-University moved it and seconded by the Hon. Member from Regina South West (Mr. 

McPherson). At that time I think it was the Hon. Member from Regina South West who said this was “a 

great thing” that we were doing here. My comment was, if it was a great thing now, it really would have 

been a much greater thing, and I think with all deference a much more useful thing, had we done it last 

year. 

 

I mention that, Mr. Speaker, because last year during a discussion of a Bill which changed The 

University Act, I proposed an amendment to the proposals of the Government at that time. Section 27 of 

The University Act describes the makeup of the University Senate. At that time I moved that Section 27 

be amended by adding to the membership of the Senate “and two students who had been certified by the 

Registrar of the campus as full-time students from each campus now or hereafter established by the 

University, who shall be appointed annually by the Students‟ Representative Council of the campus and 

whose term shall be from the first day of October to the next succeeding thirtieth day of September and 

who shall be eligible for reappointment for one further term.” That Resolution appears in the records of 

the Legislature for April 24th, 1968, and to it is attached the signature of the Chairman of the Committee 

of the Whole and the word „lost‟. I could have hoped that the Members might have supported it last year 

with the same zeal with which they put it forth this year. 

 

Regardless of that, Mr. Speaker, those of us on this side of the House this year do accept and do support 

the Resolution which has been moved. However, we submit that something more needs to be done. The 

Resolution or the change which the Resolution proposes is by itself, I submit, an inadequate change to 

meet today‟s requirement for sensitive and responsible university administration. Later this evening I 

want to ask leave of the Assembly to introduce an amendment which would provide I think for a more 

adequate change. 

 

I do this, Mr. Speaker, because in my opinion and the opinion of Members of this side of the House, 

more than just giving students representation on the Senate is needed at this 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1164 

time, More is needed in order to accommodate the legitimate interest of faculty and students in sharing 

responsibility for decisions that count. I emphasize the legitimate interest of these groups. I emphasize 

responsibility, and I do suggest with all sincerity and with all emphasis, Mr. Speaker, that both of these 

groups are looking for an opportunity to exercise proper responsibility with respect to decisions that help 

to define the University. 

 

The change that is needed is one not just to accommodate the interests of the university community. I 

think we need a change also in order that the University, which is our University, can draw on all 

possible strengths and resources available to it. It is only by using all resources that the University can 

do the various onerous jobs that we ask it to do. We ask it to do a job for the students. We ask it to do a 

job with respect to ideas generally. We ask it to do a job with regard to commenting on society 

generally. We ask it to do many jobs with respect to service to society generally. 

 

So that we can have some guarantee of some changes now, I want to move an amendment later on. I 

want also to propose that we set up a representative group to study the possibility and the desirability of 

even more changes. May I say I have given to the mover of the Resolution a copy of the amendment 

which I intend to propose when he discussed the matter earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a previous debate I did refer to progress which has been made on both campuses of the 

University. I made reference to progress in opening up avenues for students to share in decisions. More 

and more they are being given the opportunity and the responsibility to share in decisions about planning 

of courses, about the content of courses, about the development of courses. They are given more 

opportunity to take part in making decisions about how student achievement is best measured. Like 

some other Members in the House I have talked to both students and University teachers about the 

improvement which has resulted. Both students and teachers have benefited and certainly are willing to 

testify to the advantage to the University as well as to the students and the teachers as a result of this 

opening up of the decision-making process. As a result some courses have been made more relevant. 

One of the big criticisms of university today and other avenues of education as well is that they are not 

as relevant as they might be. Some frustrations and some boredom have decreased. Some interest and 

some satisfaction have increased. Some of the barriers which too frequently prevent contact between the 

learning of the teacher and the yearning of the student have been lowered. 

 

I submit that it is our job as a Legislature, and it‟s the job of our Government to recognize and to 

applaud improvements of this kind. It is also our job as a Legislature and of the Government to 

encourage and facilitate more change of this kind which will release more of the total potential of the 

University. So I submit it is not good enough just to give students representation on the Senate. We need 

to make some 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1165 

 

additional and some more positive specific proposals as well. We need for one thing, Mr. Speaker, to 

establish a procedure for some more broadly based and representative discussion about the University. I 

have reference to discussion which crosses the boundary between the University and the total 

Saskatchewan community. We need, I think, to have some kind of a timetable, so that the results of 

discussions of this kind can be brought before the public and before the Legislature within a certain 

given time. I emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that we do need a timetable with respect to when these changes 

are going to take place. To do this, in my opinion, we need more than the Resolution proposes. So I ask 

the Legislature to consider some additional, or I will ask the Legislature to consider some addition to the 

proposal. 

 

The amendment which I have in mind first of all will endorse the Resolution. In addition it will provide 

first that the faculty have an opportunity to select direct representation on the Senate. Now there are 

some who say that the faculty already has representation on the Senate. They have it only to the extent 

that the Deans have representation there. My point is that the faculty themselves should have the right to 

select some representative on the Senate. Secondly, it will suggest that both students and faculty will 

have representation on the Board of Governors of the University. Thirdly it will suggest the 

establishment of a Commission to discuss and to advise with respect to other desirable changes in some 

of the administrative structures and practices of the University. In other words the amendment will 

propose something to be done now and it will propose also a longer-term, more incisive kind of a study 

to decide other things which may be done later. 

 

The Commission which I am proposing should include representatives of the public generally, should 

include representatives of the University administration, should include representatives of the students 

as well. This Commission, Mr. Speaker, should explore and report on the administrative structure and 

practices, which would contribute most to making our University responsible and responsive to the ideas 

and the hopes of the public, faculty and students. I am proposing obviously that not all the practices of 

university be studied — some of these are properly the prerogative of the university community itself. In 

particular I think that we need a body which can communicate with the people of Saskatchewan about 

this matter. May I suggest, Sir, that the University is a greatly misunderstood institution. It is at least an 

institution that is not understood. I submit that there are a lot of people in Saskatchewan who would like 

to understand it better. I submit that all of us would benefit if more people did understand better what the 

University is. So I propose this kind of a Commission. I would hope that the Commission would report 

back to this Legislature at the next session or that it might report at a special session, if the work is 

accomplished in time and the move appears to be urgent enough. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1166 

Mr. Speaker, before going further, may I ask the pardon of the House for some personal references with 

respect to the University. I do have as an individual, as many other Members of the House have, a very 

strong personal feeling and relationship with the University of Saskatchewan and this deepens my 

concern that our University be a good university. Like a number of my colleagues on both sides of the 

House I was a student there. It‟s an institution in which I enrolled at the age of 16 and 10 years later I 

got a degree. I have taken three classes from the present President of the University. Of my family my 

two daughters are both graduates of this University, one son is a student there now. I have another son 

who is still in high school, whom I should very much like some day to study at our University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — In the early 1940s before becoming a Member of this House I was an elected member to 

the Senate of the University. As Minister of Education I sat on the Senate for some 16 years in that 

capacity. In addition to that during those years I was at various times chairman of the Saskatchewan 

Research Council, of the Saskatchewan Archives Board, and of the Saskatchewan Centre for 

Community Studies. And in all of these I was associated with representatives of the University on these 

boards. It was my privilege to represent the people of Saskatchewan in laying the cornerstone of the 

Regina campus and to speak on that occasion. I mention these things, Mr. Speaker, to underline and to 

emphasize my own deep and very real personal concern about the welfare of this institution of ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a university is in the simplest of occasions a very complex institution. Under the best of 

conditions it faces a very difficult task. We give it a very onerous kind of job to do. It is I think true that 

these difficulties are magnified on a very broad spectrum by some new and many intensified tensions 

which exist in society generally today. As a result I think all of us have to work harder at the very 

essential job of understanding young people. We have to make a better job of understanding what it is 

that is motivating young people, understand what it is that‟s bothering them, understand what it is that 

they are hoping for. This is not simple and I hope we can work harder at it. 

 

Part of the situation in society which makes this understanding difficult and which complicates the job 

of our universities was described in an article by the historian Toynbee which I read not very long ago. 

Toynbee referred to what he called “the accelerating pace of change in our man-made environment 

within the span of a single lifetime.” We need hardly stop to think in order to appreciate how much that 

change has been. Sometimes we don‟t think, in addition, of what the change has meant in the lives of 

individuals. Toynbee went on to pinpoint this change in the lives of individuals by saying that, because 

of this fast and rapidly changing environment, “personal 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1167 

 

relations have dwindled to insignificance and impersonal relations have become suffocating.” May I 

submit, Mr. Speaker, that this is a real problem for universities, a real part of the problem when a 

university grows and particularly when a university grows as quickly as has the campus here in Regina. 

 

Toynbee goes on to point out that the technology which created this problem of impersonal relations 

can‟t even partially solve the problem which it created. He says this problem can be solved only by 

“changes in the management of our relations with each other and changes in the attitude of each 

individual.” I think this is something that those of us who have responsibility for defining in any way 

what happens to make other things happen at a university must work harder at, “the management of our 

relations with each other and the changes of the attitude of each individual.” I said a minute ago that we 

need to work harder at understanding young people. Toynbee who is now something over 80 years of 

age, I think, gives us a lead into this important job. I want to ask to read to this Legislature a further 

paragraph of his comments. He said, in this particular article: 

 

Nobody can guarantee that genuine cures are going to be found but at least we can seek them in the 

right quarter. Let us start by reminding ourselves of the symptoms of our prevalent spiritual sickness. 

We know what these symptoms are: the abnormally bitter alienation of the young from their parents‟ 

generation, the resort to strikes and public demonstrations, the lapse from orderly demonstrations into 

physical violence, the resort to counter-violence by public authorities. These symptoms he says are all 

manifestations of one and the same complaint, namely, frustration. The individual feels that he is not 

the beneficiary but the victim of a social system into which he has been born. 

 

Let‟s note these words carefully. 

 

He tries to put his case and to obtain redress by approaching the traditional institutions, families, 

schools, university governments. He finds himself up against the wall. He cannot obtain a hearing. The 

establishment shows no intention of taking him seriously and no intention either of mending its ways 

on alternative lines of its own choosing. 

 

And as a result of this, Mr. Speaker, there is abroad what somebody called a “hammering discontent”. 

Much of this discontent is consolidated and vigorously expressed and sometimes even ignited on 

university campuses. Much of this of course is nothing new in university history. In fact much of it is 

almost traditional in university life, particularly in a vigorous university. It‟s not confined to 

Saskatchewan. I think if one looks at what went on in Czechoslovakia, for example, not too many 

months ago, Mr. Speaker, we will find that the students there were a very real part and a very real spark 

in that 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1168 

particular uprising. They were protesting and it was a part of their university life, part of their vigor. It‟s 

not evil that there should be strong dissent and criticism and clash of ideas, when vigorous and informed 

people examine the teachings of all time and explore the best hopes of humanity. But our job, our job as 

a Legislature is to guide and to develop a public structure so that out of this can come the greatest good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The hope of the amendment, which I want to move later, is to achieve this in part and to 

achieve part of it soon. It‟s to provide again a means to study further a more adequate way of 

achievement. Let‟s give the university people, may I ask, a chance to comment. Too frequently now in 

this as in many other things, I think, our discussion, our contact is with certain heads. There are a great 

many people in the University who have something to say whom perhaps we don‟t have a chance to talk 

to in the ordinary way. 

 

While I have said that discontent and dissent is not new or confined to Saskatchewan, we must admit 

that discontent and dissent on university campuses all over the country is more intense than has been the 

case in the past. We need to recognize the particular dimension and the essential dialogue of 1969. May 

I urge here, Mr. Speaker, that it is not good enough to put blame on things and groups and individuals 

we don‟t like. May I submit that it is positively dangerous and foolhardy to suggest that, if a few 

students and a few professors and the few campus newspapers and a few TV programs would disappear, 

the problem would disappear with them. It won‟t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And I suggest that such oversimplification, no matter how tempting it‟s made by 

oratorical embellishment, does the greatest possible disservice to all of us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I want to add to that that the use of emotionally charged labelling such as Communists, 

anarchists, kooks, or people without guts may sound brave and pure. In fact, it simply displays an 

inability for rational discussion of a deeply serious problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Use of this emotional appeal avoids the facts or tries to avoid the facts and sweep them 

under the table. The facts in this case, Mr. Speaker, are stubborn ones. They are real but 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1169 

 

they‟re stubbornly stubborn ones. They are deeply imbedded not just in the university. They are 

imbedded in the very society which we have created. They aren‟t going to be chased away by name 

calling, and this Legislature should be competent of something more meaningful in facing up to the 

problems of our times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — In discussion of The University Act during the 1968 session, I noted a number of 

universities which already provide student and faculty representation on governing bodies. My statistics 

are from a 1967 report. There are indications that more universities have joined the groups since then. At 

the time ten Canadian universities had students on the Senate. Fifteen had faculty members on the Board 

of Governors. There were students on the Board of Governors of two, St. Michael‟s College at the 

University of Toronto and the University of Montreal. This hasn‟t solved all the problems of these 

institutions by any stretch of imagination, but it does, I think, support the idea I propose we study. There 

is further support for the ideas of the amendment, which I will propose, from the December 1967 

bulletin of the Canadian Association of University Teachers. I read one comment: 

 

Our universities are going to need all the strength they can muster to face these new challenges, 

continuing reform of internal university government, so as to provide effective participation by board, 

administration, faculty and students as one of the indispensable means to building this strength. 

 

The Canadian Association of University Teachers has reference to all of the challenges that face 

universities, the strength we need to face those and says that representation on boards by faculty and 

students is, in their words, “an indispensable means of building this strength.” 

 

Support also comes from a paper by Drs. Armstrong and Rowat of Carleton University. Some Members 

will know that Dr. Rowat was in the city within recent days as a part of a Commission which is 

examining government-university relationships on a Canada-wide basis. Here‟s what they say in their 

paper in support of students on boards of governors: 

 

What students would bring to the board is their topicality. They, better than anyone else, can present 

student opinion on a given issue. They can ensure that no board decision is arrived at without due 

consideration of the student perspective. Their most important contribution would be their 

understanding of student opinion. 

 

I add one more reference from the Duff-Berdahl Report, a Commission a few years ago which has been 

called the “watershed”, so far as changes in university structure are concerned. One comment was this: 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1170 

The issue is not whether to welcome or stifle this new wave of student sentiment but rather how to 

develop channels into which it can flow constructively. 

 

And as one further comment in support of my Resolution, Mr. Speaker, I have reference to the Star 

Phoenix, March 10th. There is an article there which says that the Saskatchewan Young Liberals have 

come out in support of an autonomous university in Regina. They gave unanimous support also to 

student representation on the University Board of Governors, and they said that representation on the 

Senate did not go far enough because the real power lay with the Board of Governors. I want to repeat as 

I did, in a former debate, Mr. Speaker, a comment made by former Prime Minister Pearson. He was 

speaking at Queen‟s University. He‟s reported in news items of January 31st and part of his words were 

these: 

 

No dissenters but those who would diminish or deny the right to dissent are the really dangerous 

revolutionaries. By damning the avenues of peaceful and evolutionary change, they make violent 

change inevitable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal which I have, as I said before, provides for some things that 

could happen in the very near future. It provides also a means of considering other methods over a 

longer period of time. It provides a means of getting opinion from people at the University and the 

administration at the University and the public of Saskatchewan as well. 

 

The Resolution would add after the word “of” in the first line, the words “faculty and”. The Resolution 

would add after the word “Senate” in the second line, the words “and the board of governors.” In other 

words it would give representation on both the Senate and the Board of Governors to both students and 

faculty. And finally, it would add after “Saskatchewan” in the second line, the words “and that the 

Government also give consideration to appointing a Commission composed of public representatives 

together with representatives of the University administration, faculty and students to study and report 

on such changes in administrative structures and practices of the University which would provide 

adequate participation by the public, faculty and students.” 

 

For the guidance of Members, Mr. Speaker, may I read the Resolution as it would read if the amendment 

were accepted and passed and it would be this: 

 

That the Government give early consideration to the approval of faculty and student representation on 

the Senate and the Board of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan and that the Government 

also give consideration to appointing a Commission composed of public 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1171 

 

representatives together with representatives of the University administration, faculty and students to 

study and report on such changes in administrative structure and practice of the University, which 

would provide adequate participation by the public, faculty and students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, it was with mixed feelings that I first 

noticed the appearance of this Resolution on the Order Paper because, as I have said before in this 

House, I do not believe that the internal affairs of our University should be the subject for debate in this 

Legislature except insofar as financial support is concerned. 

 

Absolute academic freedom, like any other absolute, is a concept rather than a definable goal. However, 

except for the duties inherent in our role as keepers of the public purse, we should do nothing to 

circumscribe the activities of our academic communities. During the last session of this Legislature I 

pointed out that under existing legislation, the Senate of our University has the authority to add 

representatives from student societies or from any other group which contributes to the social, economic 

or cultural life of the Province. Since the Senate has not chosen to exercise this power and, so far as I 

know student councils have not requested it to do so, I‟m rather reluctant to pursue the matter any 

further. 

 

My support for the Resolution itself is based on a desire to emphasize my agreement with the principle 

of student representation, though after the remarks which the Member from Regina North East (Mr. 

Smishek) is reported to have made on the Regina campus, there is some doubt as to whether students 

will welcome an invitation to be represented on the Senate. 

 

The debate on this Resolution and its amendments make a very tempting launching pad for a journey 

into the land of student power. I would like to ask the indulgence of the House as I succumb to this 

temptation for a few minutes. 

 

Let me begin by saying that I do not believe that student power exists as a phenomenon separated from 

the social unrest which characterizes our times. It is related to an ideological struggle which is by no 

means new but which is reaching a climax in the institution which we call the university. The struggle I 

refer to is the struggle to find living space for both the mystic and the mechanic, for the spiritual as well 

as the practical. 

 

Peter Shrag writing in the Saturday Review, February 15th, 1969 puts it this way: 

 

The universities haven‟t been standing in the way of the educational demands of most undergraduates. 

The majority, 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1172 

the business students, the education students, the engineers and agronomists and the dental technicians, 

have been using the system to get emoluments. The disaffected, most of them humanists and social 

scientists, have been engaging in a kind of status revolt to keep the university from being used that 

way. 

 

As private citizens it may be impossible for us to keep out of this dispute, but, as Legislators, I hope that 

we can limit our involvement to a clear statement of our intent to provide a forum and a political 

atmosphere in which rational discussions can take place. In effect, this means that we must maintain the 

rule of law and we should not hesitate to make it clear that we intend to do so. 

 

I will not be an apologist for or a supporter of any government which proffers the hemlock to a modern 

Socrates, if such there be amongst us, but let me make it very clear that I do not intend to be silent, while 

a small, well-disciplined and externally inspired group on our local campuses attempt to pervert the 

normal radicalism of youth into an ugly thing, a humorless thing, devoid of human decency. 

 

Those who think as I do have no desire to stifle the voices of dissent, but we do warn the dissenters that 

we will fight and we will fight hard to assure for ourselves and for our children the right to achieve our 

goals by the exercise of reason and to the give-and-take of the democratic process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — We do not intend to let our teenagers accept without challenge the belief that 

subversion is the “in” thing and that the underground high school newspaper has some special claims to 

justice and to truth. 

 

A little over a year ago the distinguished American diplomat, George F. Kennan delivered an address to 

the students of Swarthmore College. It was reproduced in the New York Times magazine under the title, 

“Rebels Without a Program” and is the key-note section of a recently published book “Democracy and 

the Student Left.” I wish I could place all of Mr. Kennan‟s remarks on the record of this Assembly for 

those of them are pertinent to the present situation. Let me read just one paragraph: 

 

When we are confronted with attempts to frighten or intimidate an administration into doing things for 

which it can itself see neither the rationale nor the electoral mandate, when we are offered, as the only 

argument for change, the fact that a number of people are themselves very angry and very excited, and 

when we are presented with a violent objection to what exists, unaccompanied by any constructive 

concept of what ideally ought to exist in its place, then we of my generation can only 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1173 

 

recognize that such behavior bears a disconcerting resemblance to phenomena which we have 

witnessed within our time in the origins of totalitarianism in other countries. Then we have no choice 

but to rally to the defence of a public authority, with which we may not be in agreement, but which is 

the only one we have got and with which in some form or another we cannot conceivably dispense. 

People should bear in mind that if this noise, violence and lawlessness is the way they are going to put 

their case, then many of us who are no happier than they are about some of the policies that arouse 

their indignation will have no choice but to place ourselves on the other side of the barricade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m not advocating that students be given more positive roles in the government of the 

University, because I feel that they have an inalienable right to such a role but rather because I feel they 

have a real contribution to make. Many of our institutions, including the University, need the freshness 

of thought and the untrammelled imagination which youthful minds can bring to their administration. 

 

I hope that the recent action of a small politically inspired group on this and other campuses will not 

influence Members to react against the valid aspirations of thousands of less vocal but equally highly 

motivated students. 

 

Speaking specifically to the amendment, I‟m certainly not opposed to the underlying principles which it 

suggests. However, I will vote against it, because I feel it adds very little to the Resolution and in fact it 

could complicate the situation quite unnecessarily. 

 

Dealing specifically with section (a) of the amendment, this would provide additional representation 

from some unspecified faculty group on the Senate and the Board of Governors. I would like to point 

out the responsibility which members of the faculty, including those of lecturers rank, have as members 

of campus councils. Each of these councils is represented by 18 members on the General University 

Council, and I‟m sure that the opinions of these three councils are a major factor in decision-making by 

the Senate and the Board of Governors of the University. 

 

I feel that the student representation on these councils may be a desirable thing. It has not been 

proposed. I feel that there is a good case to be made for student representation on these councils and on 

the councils or the student-faculty groups, which can meet informally in each of the colleges or 

departments of the University. Also, I would point out that the Senate does have some 32 members who 

are ex officio, because they are senior faculty members, deans, directors of academic programs and 

administrative officers, and if this is not adequate faculty representation, then we obviously have little 

faith in our senior, academic and administrative appointees. 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1174 

Section (b) of the proposed amendment suggests further provision for a student representation on the 

Board of Governors. As for this section I will not argue the point whether or not that representation 

would contribute to more efficient government of the University. Since the Senate has the privilege of 

naming five of its members to the Board of Governors, I think it is sufficient to suggest that the student 

representatives proposed by the original Resolution will be available for such appointment. Surely such 

an appointment to the Board of Governors would be much more prestigious than one which is made 

purely on the basis of statutory requirements. 

 

With respect to section (c) of the proposed amendment, the description of the Commission which it 

contains is also a perfect description of the Senate of the University. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) asks for a Commission composed of representatives of the public, the University administration, 

faculty and students. May I remind him that the Senate membership represents 21 province-wide 

organizations, including the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation, the Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association, the SARM, the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association. The 14 members elected by convocation are selected from geographical 

areas which cover the province and the 34 ex officio members represent the Government, University 

administration and the senior faculty. When proposed, and we hope that this is done, the Hon. Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) will agree that there will be no body better constituted to study and to report 

on possible changes in the administrative structure than the University Senate or a Committee thereof. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Mr. Speaker, I will vote for this Resolution in anticipation of the benefits which it may 

produce for the students, for the administration and the general welfare of our University. I will not vote 

for the amendment because I feel that the clauses which it contains are largely redundant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — I intend to have a few words to say about this Resolution and the 

amendment that has been proposed. I‟m not completely ready to speak yet but one of the things that 

struck me, when the Hon. Leader of the Opposition was speaking, is that I agree with him in many ways. 

Perhaps our University atmosphere, perhaps our University life does need a little bit of a shock, a little 

short-circuiting, as he suggests, by the appointment of a Commission, by the election or appointment of 

students and faculty to the University Board of Governors. Maybe it does need a little shock, but I think 

we ought to be careful that we don‟t electrocute it. These changes are sweeping. They are something that 

I want to consider after a few days, and I beg 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1175 

 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 63 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. J. Kwasnica (Cutknife) for 

Return No. 63 showing: 

 

With respect to students who applied for loans under the terms of the Canada Student Loan Plan in the 

fiscal year 1968-69 to January 31, 1969; (a) the number of loans granted; (b) the average amount 

granted; (c) the average amount applied for; (d) the number of applications for which the amount 

granted was less than the amount applied for; (e) the number rejected altogether; (f) the number of 

applicants qualifying for independent status under the regulations; (g) the number of applicants not 

qualifying for independent status under the regulations; and (h) the average amount of parental 

contribution required where the applicant was classed as dependent. 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, on this Motion for Return I should like to 

propose an amendment, seconded by Mr. Heald as follows: 

 

That part (e) be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(e) the number of applicants not qualifying for a loan; 

 

And the following words be added to the Motion: 

 

(i) the number of applicants where the amount that could be granted was greater than the amount 

requested. 

 

I might say also, Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet, that there are something like over 8,000 

applications that were received. The motion, as it‟s presented with all its various subsections, will call 

for a great deal of work to review each and every one of these. It will be some time before we can give 

the Hon. Member the answer. We can give him the first part (a), (b) and (c) without any difficulty, 

without very much difficulty because these records we have, but the rest of the information will take a 

good deal of time to gather. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Could I ask the Minister to clarify what he intends to do with the last 

section? In simple English, what are you tying to tell me really? 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1176 

Mr. Speaker: — I draw your attention to the fact that a person gets one speech. He‟s already made his 

speech, and you‟ve already made yours. The debate continues. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member from Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) may wish to close the debate too, let me 

remind him of that, in case he thinks he is being hard done by. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 — GUARANTEED WHEAT PRICE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): 

 

That this Legislature recommend that the Provincial Government requests the Federal Government to 

adopt an agricultural policy that would provide for both an export and domestic guaranteed price for 

wheat, set through a study of production costs and world market trends and subject to periodic review, 

to insure an adequate standard of living for the farmer. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, my hon. colleague the Member from Kelsey a few 

days ago produced an excellent review of the need for a two-price system for the farmer for the wheat 

that he grows. I do believe and feel that his presentation went far beyond the usual chatter in this 

Legislature by Members of the Government who have continued to say that farmers can take care of the 

problem themselves, and that farmers really don‟t need any assistance. I believe his presentation went 

again beyond the bogey-man policies of the Government which suggest that farmers can shift their 

present economic conditions by a simple combination of many enterprises which they call 

diversification. As the Member for Kelsey provided the broad basis to well establish the need for this 

Resolution, I do not intend to deal extensively with the subject at this time. I suggest that a two-price 

system is not the end-all solution to ills of agriculture. It will provide the additional income that is 

necessary at this point of time for survival of many of Saskatchewan‟s farmers who will otherwise, I 

suggest, disappear from the farming community. It will provide time for development of what may be a 

more reasonably based program related to guaranteed minimum income, which I suggest must inevitably 

come. 

 

Secondly, I suggest it is a reasonable request to make of any government in order to sustain one of the 

principal industries 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1177 

 

of both a national and provincial economy. It would also seem that any Resolution of this nature in 

Saskatchewan would certainly receive the support of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our major resource is farm products. They contribute slightly less than one billion dollars to the 

Provincial economy. I suggest that, if you contrast these with the mineral revenues and with their 

subsequent tax grants and their grant incentive programs and other means of tax handouts, the proposal 

of a two-price wheat marketing program for agriculture becomes totally relevant. I suggested earlier 

that, unless there is financial stabilization of the farming economy, we will continue to see constant 

erosion at accelerated rates of our rural population in Saskatchewan. 

 

For the years 1961 to 1966, the Dominion Bureau of Statistics reports Saskatchewan farm population 

has declined 25,000 or more. This means that there are 4,000 farmers per year that are leaving 

Saskatchewan farms. When we see how the farm revenues are structured in this province, there is little 

wonder why farmers are leaving the land. The 1966 census of Canadian agriculture shows classification 

of Saskatchewan farms on the basis of their agricultural product sold. It shows that there are 9,100 of 

these farms that have gross sales from $1,200 to $2,000 annually. Another 9,200 farms have sold $2,500 

to $3,750 annually, another 8,600 sold $3,750 to $5,000 worth of products annually, and the largest 

group in this selection of farms is the next group, 15,500 farms that had gross sales from $5,000 to 

$7,500 worth of farm products in a year. This shows that 54,000 or 64 per cent of Saskatchewan farmers 

operate and live from gross farm sales of less than $10,000 annually. To indicate what this means in 

terms of actual farm operation I have a 1966 income tax return from a person in my constituency that 

operates a seven quarter section farm, and that falls into this largest single farmer group with the gross 

sales that are in the area from $5,000 to $7,500 annually. Mr. Speaker, I believe that it is necessary if I 

don‟t wish to table the document that I take full responsibility for the material that . . . 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — The Member . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — . . . He can take his choice. He can table it and take full and complete responsibility for 

its content, the fact that it is a bona fide document. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Very well, Mr. Speaker, I will take full responsibility for the signed document and 

that it is an income tax return for the year 1966. 

 

I refer to the statement of income and expenses for the year 1966. It shows the income on this basis: 

wheat sold $2,740.38; Wheat Board payment $429; barley $4.81; rye $468; cattle $2,139; pigs $942; 

cream $441; goods used $100. I am sure that the Minister of Agriculture will appreciate that this 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1178 

is a fully diversified farm that the income is coming not only from grain, but from cattle and hogs and 

cream and some of the other things that this person is producing. This is a gross income of $7,265 from 

a seven quarter section farm. It falls into the largest category that the Dominion Bureau of Statistics says 

that Saskatchewan has in this particular area of farm production The expenses on this farm show: 

interest $340; miscellaneous $42; phone $44; power $175; taxes $257; tires and batteries $99; mineral 

for livestock $42; tractor and truck gas and oil $891; repairs and maintenance $1,186; family wages 

$100; lumber $169; depreciation $2,125. For a total of $6,174 of expenses. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — What was the cultivated acreage? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I am not sure what the cultivated acreage was. This is in the poorer land area as you 

will recognize because of the fact that seven quarter sections of land certainly ought to be able to 

produce more than this. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was the gross income? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — The net income was $1,081. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was the gross? . . . 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — $7,265. And the net income was $1,081.55. Now this is less than $100 a month. If 

he uses his depreciation as farmers are doing today, it in fact contributes to him $320 a month. 

 

What I am suggesting is that, as the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) has said in this House, farming is 

not really on the high and glorious plane that it was demonstrated by him to be. 

 

We have heard in this Legislature a good deal of talk about the high level of capitalization on 

Saskatchewan farms, and indeed this partly is true. But I am suggesting that the capital net income 

position of farmers is directly related and influenced by their net income position. Again, in the 1966 

census of Canadian agriculture it shows that over 50,000 of the 70,000 commercial farms in 

Saskatchewan range in total capital value between $25,000 and $100,000. Only 3,400 of these 

commercial farms exceed $150,000 of total capital value. This capital assessment includes land and 

buildings, machinery, equipment, automobiles, livestock and poultry, and it is estimated on a market 

value basis. This is a far cry from what has been said in this House about the relationship of the estates 

tax to the family farm in Saskatchewan. If this capital assessment is an impressive one, it certainly will 

appear much less impressive when we relate to it the current farm credit picture in Saskatchewan, or in 

Canada. The Farm Credit Corporation Annual Report of 1967-68 says that 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1179 

 

one farm in every four has an average mortgage of $15,000 and the average Farm Credit Loan last year 

was $22,000. If we want to talk about nationalization of farm land, the largest land title holder in Canada 

today is the Prime Minister of Canada, who through farm credit legislation holds most of the titles in 

Canada at the present time. Maybe he should start selling wheat. 

 

The number of farm credit mortgages and their amount have all but doubled in the last five-year period. 

In 1967-68 alone the number and amount of farm credit loans increased by 10 per cent and by 22.3 per 

cent respectively. At the same time the percentage of loans in good standing decreased by .8 per cent. In 

addition to the Farm Credit Corporation mortgages the Dominion Bureau of Statistics reports that 

Saskatchewan farmers are utilizing another $60 or $70 million annually under the Farm Improvement 

Loans Act. Both of these programs are Federal Government farm loan programs to which you can add 

the Canada Trust and Mortgage Company, industrial loans from John Deere and Massey Ferguson, Ford 

and other machine companies and lending agency accounts. Also it doesn‟t include the banks and the 

credit unions and the finance companies who are all servicing farm credit. I want to quote here from The 

Leader Post of January 29th, entitled, “Farmers‟ debts are growing.” 

 

Prairie farmers have been sliding deeper into debt and now owe more than $2 billion, H.D. McRorie 

manager of the Royal Bank of Canada Prairie Agriculture Department said Monday night. 

 

He told the Canadian Agro-marketing Association that financing farming operations has become more 

difficult and farmers may become more conscious about borrowing more money. It will have to be 

self-imposed rationing, said Mr. McRorie. Farmers will have to make their own decision on whether to 

extend their current debt position. Many may have to decide to cut back on capital expansion this year. 

In the period from 1961 to 1967, farmers‟ short-term debt climbed to $1.3 billion from $775 million. 

Intermediate debt rose to $500 million from $232 million, and long term debts climbed to $375 million 

from $137 million. This points to a rather gloomy picture insofar as agriculture is concerned. Again, it is 

not the gravy train that it was said to be by the Hon. Minister of Highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the net capital position of Saskatchewan in agriculture is one which is dead on the line. I 

suggest that, if it increases in any extent, it will mean bankruptcy for Saskatchewan farmers as we know 

them today. Farmers not only face a critical debt position, but added to this is the usual hazard of the 

weather such as we have had this year, the loss of their market, the continuing falling prices, and the 

continuing increased costs of farming operations and the continuing increased costs of farming 

operations and the interest which they must pay on their loans. From this vantage point all farm leaders, 

or at least most farm leaders, except Liberal Governments and Liberal Ministers of Agriculture, are 

aware of the impending consequences. I would like to quote again from The Leader Post of January 29, 

entitled, “Western grain farmers 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1180 

face financial disaster.” 

 

James Bentley, the president of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture, said Tuesday that many 

Western grain farmers are on the brink of financial disaster. 

 

And he goes on to talk about the drying of grain in the West. 

 

Unless greater drying facilities are provided along with financial assistance to operate them, many 

farmers could be in serious financial predicament from which they might never recover. 

 

I would hope that the Minister of Agriculture would listen to that. 

 

Canadian grain exports in 1968 had dropped 35 per cent from the previous year and 26 per cent below 

the last five-year average. 

 

Mr. Bentley said that the precarious position of wheat growers could result in serious disruption of 

other sectors of the agricultural community. 

 

If large stocks of unsaleable grain continue to pile up on the farms there could be a shift to livestock 

production which could result in economic disaster if the increase is not tailored to the effective 

demand. 

 

What we have been trying to say to this House before in this session is that this continual talk about the 

diversification of agriculture and the establishing of more cattle, without there being some tailoring to 

the effective demand, will only, I think, increase the problem and the predicament of the farmers which 

they are already in. 

 

Mr. Bentley predicated that stock-piled wheat and flour will reach 685 million by the end of July. 

 

Canada‟s share of the total world wheat trade had dropped to 17.2 per cent in 1968 from the traditional 

25 per cent. Canadian wheat prices in 1968 had dropped 18 cents to $1.94 a bushel compared with 

$2.12 in 1967. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

It is significant to note that while prices of wheat to farmers have declined bread prices this last fall 

increased to the consumer 2 cents per loaf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that there must be an interim stabilization program to assist farmers through 

this agricultural depression. My hon. colleague has moved a Resolution which, I believe, when put into 

effect, will serve to accomplish this requirement. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would urge all Members 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1181 

 

to support the Resolution. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 3 — INTRODUCING STUDENT GROUPS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. MacDougall 

(Souris-Estevan): 

 

That this House request Mr. Speaker, to introduce all student groups sitting in the Galleries before the 

Orders of the Day are entered into, and should the House be in a Committee of the Whole, request the 

Deputy Speaker to perform the same function. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Thibault: 

 

That all the words after the word “House” where it appears in the first line be deleted, and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

request the Special Committee on Procedures of the House to study the procedure of introducing 

students to this House. 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — I feel that this Resolution and this amendment are of much greater 

importance than many Members may take them to be. I would heartily endorse the stand that my hon. 

friend, Mr. Thibault from Kinistino, has taken. Again it is the youth and the students of our province that 

we have the privilege to show our concern for. If we defeat this amendment and support the Resolution, 

we, Mr. Speaker, are in fact saying to our young people that we as Members have no time to give you in 

our busy schedule. After all these young people are the citizens of tomorrow. What type of citizen they 

will make depends on what time, effort and opportunity that we as their Members offer to give them, so 

that they might have the opportunity to learn about many of today‟s problems. Our concern for them has 

much greater effect than what I believe many Members seem to realize. So I urge, Mr. Speaker, all 

Members to support this amendment and to defeat this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I think I probably introduce as few students in 

this House as anyone, but I feel that I must speak on this matter because, while it might appear to some 

to be trivial, it probably involved more than appears at first glance. 

 

It has been pointed out, Mr. Speaker, that we have selected a Special Committee on House Procedures. I 

suggest that it is 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1182 

a very poor way for us to start out by deciding by this motion one of the questions that should be within 

their purview. The Member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) has taken some time in pointing out what has 

been undisputed and that is that the very little time that is actually taken in introductions of students in 

this House by private Members. Surely, when students or visitors appear their own Member of the 

Legislature should have the right to introduce them, if this is done with discretion and responsibility. I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that there is every evidence, certainly no evidence to the contrary, that Members have 

exercised responsibility and discretion in such introductions. 

 

The real question is one of not diminishing the status of a Member of the Legislative Assembly and 

particularly the private MLA. I think the real question also is possibly associated with giving an MLA 

the right to speak to people that come from his own constituency or area. With deference to you, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that introductions through the Chair would constitute a stale and sterile procedure, 

whereas introductions from the Members of the House rising in their places on both sides of the House 

would enrich rather than injure the lifeblood and the vitality of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our House procedures are necessarily formal and the brief comments that Members can 

make on Orders of the Day provide a leeway and a flexibility, which I think are deliberately conceived 

as a counter to over-rigidity and to enervating forms within the House. It would be a great mistake to 

restrict Members in their right to introduce students from their own constituency areas. 

 

I want to point this out, Mr. Speaker, - and I know that you are well aware of this — that Saskatchewan 

possibly is unique among the provinces in the number of students that visit this Assembly, that sit in the 

galleries and gain, I think, some knowledge, some understanding, some overall impressions and 

probably that which is most important, what this House is all about, what our kind of democracy is all 

about. I think that it is a great thing for our forms and our Legislature that these young people are 

visiting us. I point out again that I don‟t think anywhere in Canada is there the number of young people 

visiting a Legislature as is the case in this Province. I say, Mr. Speaker, to Members on both sides of the 

House why enforce a tongue-tied Member in the presence of his own constituents? 

 

To sum up, and I am not going to labor the point, I think that it is obvious to everyone that the little time 

that is taken in the introductions gives no reason for the kind of action that is contemplated in the 

motion. I say, secondly, that action contemplated intrudes on the work of the Committee which this 

House has set up in good faith. In fact the action that is contemplated is premature and ill-advised at this 

time for these reasons. I say that the action intended by the motion robs this House of some of its vigor 

and some of its color. I say that it eliminates a common practice and an understood right of the private 

Member in this House. I would appeal to Members on both 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1183 

 

sides of this House to vote the motion down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, very briefly and very quickly I want to 

add a few words of support for the amendment. 

 

Presumably all during these years when students have come to this Legislature we have meant what we 

have said when we rose in our places and welcomed them here. I am sure that we did mean what we 

said, and the continuation of this practice is one way to convince them that we really do welcome them 

when they come to visit this institution. It is one way, Mr. Speaker, to make this institution look like a 

human sort of thing, a living thing. I submit the more we transfer the opportunity to welcome and 

introduce these students from the Members down here to the Speaker, Sir, the more formalized we make 

it and we take away some of the humanity of the whole action. 

 

I don‟t want to take very much time, but we do want, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, the students to 

remember what they have seen and what they have heard in the short time that they spend here. We 

don‟t want them just to feel they have come in and looked at something of awe and majesty and 

unmeaningful to them. We want them to really remember it. There is such a thing as learning more 

because of the association with those things that please and satisfy. When a Member gets up in his place 

and welcomes students from his constituency, then that develops a little bit of a bond between us down 

here and those students up there, and they are more likely to remember more of what they saw as a result 

of it. I want to add my plea that we do not accept the original motion but that we support the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this amendment deserves careful 

consideration from the Members of this Assembly. I would like to concur in the words which has just 

been echoed by my seatmate (Mr. Davies) and the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I believe that rules of any House should be to protect a minority in the House, not the majority. The 

majority can always protect themselves. I believe that this Legislature saw fit a while ago to set up a 

Special Committee to study and examine the rules to see if changes were necessary, I think this was a 

good move. I believe that the amendment by referring this subject matter to that Committee is a proper 

amendment. It is not trying to prejudge the decision of that Committee or prejudge what that Committee 

should do, but is just asking the Committee, which has been appointed by this Legislature on a motion 

by the Government, to study this main motion. I realize, Mr. Speaker, that, in our rules at the present 

time if we wanted to practise 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1184 

strict ruling in the Legislature, there is no place for the introduction of students. Our Standing Orders or 

our Rules and Proceedings of Beauchesne‟s or soforth, do not make a place for introducing students. It 

has been done throughout the years as a matter of custom, a matter of courtesy, a matter of tolerance. I 

believe for that reason that it is a practice that has been long endured here. I would like to see the 

Members of this Assembly agree that for the balance of this session — and the large influx of students 

in the future as we have had in the first half of this session — I would like all the Members to consider 

this amendment to let this session continue as it has done so that this Committee would have a chance to 

study the question, receive representation from any Member who may care to give a brief to this 

Committee and to make a report accordingly at a later session. That way I think that we would have 

better harmony in the House. I would hate to see any group by a majority bring in a ruling at this time 

which has not properly been considered by a Special Committee or the Committee on Standing Orders, 

where it has had a chance to go through what we may call the proper channels for discussion first. 

 

With those words, Mr. Speaker, I am asking the Government and the Members to support this 

amendment, so that we may take a look at this in Committee when we are not under the pressure of 

political or the heat of the debate of this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 20 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Dewhurst Michayluk 

Wooff Meakes Brockelbank 

Kramer Berezowsky Pepper 

Willis Romanow Bowerman 

Wood Smishek Kwasnica 

Blakeney Thibault Kowalchuk 

Davies Whelan  

 

NAYS — 30 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Leith 

Howes Grant Radloff 

McFarlane Coderre Mitchell 

Boldt Larochelle Gardner 

Cameron MacDonald Coupland 

Steuart Hooker McPherson 

Heald Gallagher Charlebois 

McIsaac MacLennan Forsyth 

Barrie Heggie McIvor 

Loken Breker Schmeiser 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

1185 

 

The debate continues on the motion. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): —Mr. Speaker, I think that I am one of the 

Members in this House that could argue that I have the right to vote for this motion, because I have only 

introduced one group of students in 17 years. Unfortunately my constituency is in the far North and I 

have not been honored by students coming often to this Legislature to be introduced and to watch us at 

work. There are some things that I think are a little more than just Government business. I think that 

there are some things which belong to us. I think that, if students did come from my constituency from 

time to time, I would like the House to allow me the small privilege of a minute or two, to introduce the 

students to the Assembly, to you, Mr. Speaker, and to this Assembly. It is something that I think is 

important as part of democracy. I think that it is something that is important to an MLA. 

 

Introductions should be above politics. When I think of democracy and of freedoms, I think that this is 

one kind of personal freedom that I would like to have in this House. I do not wish to say very much 

about it. I thought that we had good enough judgment to be able to say to ourselves, if we believe in 

freedoms and democracy and certain human rights and certain rights of the Members of this Legislature, 

that we would have turned down this motion unanimously. I think that, with the amendment being lost, I 

would be out of order in discussing the proposal of the amendment, but I would like to say that I think 

that this might have saved the day. I do not know how the Government Members are going to vote on 

the motion, but I think that it will be a sad day for the Province of Saskatchewan if they would vote in 

favor of the motion. I think that it is most regrettable that the Member for Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) 

should have brought this kind of a motion into this House. I should have said hon. gentleman, but I 

hesitated as you saw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where does this end? Today we had students who came to Canada to watch democracy in 

action. Today, Members of the Legislature including yourself, took the opportunity to introduce those 

students to our parliamentary system. I was very, very proud. I have relatives in Czechoslovakia. I did 

not know if any were here and I didn‟t ask. But were they here, I would have been proud for them to 

watch how we perform here. And, this again, is something that we as MLAs should be doing from time 

to time. It doesn‟t take too much time of the House. I think that introductions are very appropriate and I 

think that it is very democratic. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, there are times when we have other groups 

coming into this House which you have the honor of introducing, yet we feel that we have some part of 

them and so we take the opportunity to say a few words also to introduce them to the Members of this 

House. 

 

What about a situation where you have a few hockey players? Is this the next step? They have come into 

this House, they have brought honor to the Province of Saskatchewan, so will I 



 

March 11, 1969 

 

 

1186 

be denied the right to introduce them to other Members and the gentlemen opposite? These are the 

questions that I must ask myself. I am very sad and disappointed to see that we haven‟t found some 

better means of protecting such Members‟ rights. I notice, Mr. Speaker, that it is 10 o‟clock but I can go 

on if you like, Sir. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


