



















































Hansard: January 30, 1969


 

1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

1st Day 
 

Thursday, January 30, 1969 

 

3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the twenty-

first day of December, 1968, for the meeting of the Second Session of the Sixteenth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received a communication from the private Secretary to 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock 

p.m. today, Thursday, the Thirtieth day of January, 1969. 

 

3:03 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, 

was pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: — 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Second Session of the Sixteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

The year through which we have just passed has demonstrated dramatically the benefits of the 

diversified economy my Government has been striving to achieve. 

 

Although weather conditions resulted in substantial damage to our wheat crop, general income in 

Saskatchewan equalled an all-time record. 

 

Reduced income to our farmers was more than compensated for by greatly increased earnings by our 

citizens outside agriculture. 

 

It remains obvious, however, that inflation continues to pose a serious threat to our economy, and my 

Government will continue to do all in its power to combat this danger. 

 

AGRICULTURE 
 

The past year was a difficult one for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Yet despite poor growing conditions and extremely unfavorable harvesting weather, our province will 

still have its seventh largest wheat crop in history. 

 

Unfortunately, much of our crop was taken off in a damp or tough condition. 



 

January 30, 1969 

 

 

2 

Working with the Federal Government, the grain companies and individual farmers, my Government 

has made every feasible effort to make certain that adequate drying facilities are available. 

 

Livestock 
 

1968 has been a good year for livestock producers. 

 

When the final figures are compiled, we expect to have achieved an all-time record in cash receipts for 

the sale of livestock and livestock products, amounting to nearly $250 million. 

 

During this session, you will be asked to approve additional measures designed to diversify the 

province’s agriculture, and particularly to expand livestock production. 

 

Swine Barns 
 

The program of assisting farmers in the Rural Development Areas of Saskatchewan with the 

construction costs of swine barns and equipment will be continued. Since the policy was put into effect 

in 1967, assistance totally more than $340,000 has been paid to 153 farmers. 

 

Crop Insurance 
 

Again, you will be asked to substantially increase the number of farmers eligible for crop insurance. 

 

South Saskatchewan Irrigation Project 
 

The first major block of the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project is scheduled to become 

operational in the spring of this year. 

 

With the completion of some additional water control structure installations this year, water will be 

available to approximately 12,000 acres of land in the Broderick South section of the project. 

 

My Government will give a major priority to the preparation of additional irrigated acreage during 1969. 

 

Crown Lands 
 

The sale of Crown-owned lands made in the past four years now exceeds 900,000 acres. In the coming 

12 months this program will be further stepped up. Under certain circumstances, some land will be sole 

by tender. 

 

Sewer and Water 
 

During 1968, sewer and water facilities were brought to 



 

January 30, 1969 

 

 

3 

3,800 rural homes – many with assistance from the Department of Agriculture. 

 

This program will be continued and expanded during 1969. 

 

HEALTH 
 

My Government will again ask for large sums to improve the various health programs in Saskatchewan 

 

Utilization Fees 
 

My Ministers continue to be concerned by the rapidly escalating costs of our health plans. 

 

Utilization fees have been successful in restraining the rate of escalation, but unless every citizen co-

operates in helping to curb over-utilization of our health facilities, additional tax measures may be 

required in future years. 

 

In order to ensure that utilization fees will not cause undue hardship to any family, you will be asked to 

approve legislation which will institute an annual family ceiling on such fees. 

 

Psychiatric Program 
 

My Government will continue to strengthen our psychiatric program and to implement the so-called 

―Saskatchewan Plan‖ in accordance with the Frazier report. 

 

The conversion from an institutional program to a community-based plan will require a change in the 

role of the hospital located in Weyburn. 

 

During the coming years, therefore, we shall be faced with finding alternative uses for these buildings. 

 

An interdepartmental study is under way to aid in bringing about these changes, with the least 

dislocation in the Weyburn area. 

 

Marriage Act 
 

You will also be asked to consider amendments to The Vital Statistics Act and The Marriage Act, for the 

purpose of making their provisions consistent with the Canada Divorce Act, and for the purpose of 

meeting certain administrative needs. 

 

ELECTORAL REFORM 
 

The Legislature will be asked to approve the establishment of a special legislative committee to study 

the desirability and most appropriate methods of electoral reform. 



 

January 30, 1969 

 

 

4 

RULES OF THE LEGISLATURE 
 

There are many who feel that the rules of the Legislature need modernizing, streamlining, and updating, 

in the interests of efficiency. 

 

Your approval will be asked for the establishment of a special legislative committee to study the validity 

of this contention, and to make recommendations for appropriate changes in the rules. 

 

EDUCATION 
 

My Government will continue to give the highest priority to the education of our people. 

 

Accordingly, you will be asked to again approve the increases in spending for all levels of education. 

 

In particular, substantial sums will be required for the continued expansion of the Saskatoon and Regina 

campuses of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Technical and vocational training facilities must also be further enlarged. 

 

Certain disparities still exist which hardship on some separate school systems. You will therefore be 

asked to approve a more equitable basis for making grants to these schools. 

 

In order to encourage more extensive utilization of buildings, equipment and staff, legislation will be 

introduced to permit school boards to organize the operation of schools on a more flexible basis as to 

scheduling of the school year, school week and school day. 

 

INDUSTRIAL INCENTIVES 
 

The Government will introduce legislation to permit the making of cash grants to industry, where such 

economic development incentives are needed to meet competition from other provinces. 

 

MINERAL DEVELOPMENT 
 

Mineral activity in the province continues at an unprecedented pace, with exploration for a variety of 

minerals being carried out in all areas of the province. 

 

Reports of exploration discoveries in the Pre-Cambrian Shield have resulted in a land disposition of such 

dimensions that my Government has decided that the northern mineral exploration program, having 

fulfilled its purpose, should be discontinued. 



 

January 30, 1969 

 

 

5 

This program will be terminated upon the expiration of existing agreements. 

 

PROVINCIAL FLAG 
 

During the last session of this legislature, a Committee of the House was established to recommend to 

the House a design for a distinctive flag for Saskatchewan. 

 

During this session you will receive the findings and recommendations of that committee and, hopefully, 

choose a provincial flag. 

 

INDIAN AND METIS 
 

The advancement of opportunities for our citizens of Indian and Métis origin must be continued and 

sharply expanded. 

 

While some progress in this field has been made, much more must be accomplished if solutions are to be 

found to this most difficult human problem. 

 

The native birth rate in Saskatchewan continues to be one of the highest in the world. 

 

Therefore, My Government will propose substantial expenditures for the initiation of additional 

agricultural projects for Indian and Métis people. 

 

My Ministers will also seek your co-operation in expanding educational and upgrading opportunities. 

 

Every method of increasing employment opportunities for our natives will be explored and utilized. 

 

You will also be asked to approve the setting-up of a new department in my Government, which will 

assume responsibility for all programs relating to Saskatchewan Indians and Métis with the exception of 

agriculture. 

 

THE PROTECTION OF CITIZENS 
 

Provisions will be made which will provide for the orderly payment of small debts for certain individual 

citizens. 

 

Uniform Trust Act 
 

My Government will ask you to pass a Uniform Trust Act respecting the variation of trusts, which will 

provide relief, if the Court sees fit, from the inflexible limitations of many trusts. 



 

January 30, 1969 

 

 

6 

Trust and Loan Companies Licensing Act 
 

You will be asked to pass a new Trust and Loan Companies Licensing Act, to provide greater protection 

to the public in the regulation and supervision of these companies. 

 

LIBRARIES 
 

My Government continues to believe that the development of public library services is an important 

factor in the total educational and cultural program of the province. 

 

Consequently, you will be asked to adopt further recommendations of the Library Inquiry Committee. 

 

Also, my Government, in order to provide library services equal to the demands of this era, will propose 

legislation outlining a Saskatchewan library system, involving provincial services and regional libraries. 

 

MUNICIPAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
 

Our municipalities continue to face serious problems in the raising of revenues to provide services 

essential to growth. 

 

Therefore, my Government proposes to establish a fund, from which municipalities may borrow at lower 

interest rates than are presently available to them. 

 

This will be effected by the establishment of a Municipal Finance Corporation, through which the credit 

of the province can be utilized for borrowing at favourable rates of interest. 

 

POLLUTION ASSISTANCE 
 

My Government proposes to take steps to prevent pollution of our waters, and to continue to ensure an 

adequate supply of clean water for our citizens and industries. 

 

The burden of maintaining an unpolluted water supply will fall heavily on some of our cities. 

 

Therefore, you will be asked to approve legislation which will help our cities to meet the future costs of 

effective pollution control. 

 

REMUNERATION FOR URBAN COUNCILS 
 

My Government will put before you a measure which will permit an increase in the remuneration which 

may be paid to members of urban-municipal councils. 

 

SASKATCHEWAN POWER CORPORATION 
 

My Government has noted continued improvement in the operations of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, now in its 



 

January 30, 1969 

 

 

7 

fortieth year as a Crown Corporation. A considerable gain in productivity will be reported to you, 

together with appreciable gains in the return on your investments and your equity in this utility. 

 

NATURAL GAS SERVICE 
 

You will also be asked to approve expenditures for the further extension of natural gas services to a 

number of centres not presently served. 

 

FAMILY THERAPY PROGRAM 
 

About a year ago, a family therapy program was commenced in the Correctional Centre in Regina. 

 

Accommodation for over-night visiting between the inmate and his family was provided. 

 

This program has shown much promise since its inception, and will be extended to the Correctional 

Centre in Prince Albert. 

 

CORRECTIONAL PROGRAM 
 

In 1967 we enacted a new Saskatchewan Corrections Act. 

 

It invoked a new concept of work training, parole and probation services under provincial statutes. 

 

In the past year work training was introduced in our correctional centres. It allows the inmate to be 

employed, or to take vocational or academic training in the community while serving his sentence. The 

new program has had encouraging results. 

 

In the coming year, we will proceed with the establishment of parole services and the extension of 

probation services under the provincial statutes. 

 

SENIOR CITIZEN ACCOMMODATION 
 

My Government has given major emphasis to the need for providing housing and care for our senior 

citizens over the past four years. In 1969, you will once more be asked to provide funds to assist in the 

construction of additional special care facilities and independent living units for the elderly. 

 

HIGHWAYS 
 

Again, this Legislature will be asked to approve large expenditures for the expansion and maintenance 

of our highway system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Roads will be extended in our North. 



 

January 30, 1969 

 

 

8 

A vigorous oiling and paving program will be continued. 

 

Four-laning will continue on the Trans-Canada highway and the Saskatoon-Regina highway. 

 

Another major bridge, over the Saskatchewan River, will be commenced, and a number of medium-

sized bridges will be built. 

 

Assistance for the construction and maintenance of grid roads will be increased. 

 

The new feeder road program to serve rural areas will be stepped up. 

 

CIVIL SERVICE PENSIONS 
 

You will be asked to approve legislation increasing the pension benefits paid to civil servants or the 

widows of civil servants who retired between April of 1958 and March of 1963. 

 

Your approval will also be asked for a measure to increase the present ceiling of $6,000 on annual 

pension benefits for civil servants to $8,050 per year. 

 

CO-OPERATIVES 
 

Amendments to The Credit Union Act will permit a greater freedom of action in making loans for the 

purchase of land and buildings, as well as for business purposes. 

 

LABOUR 
 

My Ministers will ask you to approve amendments to The Trade Union Act 

 

* * * * * 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 

1969, will be submitted to you. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session, with the full confidence that you will favourably 

discharge you duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:22 o’clock p.m. 


