



















































Hansard: March 10, 1969


1108 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Monday, March 10, 1969 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce 

to you and to the other Members of this House, a fine group of 39 grade six students from the Palliser 

Heights school. Palliser Heights school is situated in Moose Jaw North, of course. They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Thompson. This is the second group that has visited us during this 

session from Palliser Heights. I‟m sure that all Members will want to join with me in expressing a 

sincere welcome to them and express the wish that their day will be a pleasant and informative one and 

that they‟ll have a pleasant and a safe trip back home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, the group from Victoria school have 

not as yet arrived and I would appreciate it very much, if they do arrive, that I might speak and welcome 

them later in the afternoon. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO CRAIK MIDGET C HOCKEY TEAM 
 

Mr. W.A. McIvor (Arm River): — Before the Orders of the Day, I wish to inform this House that the 

Craik Midget C Hockey Team won the Provincial Championship Saturday. They defeated Wakaw in the 

finals by a score of 9 to 3 and 7 to 4. The Member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) who was justly proud 

of his team has made a slight contribution to the Treasurer of the Craik Club. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIvor: — Craik has a very good record in minor hockey, having won four juveniles, two midgets, 

one bantam championship since 1960. I would like all Members to join with me in congratulating them 

on the fine showing that they made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I should like 



 

March 10, 1969 

 

 

1109 

very briefly before the Orders of the Day to draw to the attention of the Members of this House the very 

unfortunate passing on Thursday last in the city of Saskatoon of a very noted historian and one of the 

leading citizens of Saskatchewan, Professor G.W. Simpson, of the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, he died at the age of 75 and has long been noted, as I have said, as one of the leading citizens 

of this province. He was Professor Emeritus of the History Department at the University of 

Saskatchewan, having taught history for approximately 36 years. Mr. Speaker, he was head of the 

History Department at the University in Saskatoon for about 17 years. I am sure that all Members of this 

House will appreciate that Dr. Simpson attempted to, and I think to a great degree was successful, 

cultivating a deep historic sense in the people of Saskatchewan. He helped shape the policy of such 

important new features as The Saskatchewan Archives Act. 

 

May I just inject one small personal note, Mr. Speaker. Many Members may not know that Dr. Simpson 

was a very close friend of people of Ukrainian descent and background in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. He was the first Canadian historian that we know of that could learn, took the time to 

learn the Ukrainian language so that he could be better facilitated in his translation of Ukrainian history 

and Ukrainian fine arts. He was always a friend of the Ukrainian people and those who know something 

about the history of the Ukrainians in the early years will know that that‟s a very meaningful thing. He 

initiated, also, the Department of Slavic Studies at the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he had many honors including being a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. I am sure 

that all Members would want it recorded that we, as Legislators of the Province, sorrow the passing of a 

truly great Saskatchewanian. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could associate myself and those 

of us on this side of the House with the words of eulogy which have been so eloquently spoken by the 

Member for Saskatoon Riversdale with regard to the death of Dr. George Simpson, well-known 

historian and one of the great pioneer citizens of this province. I know, Sir, that you will forgive a 

personal note here when I make the observation that I studied under Dr. Simpson. I took three history 

classes from him at the University of Saskatchewan and it was a great experience to have had the 

opportunity to be a member of his history classes. I always remember him saying that history was a very 

useful art and that everybody should study history because history became so valuable in applying the 

lessons of the past to the problems of the future. This was truly a great man and everybody in 

Saskatchewan I know will mourn his passing. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add to the tribute paid by the 

Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) and the 



 

March 10, 1969 

 

 

1110 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald). As the Member from Riversdale has reminded us, Dr. George Simpson 

did take a particularly close and personal interest in our ethnic groups in Saskatchewan and particularly 

in the Ukrainian people. There was a way in which he served which was very close to Members of the 

Legislature. He was a main force. The main force I think one could say, in the passing of an Archives 

and Public Documents Act in the Province of Saskatchewan in the late forties. In addition to that he 

became our first Provincial Archivist. He carried on the duties in connection with and in addition to his 

duties as Professor at the University. It is of interest to note that at least the two succeeding Provincial 

Archivists, Dr. Lewis Thomas and Mr. John Archer, were students of Professor Simpson. Indeed then 

the Provincial archives which is a product in part of the Provincial Legislature, owe a great debt to him. 

One of his remarks, and it‟s similar to the one the Attorney General reminded us of, was that a country 

that forgets its history can‟t possibly know where it‟s going. We have much debt in the Legislature and 

throughout the Province to Professor Simpson for his very wide and sensitive instruction in history in all 

its phases. 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

others in extending sympathy to Mrs. Simpson on the passing of this great citizen of our province. It has 

been my privilege in the last few years for us to have been next door neighbor of Dr. and Mrs. Simpson. 

Certainly it‟s with a great deal of regret that we note his passing. Besides the many qualities that have 

been mentioned here, I can say that Dr. Simpson was also very fond of his garden and very fond of 

people and his neighbors. At all times he was completely interested in the welfare of others and it is 

indeed with a great deal of feeling that we see this citizen of ours pass on. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO CRAIK MIDGET C HOCKEY TEAM 
 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself with the Member from Arm 

River (Mr. McIvor) in congratulating the hockey team from Craik who played against Wakaw. I 

certainly took great pleasure in making a contribution toward the Craik Club because I know any time 

our young people get that kind of money, it‟ll certainly be well spent. Once again I want to congratulate 

the Member for attending the game at Wakaw, and I want to extend my best wishes to the Craik Hockey 

Club because as we always say, „May the best team win.‟ Thank you. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

THE PREFONTAINE REPORT 
 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Before the Minister takes his seat, Mr. Speaker, I was wondering 

if the Prefontaine Commission has finished their 



 

March 10, 1969 

 

 

1111 

report and, if so, will copies be available to Members of the Legislature? 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — No, the study is not yet complete. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — The second question, Mr. Minister, will copies be available when it is completed? 

 

Mr. Grant: — It‟s a report that was made for the departmental administration and I haven‟t as yet 

determined whether it‟s to be tabled or not. 

 

PROVINCIAL ROAD BANS 
 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to address a 

question to the Government. I understand that a road ban is going to go on highways before too long in 

all probability. My question is: what provisions are being made for the farmers to haul their grain to and 

from dryers during the period the ban is on the road, because some of these dryers are connected to a 

grain elevator. They must take them to and from the elevator and the farmers have asked what is being 

done on their behalf? 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — As a matter of fact, the Government has that under 

consideration. It was brought to our attention and we are trying to evolve a system of regulations which, 

while preserving the roads on the one hand, at the same time will make it possible for the farmers, as 

you have suggested, to get their wheat to the dryers. We are working on a policy now and hopefully will 

be able to announce something in a day or so. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — One further question. Would the Attorney General make copies of the policy 

available to us so that we can let our people know when they contact us? 

 

Mr. Heald: — Well, yes, Mr. Speaker, it will be in the form of a public announcement. It‟ll be made to 

the Legislature and anything of course that‟s made available to the Legislature will be available to all 

Members. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, through you, I would like to 

introduce to the House students from Victoria school in Saskatoon who are in the Speaker‟s gallery and 

are accompanied here this afternoon 



 

March 10, 1969 

 

 

1112 

by their teachers. I am sure we are delighted to have these students with us and we thank their teachers 

for showing sufficient interest to bring them along to Regina. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Public Works) moved second reading of Bill No. 60 — An Act to provide 

for Financial Assistance to Cities for the Establishment and Improvement of Water Pollution 

Control Works. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to say a few words on second reading of this Bill to provide financial 

assistance to cities for the establishment and improvement of water pollution control works. This is 

another example, I submit, of this Government‟s concern for the problems of cities to raise money 

during this period of tight money and high interest rates. All people in Saskatchewan recognize that 

water pollution presents a real threat to our well-being and to our economy. We recognize that all levels 

of government and industry have a public responsibility to ensure maintenance of the quality of our 

water resource. Industry wants good quality water to use in its processes. Municipalities need safe water 

of good quality. Treatment costs are kept at a minimum if natural water quality is maintained and every 

citizen wants the beauty of our natural water bodies in the associated wildlife resources protected. The 

general objective of the water pollution control program implemented on April 1st, 1968 is to protect 

and enhance the capacity of our water resource to serve the widest possible range of uses. The discharge 

of treated effluent or waste water is acceptable where it does not cause pollution or impair water quality 

to the extent that it adversely and unreasonably affects other uses of that water. As a matter of policy, no 

sewage may be discharged which has not received a minimum of primary treatment. Treatment over and 

above primary treatment may be required depending on the circumstances. 

 

In the case of new systems, treatment plans must include provision for adding secondary treatment 

facilities. Where there is limited water available for dilution purposes, the time period allowed for 

introduction of secondary treatment is limited. In the case of existing primary systems, the Commission 

is prepared to negotiate a reasonable schedule for the construction of secondary work. We are fortunate 

in Saskatchewan that water pollution has not gained the upper hand, and it is our hope that it never will 

as it is a very expensive proposition to correct it, once it has occurred. This is not to say that we do not 

have water pollution problems but they are isolated and can be corrected. Generally speaking our urban 

centres and industry have done a good job of effluent treatment. Most of them now provide the 

equivalent of secondary treatment of waste water. 



 

March 10, 1969 

 

 

1113 

Since the regulations went into effect last April, the Commission has secured commitments to provide 

treatment facilities from all those urban centres that do not presently have such facilities. The 

requirements that these centres construct sewage treatment works pose a real financial problem. 

Construction and equipment costs have soared in recent years. Since 1960 our towns and villages have 

been protected from unreasonable sewer and water charges by way of assistance under The Municipal 

Water Assistance Act. However, cities are not eligible for assistance under that Act. 

 

The Bill before you today provides for Provincial Government grants to Saskatchewan cities amounting 

to 10 per cent of the cost of actual sewage treatment plants and appurtenant land and other works. The 

maximum grant to a city is set at $500,000. These grants will be applicable in the case of construction of 

new facilities or the expansion of existing works. 

 

The early beneficiaries of this new system of grants will be the cities of Yorkton, Prince Albert and 

Saskatoon. However, our other cities are growing and the expansion of their treatment facilities will 

only be a matter of time and then they will receive assistance also. 

 

The knowledge that this assistance is available will assist these cities in planning their construction 

program. This program together with CMHC assistance will mean that cities can expect by way of 

senior government grants up to 26 per cent of the capital cost of sewage treatment works. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is another example of Liberal action where our words of concern for cities‟ 

financial problems are backed up by hard, cold cash. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — I had only a question, Mr. Speaker, of the Minister of Public 

Works. Does the Minister have any estimates, or his advisors, as to the amount of money that would be 

necessary to bring sewage disposal works to a point where they would be satisfactory from all points of 

view, including health points of view? 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I did not intend to enter 

this debate except for the fact that the Hon. Minister (Mr. Guy) made a certain statement. He boasted 

about a 10 per cent grant the Province is going to contribute to the cities that take upon themselves to 

build the necessary controls. I recognize as every Member does that pollution of our water is a 

contemporary evil and something must be done about it. To that extent I commend the Government for 

proposing this Bill. But I do want to tell the Minister that, when he suggests that 10 per cent is a big 

deal, instead it‟s a very small deal even when he stated that the Federal Government through its CMHC 

is going to 



 

March 10, 1969 

 

 

1114 

assist with another 16 per cent. That still is only 26 per cent of the total cost. When you consider the 

interest rates of today that must be paid by municipal institutions then it is not a very big deal. It‟s not a 

tremendous amount of assistance, such as the Minister suggested. I must say that I wish this Government 

had done something to establish a municipal development fund in co-operation with the Government of 

Canada under which plan this Government could have obtained money at a possible one or two per cent 

cost. Now, if such a program had been incorporated into this Bill as a result of such a policy, then I 

would have said that you‟re really giving substantial assistance to the cities that require essential 

pollution control. 

 

I‟m glad you‟ve brought the Bill in, Mr. Minister. I know the city that I represent, which is part of Prince 

Albert, needs this kind of service but I must say, “Please do not boast about the tremendous assistance 

you‟re giving to the cities because I think it‟s very, very paltry.” 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — I am certainly glad to see this Act come into force. I think 

it‟s long overdue and I am satisfied that it will do a good job. However, as you notice in the remarks of 

the Minister (Mr. Guy) it‟s to bail out Yorkton, Prince Albert and Saskatoon. I know Saskatoon needs it 

very badly, because of the way they‟re polluting that wonderful Saskatchewan River. This is something 

that should have been done 10 years ago, and I know it‟s going to cost them a lot of money. We are 

planning an extension to our sewage system here this spring or summer, and I believe I understood the 

Minister to say there would be money for expansion too. Is that right? It‟s not just for these three 

locations this year. Well, I certainly appreciate that because we plan on expanding our oxidation ponds 

and aeration system which has been highly successful. I might tell the Members of this House the city of 

Regina could have been faced with $6 to $7 million expenditure but because of this system we were able 

to reduce that through this method. It may be good for other people to come and investigate our system. 

Other cities across Canada have followed suit. It is difficult to be utilized in Ontario because of the 

closeness of the urban centres as large tracts of land are needed. I‟m very pleased to see this and I hope 

we will get the same treatment that other centres will get, when we make application for our expanded 

plan this year. 

 

I certainly want to support the Bill. 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Public Works): — In answer to the Member for Moose Jaw, I haven‟t got 

those figures here, but I think my officials have a rough estimate which we can take a look at in 

Committee. I want to thank the Member for Prince Albert East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) for his 

support. Small wonders never cease. One minute you say we are doing too much and then the next 



 

March 10, 1969 

 

 

1115 

minute you say we are not providing enough. I only remind the Member for Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland that this is 26 per cent more than was provided under his Government. As for a 

Municipal Development Fund, if he is very patient he will find that this Liberal promise will be carried 

out in the very near future as well. 

 

In reply to the Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker), I did mention in introducing second reading 

of the Bill that all cities in Saskatchewan will benefit from this in the future. In fact, our Estimates are 

that within five years every city in Saskatchewan as well as the three that I mentioned will have to 

expand their works and will become eligible for some assistance. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


