



















































Hansard: February 20, 1969


479 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Thursday, February 20, 1969. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, through you it is my pleasure to introduce to all 

Members of the Assembly, first, in the west gallery, 35 grade seven and eight students from Al Pickard 

school in Regina North West. Their teacher, Alice Semkoe, is with them. I understand they have a 

parliamentary forum at Al Pickard school. In the east gallery, also from Regina North West, 90 grade 

eight students from Rosemont school, their principal, Jim Young and teachers, George Achtymichuk and 

Peter East are with them. They too are interested in parliamentary procedures. All Members I‘m sure 

join me in expressing the wish that their stay here with us this afternoon will be pleasant and 

educational. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 

introduce to you and through you to the other Members of this Assembly, a group of students situated in 

the Speaker‘s gallery. These students comprise a portion of grade twelve high school at Glentworth. 

They were brought here by their teacher, Mr. Jeff Thompson. They have travelled a good number of 

miles to be with us this afternoon and we certainly hope for their benefit that the Member from Regina 

Centre (Mr. Blakeney) will be in good form. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hooker: — I also know that all Members of the Assembly will join with me in wishing them a very 

safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H. H. H. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I too want to welcome a fine group of 

young ladies from the St. Chad‘s school of the Qu‘Appelle Diocese sponsored by the Anglican Church. 

They are 22 in number from grade 10. They are here with Sister Beryl who is their teacher. This school, 

Mr. Speaker, is one of great reputation for learning and standards. It is in the heart of my constituency, 

the South East seat of Regina, the largest, I repeat again, in the Province of Saskatchewan. We do 

welcome them this afternoon and we hope that their stay here will be most fruitful and that they will 

learn much about the making of the laws of our province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

480 

Mr. J. J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to 

introduce to you and through you to the Members of this Assembly, a group of students seated in the 

Speaker‘s gallery. These students attend Sutherland school which is located in my constituency, 

Saskatoon City Park-University. We sincerely hope that these students will appreciate the proceedings 

of the House and that they will enjoy a very pleasant and safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I want also to welcome on your behalf and on 

behalf of the Members assembled here some 37 grade six school children from the Palliser Heights 

school in Moose Jaw. They are accompanied by one of their teachers, Mr. Neudorf. The school, I 

understand, intends to send a number of other classes down during the session and I want to take this 

opportunity to welcome them. I understand they are situated both in the east and in the west galleries, 

Mr. Speaker. I‘m sure that all Members will want to afford them a cordial welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

SASKATCHEWAN FARMERS’ WHEAT PROFIT 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. McFarlane) in regard to an article in the Leader Post, February 18, 1969, entitled ―Saskatchewan 

Farmers‘ Wheat Profit Said 4 Cents a Bushel.‖ The person making this statement was J. F. Hickey, head 

of the Farm Management Branch of the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture. I wonder if the 

Minister could table the figures that were used in arriving at this profit picture? It sounds like it is a little 

bit high to me. 

 

Hon. D. T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I saw the article in question 

and discussed it with the person who was purported to have given this information out. His whole 

speech was quoted out of context and I would be quite pleased to give a copy of the article to anybody 

that is concerned. 

 

DISCONTINUATION OF GRANTS TOWARD SCHOOL BUSES 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of Education. Is the statement now being circulated to school unit offices 

correct that grants of 25 per cent toward the purchase of school buses are to be discontinued and if so, on 

what date is this to become effective? 

 

Hon. J. C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, yes, the statement is correct and I 

believe the letter said, ―effective as of February 15,‖ I don‘t 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

481 

recall exactly but whatever the letter said, stands. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Steuart (Provincial 

Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the chair. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Financial Critic): Mr. Speaker, when I spoke on Tuesday I had not had an 

opportunity, in the heat of the debate which rapidly ensued after the Treasurer‘s Budget (Mr. Steuart), to 

tender my congratulations to Mr. Barnhart on his appointment as Clerk Assistant. I know all Members 

will, as they already have done, welcome his services in the House and extend to him every good wish 

of years of fruitful service to this Legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I said that the Provincial Treasurer‘s Budget was a depressing one and 

even with his oratory and even with his figures, the picture he paints is a pale grey, dull picture of 

austerity. But some of us, Mr. Speaker, will be even sceptical of his figures. I‘m a little sceptical for one 

thing, of his estimate of the yield from the education and health tax. To me it looks like a Liberal 

estimate. Some of us are sceptical on other accounts, particularly about the Government‘s so-called 

balanced Budget this year. I for one don‘t believe the Government‘s figures. I believe that the 

Government has lost and is losing large sums of money in its pulpwood operation and is not disclosing 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I say that if this Government dared to tell the people the true facts, it would 

disclose huge losses and I‘m not talking about losses measured in thousands of dollars or tens of 

thousands of dollars or hundreds of thousands of dollars. I say that this Government is losing millions of 

dollars in its pulpwood operations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — This Government claims to be efficient. It claims to be good businessmen and how 

often it makes that claim. But it is losing money on this Crown corporation at a rate never before 

equalled by such business operations in Saskatchewan. And I‘m asked how I know. If any one Member 

opposite wants to stand up and lay the figures on the table and refute my remarks, I‘ll welcome them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I say, Mr. Speaker, the fact that my allegation is true is given away by the fact that 

the Government has refused and continues to refuse to give the facts to this House and to 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

482 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‘m sceptical on another account. I don‘t believe the Government‘s stories about the 

balanced budgets in previous years. And the Government‘s own Estimates deny it. I know that 

government financing is pretty complicated, but I think it can be fairly well summed up this way: a 

balanced budget is when you pay as you go, a deficit budget is a buy-now-pay-later budget. And I ask 

Members to look at their Estimates which they got on Tuesday and look at page 26. There is an item 

there to pay $650,000 for a highway that is already built, a highway built on the buy-now-pay-later plan 

two years ago. That‘s going to be a pretty expensive highway. It cost $6.5 million to build, but to get the 

$6.5 million, the Government borrowed that sum at 7 per cent interest on a 20-year term. The interest on 

the borrowed money will be $9 million. So the highway won‘t cost $6.5 million, no, it will be: highway 

$6.5 million; interest $9 million; total $15.5 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And that‘s what we pay to put a four-lane highway out to Caron past the ranch so the 

Premier could take his visitors from Regina right down to the ranch on a four-lane highway. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That‘s just one reason why this buy-now-pay-later plan is a bad plan for highways. 

 

And I‘m sceptical of the Government‘s figures for some other reasons. I‘m certain that some of these 

estimates put in the Budget are in there for one reason and one reason only and that‘s for show. And I 

say the Government doesn‘t intend to spend some of the money that it put in that Budget. The technique 

of subterfuge is pretty well developed. They way it works is shown by the Public Accounts for the year 

1968. That‘s the latest one we have. Suppose the Government is under some pressure because of the 

appalling shortage of facilities at the University. Fine. Put in a good estimate for capital building at the 

University, $2 million. That doesn‘t mean you have to spend $2 million. Oh, no, in this case it spends 

$1.5 million and keeps back $.5 million. Who will ever catch that tucked away on page 74 of the Public 

Accounts. Or suppose the Government is under pressure to provide scholarships for students. People are 

beginning to talk. After all in Canada every Provincial Government but Saskatchewan and Prince 

Edward Island provides some form of bursary program for students out of its own funds. But, not this 

Government. What do you do when the heat is on? Well that‘s easy, no problem. Just put a figure in the 

Estimates. That‘s what it did, $182,000 for student loans. Now how much of this $182,000 did it spend 

last year? $100,000? No. $50,000? No. $10,000? No. Answer, nil . .  . on page 75 of the Public 

Accounts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And the Government wonders why the students have to take their case to the Prime 

Minister himself. The answer is not far to seek. The answer is that this Government is playing 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

483 

games with the students and with the Legislature. The credibility gap is just too wide. Look at the whole 

list of expenditures, look at the whole list in the Public Accounts. They tell an eloquent story. Highways 

capital, $6.5 million budgeted. How much spent? You guessed it, $6.5 million. But look at item 6, 

Education capital, technical institute at Saskatoon, budgeted $2.8 million, but spent, $1.7 million – 60 

per cent. A so-called saving of $1 million while hundreds of young people in Saskatchewan don‘t have 

an opportunity for technical education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That‘s what the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) called it on Tuesday. A saving. Or 

take mental health. Over $700,000 of the money budgeted for mental health was not spent. And this at 

the very time that Dr. Frazier was saying that the mental health program was falling apart because not 

enough money was being spent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Indeed the Treasurer last year put in a special item in his budget - $500,000. But all 

he would have had to do was take the $700,000 that he hadn‘t spent and spend it. Instead, he wanted this 

item for show - $500,000. He doesn‘t intend to spend it, he didn‘t spend it last year and he doesn‘t 

intend to spend it this year. Mental health is way, way down in his list of priorities. 

 

Or take item 39. This is a vote to provide housing for people of Indian ancestry. Now how many times 

have we heard that story. It put in the Budget with a great flourish an amount of $283,000. What does it 

spend? $61,000 – 22 per cent on this program. And I could go on and on. There are large sums budgeted 

but not spent for other things. For housing projects, for old age assistance, disabled persons. In sharp 

contrast is the highway budget. Of all the money budgeted, 98.6 per cent was spent. Is there any wonder 

that this credibility gap grows and grows. Now a gaping hole in the credibility of this Government is 

evidenced when it talks about its economic policies. 

 

We‘ve heard for many years about industrial diversification and prosperity. We‘ve heard that there are 

jobs going begging, that we have a low unemployment rate, indeed that we have industrial prosperity. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if that is true and I say, if, then we as a Province should be in excellent financial 

shape. In the same vein we‘ve heard about agricultural diversification; we are no longer dependent upon 

field crops; we are told that the cattlemen and the hogmen are prospering under the benign leadership of 

the Premier. Now if these things are true, this Province should be in top financial shape. The grain crop 

last year was poorish but by no means a failure. In terms of bushels it was one of the bigger crops in the 

history of the province. In terms of grade, on the poor side. But all in all an average crop. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, with an average crop and with supposedly booming industrial prosperity and supposedly 

booming agricultural industry, except for field crops, we should be rolling in money. If this is true, how 

is it that we are subjected to this dreary, mark-time Budget with its air of crisis cutbacks. And I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that this Budget reeks of crisis cutbacks. 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

484 

Let me give a few examples of programs which are cutback. School buildings, the grants of these are cut 

back; technical institute construction, cut back; park development and construction, cut back; South 

Saskatchewan River irrigation, cut back; community pasture program, cut back; co-operative extension 

work, cut back; scholarships for students, cut back; grants to Highway Safety Council, cut back; 

resource conservation education, cut back; nursing home maintenance grants, cut out all together; 

money to build new nursing homes, cut back. Mr. Speaker, this is by no means a complete list. Another 

thing which almost every one of these items has in common is this: that the work will have to be done 

sometime. It is a temporary postponement. It is just an emergency cutback. To delay this work is merely 

to put off the evil day with the sure knowledge that when we do do the work, when we do build those 

nursing homes, when we do build those schools and those technical institutes, the job will cost us more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, only in extreme measures should a government engage in this 

type of stop-start budgeting. Jack rabbit starts and screeching stops are just as expensive for a 

government as they are in running a car. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — These methods are far more expensive and far less effective than long-term planning. 

 

Now why, Mr. Speaker, does the Government find it necessary to cutback, to postpone, to defer, piling 

up trouble for next year and the year after? Why is it budgeting in this way from fright? Well the reason 

is not hard to find. For in spite of the talk about diversification, in spite of all the publicity releases about 

new industries, the Saskatchewan economy is faltering badly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Saskatchewan certainly has made some progress. But it has not surged ahead during 

the last five years. Far from it. Compared with the other provinces, Saskatchewan has not even held its 

own. It has not even kept pace with the Canadian average. 

 

The United States is still in an economic boom. So is Canada. Indeed public figures on both sides of the 

border and from coast to coast spend half their time telling us about the boom and about the inflation 

that‘s coming with it and how something must be done. Now Canada has shared this North American 

boom. But not all of Canada has shared it equally. And just about tail-end Charlie in the boom market is 

Saskatchewan. Let‘s look at some of the indicators, the indicators that the Premier used to quote with 

such pride and has stopped quoting for a very good reason. 

 

Let‘s look at oil production. Our increase in oil production has been this: 1963, 7 million barrels; 1964, 

10 million barrels; 1965, 7 million barrels; 1966, 5 million barrels; 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

485 

1967, no increase at all – 1 million barrel drop; 1968, again no increase, a further drop of 1 million 

barrels. The second successive year when we have had a drop in oil production. And not only in 

production, Mr. Speaker. Oil exploration is similarly tapering off. Compare the year ending March, 1968 

with the year ending March, 1964 back in those dark days of stagnation. The number of wells drilled is 

down, the number of wells completed is down. Yes, Mr. Speaker, production is down for two successive 

years, the number of wells drilled is down, the number of wells completed is down. This is hardly a 

picture of a booming industry. It is a picture of failure, failure by the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. 

Cameron) and I‘m sorry he is not in his seat, failure by this tired, aging and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Let‘s look Mr. Speaker, at hardrock mining. We have been treated this year to 

another barrage in the almost ceaseless campaign to convince Saskatchewan people that there is 

burgeoning development in the North. The Government is naturally just a little bit careful where it uses 

these stories. In Northern Saskatchewan the stark realities of widespread unemployment and low 

incomes are just a little too well known to allow the stories to be used there. You can‘t tell the people in 

La Loche or Cumberland House or Buffalo Narrows about the burgeoning prosperity in the North. But 

the farther south we go, the more luxurious and flamboyant the stories become. At press conferences in 

Regina it is the order of the day to repeat and if possible to embellish the myth of the burgeoning North. 

The advertising men tell us that the trick is to keep repeating your story. It doesn‘t matter whether it is 

true, just keep repeating it. And how well that lesson has been learned. How many times has it been 

suggested that mineral development in Northern Saskatchewan was blossoming forth after a period of 

stagnation? How many times has it been suggested that giant new mines are just around the corner, 

going to provide thousands of jobs, or at least hundreds, for our native people? How many times has it 

been suggested that the North is experiencing a veritable resurrection after years of deadening 

stagnation? Now these suggestions, Mr. Speaker, are little more than gusts of wind from the Premier‘s 

office. This is made abundantly clear by the report of the Department of Mineral Resources. In that 

report — I don‘t know whether it has been tabled in this Legislature yet but it was circulated to 

Members a few weeks ago — it shows just what the mineral production was in 1967-68 and in 1962-63. 

Mr. Speaker, as everybody knows, 1962-63 — everybody at least who reads Tab International and those 

other journals that carry the Premier‘s speeches, everybody knows that 1963 was in the days of 

stagnation. Yet hardrock mineral production in 1968 compared with 1963 was down from $67 million to 

$45 million. Down 30 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, only inflationary increases in prices of some of the 

minerals, particularly copper made the story look even that good. In terms of pounds and ounces 

produced, production was down over this period in gold, silver, copper, zinc, cadmium, selenium, 

tellurium, and uranium. Hardly impressive. In fact a record of failure, failure by the Minister of Mineral 

Resources and by this tired and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Or take manufacturing. Our performance in manufacturing 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

486 

is mediocre at best. The value of manufacturing shipments in 1968 was up over 1967 by — my figure 

shows — less than 2 per cent. With prices increasing by 3, 4 or 5 per cent, there has been an actual 

decline in the volume of goods manufactured and shipped. Now what about employment in 

manufacturing? We remember the now buried boast about 80,000 new jobs in four years. Well, four 

years have come and four years have gone. The jobs are gone but they never came. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In the four years, from July, 1964 to July, 1968, the number of people working in 

manufacturing has increased by 3,000, Mr. Speaker, 3,000. That is a mere fraction of the jobs which 

have disappeared in the relentless consolidation which is going on in the agricultural industry. And as 

you might expect, Mr. Speaker, that‘s a very much poorer performance than in other provinces in 

Canada. In 1966-67, manufacturing employment increased in Canada, 6.3 per cent; in Saskatchewan, 4.5 

per cent. In 1967-68 in Canada, 3.8 per cent; in Saskatchewan, 2.5 per cent. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have 

a very small manufacturing industry. A very small number of jobs would shoot up our percentage. Even 

yet, even with this small base, we cannot maintain the same percentage increase as the rest of Canada. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, five years of failure, failure by the Minister of Industry (Mr. Thatcher), failure by 

this tired and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, take the retail trade. Here again Saskatchewan‘s performance is much 

worse than other provinces! In 1968 the increase in retail trade over 1967 was: Canada, 6.2 per cent; 

Saskatchewan, .9 per cent — less than 1 per cent; and in January, 1969, if my figures are right, it‘s down 

over 1968 by a whopping 10.6 per cent. For the period from 1964 to 1968 — I‘ve just used these figures 

because Members opposite will say that the 1968 year is an unfair comparison — our comparison with 

the other provinces is even worse. During that four-year period, retail trade increased in Canada by 30 

per cent, in Alberta by 36 per cent, in Manitoba by 25 per cent and in Saskatchewan by 12 per cent. 

One-half of Manitoba‘s increase, one-third of Alberta‘s increase. Mr. Speaker, retail trade is a pretty 

good indicator of how our people are living. Not very impressive. In fact, another failure by this 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Or take construction, Mr. Speaker. My figures on construction are Dominion Bureau 

of Statistics‘ figures because the latest publication put out by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), 

giving the financial and economic position of the Province, omits all reference to construction, as well 

he might. For construction in 1968 was down $4 million compared with 1967. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Maybe not in Saskatoon, maybe you have a better government up there than we have 

down in Regina, but  . .  



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

487 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I couldn‘t offer a comment on that. All I know is that throughout the province as a 

whole, construction was down. Construction was down in all of these constituencies represented by 

Members opposite. 

 

All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that now that Regina has had come civic elections, much deplored by the 

Member for Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) a few weeks ago, I look forward to a booming time in 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: —  . .  110 mills! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, 110 mills, I‘ll come to 110 mills and just why we‘re paying 110 mills in 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But I‘ll tell you one of our problems. One of our problems is that we have hundreds 

of construction workers who are now unemployed, unemployed by this Government who said there 

were jobs for all, unemployed when the Member for Regina South (Mr. Grant) and the Member for 

Regina South West (Mr. McPherson), just in 1967 were elected on a platform of lower taxes and more 

jobs, both Grant and McPherson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, last year we had our dose of lower taxes. Now this year we have our dose of 

unemployment, because there are 1200 construction workers who are unemployed in Regina right now, 

and the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) won‘t dare deny that. I think that I‘ve got the figures right. 

There are 10 construction jobs waiting to be filled. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Still the lowest in Canada. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Still the lowest rate of unemployment in Canada. We have heard that story time and 

time again. May I make two comments on that. One, this has been true since 1945, because of the way 

the figure is worked out, and two, it‘s true only because self-employed agricultural workers are included 

and there‘s no way to tell statistically when a farmer is unemployed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I ask Hon. Members when they look at that Budget and see the cutbacks 

in school construction, the cutbacks in money for technical institutes, the slowdown in construction of 

parks, the slowdown in irrigation projects, whether there is very much comfort for construction workers 

in that Budget. The Government will no doubt try to lay the blame for its failure to provide the jobs 

which it promised but hasn‘t delivered, on Ottawa, or tight money, or inflation or the banks. 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

488 

But other provinces have surmounted this difficulty. Giant construction projects continue in Alberta and 

in Manitoba. But not in Saskatchewan. In Saskatchewan the dead weight of failure is becoming 

altogether too evident. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Even agriculture is not prospering as it should. Take the cattle industry. Now we‘ve 

heard lots of talk about diversification. I‘ve heard the Premier time after time tell us about how farmers 

are moving more and more to cattle. Well, I wish the Premier would speak to the Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. McFarlane) because the report which the Minister puts out tells me that there are fewer cattle on 

Saskatchewan farms in 1968 than there were in 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Premier says that our farmers are diversifying into cattle more and more. Now, I 

don‘t doubt that he‘s trying to do that but the Department of Agriculture says that he‘s failed. It says that 

after four years of work by the Premier there are in fact fewer cattle on Saskatchewan farms than there 

were four years ago. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You need a new report  . .  

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think not, I think I have the report with me and I‘d be delighted to show it to the 

Minister afterwards. Mr. Speaker, cattle marketings are already down. Latest figures show that for the 

first 11 months of 1968, cattle marketings are down 5 per cent in Saskatchewan. And even more 

disturbing, Saskatchewan‘s performance was worse than Manitoba‘s and worse than Alberta‘s. 

Manitoba was down between 3 and 4 per cent and Alberta‘s was actually up by 9 per cent. 

 

Let‘s look at hogs. No, I won‘t make the obvious comment, Mr. Speaker. I will say let‘s consider the 

problem of hogs. In spite of the Government‘s efforts by way of loans and grants and promotion, the 

number of hogs had increased by less than 2 per cent over four years, an average of one-half of 1 per 

cent a year. And hog marketings, while they were up fractionally in 1968, are up much less again than in 

Manitoba and Alberta. As in so many other things, this Government and this province are falling behind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Or take sheep, and this has been a favorite of the Premier‘s. I won‘t make the 

comment again, Mr. Speaker. Pastures have been established, press releases have been made, but sheep 

numbers go down and down. In June of ‘64 about 153,000. June of ‘68 about 120,000. Down 20 per cent 

in four years. 

 

It‘s the same dismal story in dairying, Mr. Speaker. Latest figures show that milk production is down for 

the first 10 months of 1968 over 1967, whereas elsewhere in Canada it‘s up by a whopping 90 million 

pounds. Saskatchewan is down 3 million, 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

489 

Canada up 90 million. The latest figures from the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) — and I see 

he‘s looking at his report — show that in the three years from 1964 to 1967, milk production dropped, in 

these three years of thriving diversification, 23 per cent, and dairy cattle numbers dropped 25 per cent. 

 

Hon. D. T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Up last year, ‘68. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — up in ‘68, he keeps those figures real dark, they haven‘t been published. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, turkey production is well down in 1968 and once again down 

more than elsewhere in Canada. Now, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. We‘ve had an almost 

unending succession of stories about how Saskatchewan agriculture is diversifying. We are told by 

Government press releases that we‘re no longer dependent upon field crops but the facts tell their own 

story of frustration and failure. Cattle numbers down. Cattle marketings down. Sheep numbers down. 

Hog numbers up a tiny fraction. Milk production down. Turkey production down. There just has not 

been a diversification of Saskatchewan agriculture. We‘re more dependent on field crops today than we 

were five years ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Another story of failure and this time failure by the Minister of Agriculture. Failure 

by this tired and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Or take population. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Somebody took them, yes. During the decade from 1951 to 1961, in the depths of this 

so-called ‗stagnation,‘ the population increased by an average of about 9,500 a year. But during the five 

years of Liberal Government, the population increased less than half that figure. There‘s been a real 

flight of young people from Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, I just happen to have the latest news 

from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics in their daily bulletin of February 18th, which is yesterday. And 

it notes a drop in population for Saskatchewan from October 1st, 1968 to January 1st, 1969, a drop of 

1,000 people. No other province had a drop. Saskatchewan is big number one again. Two other 

provinces stayed still. They were Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick but that‘s explainable. 

They, too, have Liberal Governments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, there has been a real flight of young people from this province, and with 

this Government conscientiously 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

490 

pursuing policies designed to alienate our young people, not only New Democratic young people, Tory 

young people, Liberal young people and New Democratic young people — we can expect a further 

flight of some of our best brains. 

 

No wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the Government must spend large sums to recruit teachers and other 

professional people abroad. At the rate it is alienating not only our so-called ‗fringe‘ young people — 

they‘ll be against any government and good luck to them in that — but the good solid teachers, and the 

good solid students — at the rate this Government is alienating them, we‘re going to have to spend more 

money than there is in this Budget to bring people into Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, this isn‘t hurting the good students and the good teachers very much. 

They can look after themselves. They can go to Manitoba or Alberta or British Columbia. I‘ve no worry 

about them. But it will bother Saskatchewan because they are leaving and leaving in unprecedented 

numbers. It is we who will be the poorer; poorer in purse and poorer in spirit. This is a sad failure for 

which we will pay dearly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, faced with this declining economic picture, the Government has acted, 

or perhaps I should say, reacted in two distinct ways: It has been paralyzed with inactivity in the face of 

a serious problem facing our province — the damp grain crisis. It is afraid to do anything that might cost 

money, and second, it has slashed expenditures on some vital programs and in this process has shown 

and shown all too clearly where its priorities lie. 

 

Let‘s look first at this damp grain crisis. Now this crisis isn‘t the greatest crisis to hit Western 

agriculture. It does not compare with the one-two punch of drought and depression of the 1930s. Nor is 

it of such fundamental long-term importance as the ever tightening cost-price-no-market squeeze which 

threatens to strangle our grain economy. Let‘s admit that. Let‘s keep our sense of proportion. But it 

certainly does compare, Mr. Speaker, this crisis certainly does compare in seriousness with any crisis of 

an immediate nature which has hit Saskatchewan since 1945. It‘s just as serious as the fodder shortage in 

the drought of 1961. Yet what has the Government done? Has it acted vigorously as the Government of 

that day did to deal with that crisis? That Government gave help, cash on the barrelhead help, to farmers 

to bring in fodder from Alberta, to bring it in from Manitoba, to bring fodder from northern 

Saskatchewan down to the south. There was an awareness. There was action and there was cash. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Or, Mr. Speaker, take the crisis when the 1959 crop lay under the snow. Once again 

there was awareness. There was action and there was cash. Cash to the tune of $6 million. But what has 

this Government done? What has the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) done? He‘s held 

meetings. Oh, yes, 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

491 

he‘s held meetings. Yes, and he‘s issued press releases. He‘s even offered help in installing dryers. But 

conspicuously, so far as the Government is concerned there has been no awareness, no action, and no 

cash. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now doubtless the Government feels that its finances are in such poor shape that it 

can spend nothing to meet this crisis. But this is short-sighted folly. If government action could save, say 

10 million bushels of grains, and I think this is a very modest figure, it would mean $10 or $15 million 

more for our economy. The Government would probably recover close to $1 million of that in taxes of 

one kind or another, sales taxes, gasoline taxes, other taxes, without even considering possible savings in 

assistance payments and other special payments. Because make no mistake about it, there is a shortage 

of cash in some parts of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — There will be trouble this year in collecting municipal taxes. There will be trouble for 

merchants, trouble for fuel dealers, trouble for machinery agents. Last fall the Government should have 

acted to bring dryers into this province and to set them up where they were needed. By the 

Government‘s own admission, the dryers which are here are in the wrong places, or else they‘re not 

being used. I don‘t know whether it‘s true or not, but I read in the Hansard for the House of Commons 

for January 31st that there are a lot of dryers to be had in Ontario, that some in fact have been moved to 

the Lakehead and that many more are available. And I want to quote some remarks from the Member for 

Huron, which is an Ontario riding, Mr. R.E. McKinley, and he says: 

 

There are in Huron County alone, which is part of my constituency, 40 or 50 dryers available. They 

could be ready on short notice to be moved and be set up outside the terminals in Vancouver. 

 

That was his idea then. 

 

in order to dry the grain. All we need is someone to co-ordinate such a program and tell the people 

running the terminals in Vancouver, if they‘ve never encountered this situation before, how to do the 

job. We could provide a great deal of assistance in this respect if we were invited to do so by those 

responsible. 

 

Now, whether or not Mr. McKinley‘s idea of taking dryers to Vancouver is feasible, I don‘t know, but I 

think he makes clear what the Government doesn‘t deny, that there are dryers readily available. Now the 

Government says that they‘re not needed. We on this side of the House say they are. We say there‘s 

every reason to believe that dryers are needed. We say that it‘s better in any case to be safe than sorry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But this Government feels otherwise. It feels that 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

492 

it cannot spend money on drying grain even in this crisis. It‘s a sad day for Saskatchewan when the 

financial affairs of this province are in such a shape that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

can‘t spend money to meet a crisis in our primary industry, agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It‘s an admission of bad management by him and by the Government. It‘s another 

indication of the incompetence of this tired and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I said that the failure of its economic policies has caused this 

Government to react in two ways. We‘ve seen that it stands seemingly paralyzed with inactivity in the 

face of the damp grain crisis. 

 

Now let‘s look at how it sets its spending priorities, in particular, let‘s look at where it made its cuts, 

where its priorities lie. This Government is fond of saying that it gives top priority to education, and I 

suppose that in one sense of the word that‘s true. In Saskatchewan the greatest public enterprise is our 

educational system. But that‘s equally true in every other province of Canada. It‘s equally true in almost 

every country of the world. 

 

Simply to say that we spend a lot of money on education is not to say very much. After all, we‘re all 

human, we live in a scientific and technological age. This is a truism. But it means that we must spend a 

great deal of our wealth, of our time and our effort in passing on to the next generations the ever-

growing body of knowledge. Knowledge is power, power to control the universe, power to shape the 

forces of nature. There can be no turning back in our commitments and our obligations to fit our young 

people to live and to grow in such a world, and to contribute to the world growth and betterment. This is 

perhaps the greatest obligation that any society has to its young people. I‘m sure that we on both sides of 

the House accept this burden and this challenge. But some accept it with more grace and more sincerity 

than others. Some are ready to act, to open the new world to our children and to our younger brothers 

and sisters. Others prefer to talk about education and act in other fields. 

 

How does this Liberal Government in Saskatchewan rate in discharging its responsibilities to our young 

people? Let‘s compare Saskatchewan‘s record with the other provinces, large and small, rich and poor. I 

looked at the latest available material from the Dominion Bureau of Statistics, and they show just where 

the priorities of this Government lie. This is a bulletin put out in December by the Dominion Bureau of 

Statistics which listed the estimated spendings for the year ending March, 1969, for all of the provinces 

of Canada. Unfortunately, the figures for British Columbia were not available so I must quote only the 

nine provinces. It‘s estimated that our Provincial Government would spend in Saskatchewan $349 

million. Of this spending, education would account for $110 million, health and welfare $100 million, 

roads $71 million. As a percentage of total spending, Saskatchewan spends on education 31.6 per cent, 

on health and welfare 28.9 per cent, on roads 20.5 per cent. 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

493 

Now how do these figures compare with the other provinces? Comparing Saskatchewan with the other 

eight provinces, again leaving out British Columbia, here are what the figures show: 

 

In spending on highways, roads and bridges, Saskatchewan is No. 1 measured by the percent of the 

Budget spent. Of all the provinces reporting, Saskatchewan spends more of its total Budget on roads 

than any other province. This is clear enough, top priority for roads. 

 

Now, let‘s look at education. In spending on education, of the nine provinces, Saskatchewan is not No. 

1, it‘s No. 6. The percentage of the Budget spent on education in Saskatchewan is 6 down the list, 

behind Manitoba, Alberta, Ontario, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and ahead of Newfoundland, Quebec 

and Prince Edward Island. And even more surprising, Mr. Speaker, measured on a per capita basis — 

how much we spend for each citizen in the province — Saskatchewan is not even No. 6, it‘s No. 7. 

Indeed No. 8. Only Prince Edward Island spends less per person on education than does the 

Saskatchewan Government. It‘s really almost unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of New 

Brunswick or the Government of Nova Scotia, or even of Newfoundland — and each of these is a 

relatively impoverished province — spends more per person on education than does this Liberal 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Speaker, that‘s what the figures show and I refer Hon. Members to the 

Dominion Bureau of Statistics weekly bulletin dated December 13th, 1968. Rather than being No. 1 

priority compared with other provinces of Canada, education is far, far down on this Government‘s list 

of priorities. 

 

The Budget presented to us by the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) on Tuesday, continues this downgrading of 

education. School grants are increased by only $2.4 million or less than 3½ per cent. The whole Budget 

shows an increase of twice that amount or 7 per cent. So school grants get an increase of less than half of 

the overall increase. This can only mean and will mean that the brunt of increase in education costs will 

be borne by the local taxpayers. And then we‘ll have these 110 mills, which the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron) talked about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) says in his Budget that operating grants will 

be, and I‘m going to use his words here, ―$62.3 million, up $4.4 million.‖ Now, do we believe that? 

Well, last year he told us in his Budget, and I quote from page 23 of his printed Budget: ―We propose to 

increase operating grants by $2.7 million to a total of $60.3 million.‖ I want you to check those figures. 

Last year they were going to be $60.3 million. This year, he‘s going to bring them up to $62.3 million. 

Now, by my schoolboy arithmetic, the difference between $60.3 million and $62.3 million is $2 million, 

but not to the Provincial Treasurer. To him the difference between 60.3 and 62.3 is 4.4. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

494 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, with the Provincial Treasurer I really can‘t say that he‘s seeing double, 

but I can say that he‘s trying too hard to put the best face on a bad Budget, a Budget which does far too 

little for schools. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) says that this increase from $60.3 million to 

$62.3 million — and I‘ll call that $2 million, if I may — is a reasonable increase and will allow school 

boards to hold the line. But this is simply not true. This year, because of the area bargaining legislation, 

school boards will have to pay not only their 1969 salaries but part of their 1968 salaries as well. This is 

going to mean extra pressure this year. And that‘s not all. Because there are teachers now grouped, 

grouped in one bargaining unit who were in many bargaining units before, there‘s bound to be expense 

to school boards in ironing out some of the discrepancies which have grown up over the years. 

 

Indeed when the Teachers‘ Salary Legislation was before this House last year, I remember the eloquent 

speech made by the Member for Milestone (Mr. MacDonald), the Minister of Welfare, along this very 

line. He said there were inequities. He said that some teachers with the same qualifications were paid 

less than others, and that these lower paid teachers deserved equal salaries. All well and good, Mr. 

Speaker, but where is the money to come from? Certainly not from this Budget. 

 

This Budget provides no money to do the job that the Minister of Welfare pleaded so eloquently for last 

year. Perhaps he expects the local taxpayer to bear the full brunt of this evening-up process as well as 

the regular salaries for 1969, and as well as part of the salaries for 1968. Or perhaps he expects the 

higher paid teachers to take a salary cut in the face of soaring costs of living. 

 

Just consider the problem facing school boards. Even a 4 per cent increase in salaries would cost $3 

million. And this makes no provision for back pay, no provision for more teachers, no provision for 

higher qualified teachers, no provision for evening-out discrepancies, no provision for giving a little 

extra help to separate school districts or other districts. How can the boards possibly operate on n 

increase in grants of $2 million? Certainly it provides nothing for extra buses which the Minister has just 

announced the boards are going to have to pay out of their own funds. On all of these matters, the 

Budget is silent. The money provided is hopelessly inadequate. And this is the smallest increase, 

percentage-wise, in school grants this year, a year of extra pressures, pressures created by soaring living 

costs; pressures created by the new salary legislation; pressures created by sharpened competition from 

other provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this wholly inadequate increase comes not as a single sacrifice to be borne, but as the latest 

in a succession of grossly inadequate budgets for school purposes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Year after year school grants 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

495 

have been pitifully low. Year after year, the burden of meeting increasing school costs has been shifted 

to the local ratepayers. Year after year, the amount of total school costs which have had to be met from 

local taxes has gone up and up. Members opposite say, oh. I would like them to look at the Minister‘s 

report from the Department of Education. It tells us that in 1963 the amount that the local people had to 

pay for their schools was $46 million; in 1964, $49 million; 1965, $53 million; 1966, $57 million; and 

1967, $65 million. $65 million, that is almost $70 for every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan for 

local school taxes. Not only that, but since this Government took power that figure has gone up by $20 

million or very nearly $25 per capita. This burden has fallen particularly hard on farm land, this, Mr. 

Speaker, by a Government that campaigned on a promise that it would and I quote: ―Greatly reduce 

taxes on farm land and property.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Just another broken promise. The results are exactly what you would expect them to 

be. Mill rates for school purposes everywhere are skyrocketing. Let‘s look at the Yorkton unit: 1965, 35 

mills; 1968 up to 45 mills — 10 mills in three years. For the Melville unit: 1965, 34 mills; 1968, 45 

mills — up 11 mills in three years. Those are rather moderate. Let‘s look at Yorkton city: 1964, 47 

mills; 1967, 67 mills — 20 mills in three years. Or the town of Lemberg: 1964, 28 mills; 1967, 50 mills 

— 22 mills in three years. Those, I think, are rather more impressive than average but there are lots of 

10 mill ones; Melfort town 10 mills, R.M. of Maple Creek 8 mills, and on and on. 10 mills, 8 mills, 9 

mills, 11 mills, are the order of the day. 

 

In one year, 1967, and I use that because the 1968 figures are not available, mill rates for school 

purposes increased an average of 2 mills in cities, 3 mills in towns, 3 mills in villages, 3 mills in rural 

municipalities. Those are averages and as I say many, many places have very much higher increases. 

 

In the face of mill rate hikes like these, year after year, the homeowner grant is a pretty pale palliative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — For almost all of our farmers and indeed almost everybody who lives in a town or 

city the homeowner grant has been eaten up and eaten up several times over. I know that I wish that I 

could pay the same school taxes that I did when this Liberal Government came into power. It can have 

its homeowner grant and it can have it twice and I would be money ahead. 

 

As I have indicated, Mr. Speaker, this piling on of education costs on the back of the local ratepayers has 

not only hurt the ratepayers, it has hurt our educational system. 

 

Trustees know that there is a limit to school taxes even if the Government opposite doesn‘t appear to 

know. They have very naturally felt that they had to hold the line and hold it hard. 

 

Teachers, on the other hand, are faced with ever-rising costs of living caused partly, as the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

496 

Steuart) freely admits, by the incompetence of the Ottawa Liberals in managing their financial affairs. 

The teachers see other professions, lawyers, doctors, dentists and, yes, politicians earn increased 

incomes. They naturally think that it is only fair for them to get an increase in salary. This has produced 

tensions between teachers and trustees greater than at any time for 25 years. It has caused educational 

standards to slip, more crowded classrooms, ―improving the teacher-pupil ratio‖ is what the Premier 

calls it, less individual attention, skimping on libraries, delays in getting needed facilities. And of course 

the chief sufferers are the students. It is they who are being short-changed by this Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No one can fairly blame the trustees. No one can fairly blame the teachers. This 

Government which has systematically starved the school boards and is doing it again this year must bear 

the blame. It is the Government that has decided that education is of such trifling priority that it will 

allow all other provinces but Prince Edward Island to pass us by. It is the Government that condemns 

our young people to a poorer start in life. It is the Government that thus betrays what is perhaps the 

deepest wish of the Saskatchewan people, that our young people have every opportunity to grow and 

develop and to make this, our province, grow and develop too. 

 

To this wish of giving the young people the start they deserve this Liberal Government says No. It says 

no to teachers, no to trustees, no to parents, no to ratepayers and above all, no to students. Mr. Speaker, 

these people will remember. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The University, too, has been short-changed by this Government. 

 

Mr. J. J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Oh, come on! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Oh, come on! I am glad to hear the Hon. Member  . .  It may well be that the 

University of Saskatoon has not been short-changed. I regret to say that I am not as familiar with the 

University of Saskatoon as I am at Regina, and I venture to suggest that the Member from Saskatoon 

City Park is not familiar with the Regina campus, as he is with the one at Saskatoon. And neither of us 

makes any apology for that. All I can tell him is that the Regina campus particularly suffers from a 

shortage of buildings, shortage of classroom space, shortage of cafeteria space, a shortage such as I have 

never seen at any other campus in Canada. Now, I haven‘t travelled that widely but I have been on 

several campuses and I have seen nothing like it in Canada. 

 

The story of the tragic cutbacks in building plans in 1964-65 which produced this crisis is too well 

known to be repeated. I see very little evidence that the follies of the past are being remedied by this 

Budget. Now we don‘t have any capital budget for the University. It seems to me that from the 

information which we have on hand that there will be very little progress 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

497 

made in relieving the desperately crowded conditions that now exist. 

 

This short-changing of education comes at a time when the Federal Government is making very real 

efforts to help the provinces with rising education costs. For this problem is not confined to 

Saskatchewan. As I have said, the Saskatchewan Government spends less per capita on education than 

any province in Canada except Prince Edward Island. This year the Government opposite is receiving in 

grants from the Federal Government for post-secondary education — and this is all set out in page 51 of 

the Treasurer‘s Budget Speech — $23 million. That sum of money for post-secondary education is 

almost enough to cover 100 per cent of the operating grant by this Government to the University, both at 

Regina and Saskatoon. The Federal Government has done its part to meet these rising costs of better 

education for young Canadians. It is the Provincial Liberal Government which has failed to meet the 

challenge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is the Provincial Liberal Government that has failed to grasp the over-riding 

importance of educational opportunities for all. It is the Provincial Liberal Government that has failed 

the young people of Saskatchewan. It is a tired, ailing and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I represent Regina city and I represent Regina Centre, a good 

constituency in that good city. Regina has six Members in this House, some on the Government side and 

some on this side. But a look at the Budget convinces me that this Government hardly knows that 

Regina exists, except as a place to tax. What, Mr. Speaker, is in this Budget for Regina? Very, very 

little. Let me point out some things which the budget should have said. How about police protection? 

Regina citizens pay for police and fire protection about $4 million a year. That is just about $25 for 

every man, woman and child in the city. This is well over twice as much per person as people pay 

elsewhere in Saskatchewan. The cost is higher because in a place like LaRonge or Gravelbourg, maybe 

even Estevan, the Provincial Government pays part of the cost of police protection. But not in Regina! 

 

There is an increase in the Budget this year for police protection in LaRonge, Gravelbourg and maybe 

even Estevan, but nothing for Regina. I don‘t know how long this inequity has prevailed. All I can say is 

that it is unfair. It is time it was changed. Regina citizens deserve and should get some money for police 

protection. The Budget should have provided this and it did not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one other thing that I would like to mention that I did when I was Treasurer, I 

provided 75 cents per person for health grants in Regina and since this Liberal Government has been in 

power that figure has been raised to the magnificent sum of $1 in five years. In two years I raised it 75 

cents, in five years these people have managed 25 cents. 

 

When the present Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) was elected — 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

498 

and I want to talk a little bit about nursing homes and I want to talk about geriatric centres — I am sorry 

that the Minister of Health is not here — because when he was elected in 1964 he was elected on this 

promise and I quote from his own personal platform: 

 

―The Liberal candidates pledge (pledge, Mr. Speaker) immediate provision of a 600-bed geriatric 

centre.‖ 

 

Now five years have passed. Do we have geriatric centre? No! Has it been started? No! And he is not 

even trying now. He has failed to keep his pledge. He has failed the citizens of Regina. And what is 

more, if I understand the Budget right, operating grants for our present homes like Mutchmore Lodge, 

Qu‘Appelle House, Santa Maria Hostel and hostels like this all across the province are going to be cut, 

not increased, not even held, but cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While I am mentioning elderly people I would like to appeal once again to the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) or the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) to find some money other than from the meagre 

cheques of some of our most needy citizens of Saskatchewan. I refer to people who get assistance under 

the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. 

 

We all know that there is an old age security pension paid to everyone over 66. That‘s the $75 a month 

pension which is now up to $78. We know, too, that some of our senior citizens qualify for an additional 

amount of the Federal Government called Guaranteed Income Supplement. This goes up to a maximum 

of about $31 a month. We know also that some of our most needy people and our most deserving people 

get assistance from the Provincial Government under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. Everybody 

knows that people on pensions are particularly hard hit by increase of the cost of living. 

 

Some years ago, the Federal Government recognized this and it provided that as the cost of living went 

up, it would put a cost of living bonus on the Old Age Security Pension and on the Guaranteed Income 

Supplement. The Old Age Security Pension used to be $75 and it is up to $78 - $3 cost of living bonus. 

Guaranteed Income Supplement used to be $30, now $31.20 - $1.20 is the cost of living bonus. Now that 

is the Federal Government. Now what did the Provincial Government do to some of our most deserving 

senior citizens who get Provincial Public Assistance? I wish it were nothing, Mr. Speaker. As the cost of 

living increases, does the Provincial Government increase the grants under the Saskatchewan Assistance 

Plan? It does not. Does it leave them alone? It does not. As the cost of living goes up this Government 

actually cuts the assistance which goes to our senior citizens of the most needy kind, 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — cuts the Provincial payments by the amount of the Federal cost of living bonus. When 

the cost of living goes up every old age pensioner in Saskatchewan gets more money, everyone except 

the most needy, except the old age pensioner who is getting assistance from the Saskatchewan 

Government. His assistance payment is cut so that the pensioner himself must bear the full brunt of the 

rise in the cost of living. Now I have had this put to me by constituent after constituent and I know the 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

499 

argument of the Department of Welfare that they are working on a ceiling and they can‘t move the 

ceiling. But I simply don‘t believe the argument which says that it could not build into the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan a cost of living escalator the same that has been built into the Federal Plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Surely the Provincial Government is not so hard up that it must finance itself out of 

the cost of living bonuses of our most needy senior citizens. This is a shocking situation which can be 

put right and I say in the name of decency and humanity should be put right by this Budget. I appeal to 

the Ministers who are sitting opposite me now to see whether this change can‘t be made. 

 

A word or two about day-care centres for children. Regina citizens would like to see some action by the 

Government to provide some day-care centres for the children of mothers who are forced to work to 

support themselves and their families. 

 

I want to say something about education in our city. The citizens of Regina are looking for leadership in 

this field. They want to see school grants which will stop the spiralling mill rates. They are convinced 

that our boards of education are doing everything they can, and still Regina ratepayers are faced with 

another hike in mill rates. Regina people want to see more action on technical education. There are 

thousands of young people in our city who either graduate from high school or leave school and who are 

not going on to university. What are they to do? There is no technical institute and apparently none in 

sight. The budget for technical institute construction has been cut. There is not even an organized 

program to bus these students to the Technical Institute at Moose Jaw, and I have suggested this time 

and time again. Why isn‘t this done? It isn‘t done because there is no room at Moose Jaw. The Technical 

Institute at Moose Jaw very nearly fell under the Liberal meat-axe and there is no room at the Institute. 

Nor is there one penny earmarked in this Budget either to build an institute in Regina or to expand the 

Moose Jaw Institute. 

 

There is no community college and apparently the Government has no plans for one. Ontario has 18 or 

20 of them. Alberta has a number. British Columbia has a number but Saskatchewan has none. The 

people of Regina believe that this Government is failing the young people of this city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about this Base Hospital, this South Saskatchewan 

Base Hospital. I particularly regret that the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) has other 

commitments and is unable to be here today, because the people of Regina want some action on the 

South Saskatchewan Base Hospital, not money put from one bank account into another, but action. Five 

years ago the present Minister of Health promised that hospital. For five years he has failed to act. He 

says he is planning. For five years! The atom bomb was planned, constructed and used in five years. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Minister is still planning. Expo ‘67 was conceived, built and performed in five 

years. The very islands on which Expo sat 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

500 

upon were built in those five years. In five years Mayor Drapeau moved a million tons of earth, and in 

five years the Minister hasn‘t moved a pound. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In five years, Drapeau built architectural masterpieces, and in five years the Minister 

hasn‘t built a tool shed. In five years Drapeau organized a staff of thousands able to speak dozens of 

languages, able to cater to 100,000 people, able to cater to princes and potentates and presidents. Yes, 

indeed. Now in these five years how many of a staff has the Minister assembled? Is it one or is it two? 

 

Mr. D. G. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Tell us how long it took Henry to build the auditorium. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I don‘t think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Regina are going to be impressed with 

these arguments about whether or not Mayor Drapeau is in difficulties or whether or not Expo was a 

financial success when we come to deciding whether or not this Minister who promised the hospital five 

years ago should be doing something. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a son and he was born just about the time that the Minister was 

making this promise. He is five years old now. Now this son has a new little sister and she is four 

months old. All I want to say is that that I‘d rather hoped that this daughter would be born in this new 

hospital. 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — In the meantime Cy has had four! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I had hoped to have a child born in this hospital. Yes, but I want to tell the Minister 

that I don‘t know about the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) but for some of us time is running 

out. 

 

Hon. C. P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Do you want any help? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well I appreciate the kind offer of assistance from Members opposite. But all I want 

to say is this, that, if the Minister doesn‘t move any faster in the future than he did in the past, it will not 

be my children who will be born in that hospital, it will be my grandchildren. 

 

Five years ago he promised a hospital. He has not built that hospital. He has failed and he has failed the 

people of Southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — With this record, Mr. Speaker, 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

501 

this record on education and on geriatric centres and on the base hospital, is it any wonder that the 

citizens of Regina feel that this Government is a tired, ailing and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, it is not only the young people that this Government is short-changing. 

It is not only the mentally ill that this Government is short-changing and it is not only the elderly that it 

is short-changing. It is short-changing the ordinary citizen as well. The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) talks about a Budget which will control the rising cost of living. Does he control the rising cost 

of living by having local taxes on your house and my house go up $20 or $30 this year, as go up they 

will? 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — It is Henry that  . .  

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It is not Henry. I am at pains to announce that you cannot blame this on our local 

governments. It is entirely wrong to suggest that our local Mayor and local council are responsible for 

the school mill rates. I know that Members opposite would like to put the blame on Henry or on the 

school board or wherever else they can find someone to put it on. They like to put it on the Mayor of 

Saskatoon even though he happens to be one of their cohorts. But unfortunately the truth is too well 

known to too many people that there is only one place that this blame resides, and it resides on this tired, 

this ailing and this failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the Provincial Treasurer thinks that he is controlling the 

cost of living by piling deterrent fees on those who are sick and least able to pay. As his contribution this 

year, I wonder if he thinks that he is controlling the rising cost of living by making a person who has had 

a stroke pay for his own physiotherapy treatments, as he says from now on is going to happen. I know 

that the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) tells us that this will help the man get better. But I know that not 

even the Minister of Health believes that sort of nonsense. Does the Provincial Treasurer think that it is 

controlling the cost of living by cutting out the maintenance grants for our nursing homes, so that the 

people who need nursing care and their families who keep them in those homes are going to have to pay 

more and more. The Provincial Treasurer has a very funny way of controlling the cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what can we glean from a look at some of the other Budget items. Well, after correcting 

for the many moves of branches from one department to another, I found that two departments had taken 

some of the severest cuts, the Department of Labour and the Department of Co-operation. Co-operative 

extension work was sharply cut back, three less men. The Department of Labour lost some of its already 

overworked staff in enforcing labor standards and in doing other such work — three less men. Contrast 

this with the Department of Highways which has 15 more men. Or contrast this with the extra money for 

the Photographic and Art Services attached to the Premier‘s office. These cuts of the Department of 

Labour and the Department of 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

502 

Co-operation, while not big in dollars, speak volumes as to just where this Government‘s priorities lie. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Streamlining the operations. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Minister says streamlining the operations. May I say to him, why didn‘t he do it 

five years ago? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It took me five years to try and find the mess  . .  

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Minister was unable to find the car. He is equally unable to find the mess after 

five years! I must remind the Minister, I just told him we had a four month old daughter, we can find a 

mess in a lot less time than that! 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word or two about mental health. Mr. Speaker, I have raised the 

problem of mental health again and again in this Legislature and I make no apology for doing so. In the 

past our efforts on this side of the House and the efforts of citizen groups from all corners of the 

Province, and finally the tragic consequences of the Government‘s folly have forced the Government to 

re-examine its program. We had the report of the Ad Hoc Committee. It supported many of our earlier 

criticisms. Early last year we had the report of Dr. Frazier. With the report of Dr. Frazier, it was no 

longer possible to deny that the mental health program was a shambles and near collapse. The reason for 

this failure is not hard to find. The program had been starved for money. In the last three years of CCF 

Government, budget increases had been 5 per cent, 8 per cent and 8 per cent. That is an average of 7 per 

cent. In the first three years of Liberal Government budget increases had been the first year an actual cut 

of 1 per cent, the next year 5 per cent and 3 per cent. An average increase of 2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 

these cuts in spending took place at the very time when other provinces and states were catching up with 

Saskatchewan, and were bidding hard for our key staff who had international reputations. The result is 

what could have been expected by any reasonable person, but evidently was not expected by the 

Government opposite. Key people left. Those who remained were overworked and discouraged and they 

too left and the crisis was upon us. It may not be generally known that the Director of Psychiatric 

Services for the State of New York and several of his key staff were with our Department at that time 

and were being enticed away by the bids from the State of New York. That was some of our 

competition, and we met it by actually cutting the Budget. 

 

The gaping holes in our program were exposed by Dr. Frazier. His report showed that the primary aim 

of the Liberal program was to save money and to that end the interests of patients and the public would 

be sacrificed. Last year I reviewed this sorry mess in detail and gave the position of those of us on this 

side of the House. I am going to quote a little bit of the statement I gave. I am going to just quote the 

minimum program which I felt and which we on this side of the House felt ought to be done in order to 

meet the urgent demands outlined in the Frazier report. Quote: 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

503 

We call upon the Minister to waste no time in acting so that, when this House meets next year, he can 

report to this House minimum progress as follows: 1. All or substantially all vacancies for psychiatrists 

filled. We recognize that these cannot all have specialists‘ qualifications. 2. Major progress in filling 

other vacancies. 3. An increase in the number of community supervisory workers so that there will be 

at least one qualified staff person for each 60 patients in the community placement. A ratio of one to 

sixty. Dr. Frazier recommended a one to fifty and we would like to see one to fifty if it is possible, but 

we want to see one to sixty for sure in the next year. 4. The Prince Albert Centre staffed and in 

operation. 5. A general tightening up in the administration. 6. Enforcement of licensing standards for 

approved homes. 

 

This is a minimum program. We recognize that the Minister is facing a crisis and he must first do a 

salvage job. We ask him to act at least to meet the minimum program as set out. If he can do more, 

fine. But we say this, as strongly as it is possible for us to say, to the Minister and to the Government, 

act on this program in the interests of the patients and the public alike. Act on this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what we asked last year. The full facts are not before us, but from the facts that are 

available it seems clear that the Minister has failed, failed even to meet this minimum program. There 

are still vacancies. There is still a grave shortage of community supervisory workers. I don‘t believe the 

one to sixty ratio has been reached, let alone the one to fifty recommended by Dr. Frazier. 

 

The Prince Albert Centre is not fully staffed and in operation, notwithstanding the assurances we had 

last year that it would be. Supervision of approved homes and nursing homes is far from adequate. 

Indeed, many of the most glaring problems are still with us. Savage and senseless crimes are still being 

committed and former mental patients stand accused. Instances of inadequate supervision of patients in 

the community are still all to frequent. The number of nursing homes who have staff with psychiatric 

training is still next to nil. Trained psychiatrists of long standing continue to leave. 

 

There may have been progress; the Minister will report to us in due course. But if there was, there was 

nothing like the minimum that Dr. Frazier said was needed to save this program. 

 

All the evidence, Mr. Speaker, points to the fact that the Government is simply not willing to pay the 

price. With the Liberal Government of the 1960s it‘s just like the Liberal Government of the 1940s. 

Mental health is way, way down on their list of priorities. 

 

Last year we said we would withhold our censure. We can do it no longer. The Minister of Health has 

failed to deal with the serious problem revealed by the Frazier Report. He has failed because for too long 

mental health has been starved for funds. It merely continues the failures of the past. It is one more place 

where this Government has failed to meet the challenge, failed to keep faith with the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

504 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, time does not permit me to make any extensive remarks on the estates 

tax proposal, but I do want to say two or three things about it. 

 

First, I cannot see how grants to persons who inherit million dollar estates can be justified while 

deterrent fees are being collected from old age pensioners and young couples with large families. 

 

Second, I cannot see why grants should be paid to people who inherit a million dollars and who may live 

in California, or France or the Bahamas, while there is a pressing need to keep that grant money right 

here in Saskatchewan to build market roads, or nursing homes or parks. 

 

Third, I cannot see how Saskatchewan will keep any large estates in this Province that might otherwise 

move out, if as will likely happen, other provinces follow suit with the tax rebate. If this is true, then all 

of us will be in the same position that we were in before, except the man who got the grant. He‘ll have 

the money, and except the taxpayers, they‘ll be short the money. There may be some reasonable 

justification to pay out large grants to people who have inherited a million dollars when there are other 

pressing public needs. If there is such a justification, it was not in the Budget Speech, nor have I heard it 

in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, standing back, what is the overall impression of this Budget, the overall impression of the 

Budget and of the Government which presented it? It is an impression of an old and battered ship, 

leaking at the seams, with a captain who really isn‘t steering any more, and a crew who are spending all 

their time just keeping this leaky craft afloat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have been wondering, Mr. Speaker, who is going to leave this leaky craft first. Is it 

going to be the Attorney General (Mr. Heald)? He is soon on his way. Is it going to be the Minister of 

Health (Mr. Grant)? Or is it going to be the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie)? Or is it going to 

be the Premier himself? The rumor has it that all these people would like to get out before there is even 

more evidence of their failure. 

 

An Hon. Member: — There‘s a couple over here! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Budget with its clear admissions of failure  . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — Every farmer knows it  . .  

 

Mr. Blakeney: —  . .  I‘m sure that, if they were thinking about it before then and after this Budget they 

will be long gone, they will be sped on their way! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — You know, the Premier used to talk about how well things were going, about the new 

industries, about the rising population, 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

505 

about the more jobs. We remember those flamboyant speeches of old. He is out getting another industry. 

I guess this will be like the Volkswagon plant, or the heavy water plant, asbestos pipe plant or one of the 

others. 

 

You remember, Mr. Speaker, these flamboyant press releases, these flamboyant speeches of old. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, he still makes these very speeches, when he is down in Los Angeles or down in New 

Orleans. Yes  . .  I imagine in New Orleans at this time of year the speech would be part of the Mardi 

Gras celebrations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We used to get a good deal of information by watching the Premier. He has a face 

that lights up like a barometer of his political fortunes — not unlike the weather tower on top of a local 

hotel. Sometimes it lights up and then we know that things are going well with the Government. 

Sometimes it clouds over and then we now that things are not going well with the Government. We 

haven‘t seen many favorable portents lately. All the indicators have been for stormy weather. Things 

aren‘t going well. He doesn‘t say this, he doesn‘t need to say it. Everybody knows it. He is thrashing 

around, as all Members opposite are thrashing around for someone to blame it on. They are looking for a 

villain, somebody, just anybody, whom the public can be stirred up against to make them forget the 

dismal showing of these Saskatchewan Liberals. We have had a procession of people in the role of 

scapegoat, of dirty dog. It is the labor unions today, though just how they are hindering our 

manufacturing industry is never explained. Or else it is the teachers — their demands are outrageous, or 

else it is the students — they are Communists, they are anarchists. George Wallace used the same 

technique, the only difference he accented anarchists differently. Or it is outside agitators, always of 

course unnamed and unspecified. It is those Liberals at Ottawa; they‘re taxing too much and they are 

spending too much. Or, alternatively they are spending too little and they are not sending us enough. 

Everyone is the villain, everyone is out of step but the Members opposite; everyone is out of step but our 

Ross. 

 

But the people of Saskatchewan won‘t buy that. They won‘t accept these excuses for the poor 

performance of the Saskatchewan economy. They know that things haven‘t changed very much in five 

or six years. They know that five or six years ago the economy was performing well. They know that the 

labor unions and the students and the teachers and the Government at Ottawa are much the same. The 

only thing that has changed is that in Saskatchewan we have the Thatcher Liberals. To the Premier I say 

this. If he wants to go to the Senate with any of the tattered shreds of his reputation left, he had better 

leave now. No government and no premier can stand much of the glaring evidence of failure that this 

Budget shows. 

 

Mr. J. E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — They‘ll take anything in the Senate. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — What general conclusions can fairly be drawn from a review of this Budget? I think 

there are three. 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

506 

First, the Government‘s economic policies have failed. It has failed to keep Saskatchewan abreast with 

the rest of Canada in industrial growth and with the rest of Canada in employment. It has failed to make 

any real progress in diversifying our economy, and particularly in diversifying agriculture. As a result, 

even with last year‘s savage increases of $35 million, this Government‘s revenues are too small and it is 

in a financial bind. 

 

Second, when this Government is in a financial bind, as it is, it fails to give sound management. It turns 

to policies of short-term expediency rather than sensible planning. It adopts emergency cutbacks which 

only delay the real decision and forces wasteful and expensive remedies in later years. This year‘s 

Budget is just such a Budget. 

 

Third, because the Government‘s economic policies have failed, because its management has failed, it 

must pass on the burden of its failure to local taxpayers in another gigantic tax shift. This is a failure to 

assume the rightful role of a provincial government. It is a failure of integrity and fair dealing with local 

governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget is an admission of failure, it exudes the heavy air of failure, failure by this 

Government, a failure of its economic policies, a failure in its management, a failure in its integrity. This 

Budget is the handiwork of a tired, ailing and failing Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, this is not only the handiwork of a tired, ailing and failing 

Government, but it is the handiwork of a Government that is on the way out! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The people have repudiated it! They said that as clearly as they could during the 

Federal election. I invite all Hon. Members, as I am sure they have, to look at the Liberal vote totals in 

any of their constituencies. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Kelvington! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They‘ll say it again in Kelvington when this Government dares to call that election. 

 

They‘ll say it loud and clear. And they‘ll say it at the next Provincial election with a great triumphant 

roar. This Government and its Budget are not supported by the voters. Mr. Speaker, this Government 

and its Budget should not be supported by this House. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move, seconded by the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That all the words after ―That‖ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

 

this Assembly regrets that the Budget presented fails to offer any solution for Saskatchewan‘s sagging 

economy, fails to provide any longer range plans for provincial 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

507 

development and shifts to local ratepayers the burden of rising school costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Heggie (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I rise in this House in the Budget Debate with a great deal of 

enthusiasm. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — One cannot help but be enthusiastic about the 1969 Budget brought down by the 

Provincial Treasurer on Tuesday. Like the Speech from the Throne there is hardly a proposal which the 

Opposition can honestly disagree with. The Opposition‘s Financial Critic says it is a panic budget. It 

does not provide for planning for the long term. Let me assure the NDP Financial Critic that he must 

lack perception in depth if he fails to see this Government‘s long range plan for the future of this 

Province. 

 

The Financial Critic this year held his remarks to one hour and forty minutes compared with two hours 

and 20 minutes last year. He wasn‘t nearly as sarcastic and as caustic this year; he seemed to lack the 

conviction that he exuded in last year‘s criticism of the Budget. He embellishes his statements with well 

placed and educated phrases to cover up the hollowness of his allegations. I think that as a colleague of 

mine in my profession, I can be allowed to say that he takes a pretty poor set of facts and tries to build it 

into a case. I would say that he has failed on every count. 

 

The Financial Critic says that there is nothing going on in the northern part of our Province. He says that 

this Government has failed in the North. I ask him to go north if he hasn‘t been there, and if he has been 

there, he must have been there with his eyes shut, because there is plenty going in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan today. Has he been up and seen the pulp mill in operation? Has he been up to Lac 

LaRonge and tried to hire an aeroplane, or engage an Indian guide because of all the exploration in the 

Precambrian shield and around Wollaston Lake? Has he been to Hudson Bay and gone through the 

McMillan and Bloedel plant that is now prospering after taking over a failing operation, run under the 

previous Government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Has he been to the Simpson Timber Company and seen what is going on there? Does he 

know that wages have almost doubled since this Government took office? He only needs to look at the 

roads, to see that there is progress compared to the progress, if you can call it that, made under the 

previous regime. 

 

I would say to the Financial Critic that he get out of his ivory tower in Regina and go north and see what 

is taking place. He can even take a ride by NorCanAir, if he so desires. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — We‘ve already been taken for a ride. 

 

Mr. Heggie: — The Opposition critic says 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

508 

that there has been a flight of the best brains of Saskatchewan from our universities to other places, and 

he blames this on the policies of the Provincial Government. If the flight of the extreme left wingers, the 

agitators and the anarchists of Saskatchewan is true, now I say if it is true, then this province is better off 

by their going. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — There is all kinds of room in this province for the sensible and ambitious young people 

seeking higher education and this Government will back them to the limit. 

 

This Government has provided more nursing homes in five years than the other Government did in all 

the time that it was in power. Last year we put on extra taxes and the Opposition cried. This year we 

don‘t put on taxes and they are still crying. Four regional libraries have been built since this Government 

took office, to the one built by the former CCF administration. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Old Woody never got off his seat! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Referring to the Estate Tax Act which he seems to picture as a piece of pernicious 

legislation that is not wanted in this province, does the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) go on 

record against the Estate Tax Bill? I challenge him, I predict that he will stand up and be counted when 

the Bill goes through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say about these things and others tomorrow. I beg leave at this time to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 — STUDENT REPRESENTATION ON SENATE 

 

Mr. J. J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University) moved, seconded by Mr. McPherson (Regina 

South West): 

 

That the Government give early consideration to the approval of student representation on the Senate 

of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, because the Saskatoon campus of the University of Saskatchewan is located in the 

constituency that I represent, and because I have resided in this area for many years, it has been my 

privilege to familiarize myself with the many aspects of this institution. Over the years, I have had first-

hand knowledge of many of the buildings. I have enjoyed the acquaintance and still do of many 

members of the administration and faculty. I am pleased to say that the same applies over these years to 

a great many students, and this applies particularly since the time of my election to serve as a 

representative in this House. It has been my privilege to meet and sit down with these students and to 

discuss with them the things that they are 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

509 

concerned about. I have done this not only with the Student Representative Council, and at times with 

their executive, but also with groups and individuals in the various colleges. In this way, I have become 

aware at first-hand of the thinking and reasoning of the students about their representation on the 

University Senate. I am certainly in agreement with this reasoning and sincerely hope that all the Hon. 

Members of this House will concur in this change in the traditional procedure in our University. 

 

In considering this motion I think that we must first of all recognize that it calls for a change, and 

because of this we should examine it very carefully. Generally speaking, we should not attempt to be too 

hasty to introduce drastic changes. But here we have a proposal that cannot be considered as drastic in 

any way. On the contrary it is a change which should prove to be beneficial in many ways, particularly 

to the co-ordination and improvement of the academic programs of the University. There is general 

concern about the most useful function of a university today. There is concern within the student body, 

the faculty, the administration and certain sections of society outside the University. Here of course we 

are considering the concern of the university students. Recently we have been witnessing a new student 

awareness in colleges and universities across the country. The fact that the students of the University of 

Saskatchewan have requested representation on the Senate of the University is an excellent example of 

this. They have many clear thoughts that they feel would improve the function of the University and 

they ask to be heard as a part of an official body. 

 

A university is not only imposing buildings, extensive libraries and modern research facilities, a 

university is more than a brilliant faculty. A university is primarily students because it exists primarily 

for the education of students, and I think we should recognize the concern of today‘s students about the 

proper function of a university. For example, there are many people, and among them many students, 

who are convinced that our universities should become active instruments in the production of social 

change in the same manner that they have been active instruments in producing technological change. 

Certainly, it is not necessary to elaborate here on the great benefits that have accrued to our society 

through the efforts placed in this direction. However, they claim that now the university forces should be 

concerned with the needs and behavior of individuals and of society and that research emphasis should 

shift from the physical world to the social world. These students — and I am speaking of the moderate 

reform type and not of the anarchist — do not believe that universities, as they have been traditionally 

organized and administered, will do or can do the things that are needed. For reasons such as these they 

want substantial student participation in the decision-making bodies, such as the Senate. Certainly I do 

not mean by my remarks that the students are suggesting that we give up our advances in technology, 

but I do think that students can make useful contributions to the improvement of the emotional and 

intellectual climate in which desirable changes can occur. For reasons such as this their membership on 

the University Senate is desirable. We feel too that such representation should be accorded the students 

because it reflects their importance to the University as a whole. It will help to establish a much better 

line of communication with the students, something which is obviously lacking in some areas at the 

present time. It offers an opportunity for the development and the 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

510 

practice of responsibility. The direct student representation proposed in this motion will assist in the 

good government of the University and in proposing this motion we have confidence in the awareness of 

the students themselves that their role in their own education is more to be led than to lead, and more to 

listen and to learn, than to dictate. We recognize what they are asking is to be given the privilege of 

participation, to be able to contribute their best thinking toward better education, toward an improved 

University. The Province of Saskatchewan is a great province because of the great good sense of the 

people of Saskatchewan and our students are no exception to this. The administration of the University 

of Saskatchewan has always maintained a policy of confidence of the mature judgment of its students, 

and in moving this motion we show no less confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D. M. McPherson (Regina South West): — Mr. Speaker, I hope you will understand the Member 

from Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) is a little excited today. He has been waiting 

since this House opened to get this Resolution before the House and has been working on his speech. It 

is a very important Resolution and I take a great deal of pleasure in seconding it. I have given the subject 

of representation on the Senate of the University by the students a great deal of thought and I feel that 

the majority of our students are responsible young men and women. I ask why shouldn‘t they have 

representation on the Senate of the University of Saskatchewan. They have a great deal to contribute and 

their personal involvement in the work of the University will offer a great improvement to a better 

understanding of the jobs and problems of all bodies. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, all of Regina is proud of 

having the University of Saskatchewan, Regina campus here. Certainly Regina is pleased to have over 

4,000 students enrolled on the campus, and certainly Regina will be pleased to see responsible students 

on the Senate of the University of Saskatchewan. This is a trend, Mr. Speaker, that is growing year by 

year across the North American continent, in that students want to communicate with those who are 

running the universities. At the same time the students are learning responsibilities as far as all matters at 

university levels of administration are concerned. 

 

I am not going to waste the time of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, or your time by speaking of the extreme 

activists on the campus because I feel there has been enough said. I just want to say this, Mr. Speaker, 

with all sincerity, I would personally hope that the good judgment of the 95 per cent of the responsible 

students would never see that extremists are ever put on to represent them on the Senate. The 95 per cent 

are good, responsible citizens and would want to see the type of person that represents them, people they 

are proud of. Again I say, Mr. Speaker, how pleased I am to second this Resolution. This is a great step 

we are taking today and I think one that we will all be proud of in years to come. I would urge all 

Members on both sides of the House to support this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I rise first of all to indicate that 



 
February 20, 1969 

 

 

511 

those of us on this side of the House are certainly going to support the Resolution which has just been 

proposed. I followed with some interest the remarks of the mover and the seconder. I am sure I can be 

pardoned for wondering why they might not have made those same remarks a year ago when I moved a 

resolution which would have put this into the act at that time. If it is to be a great step this year, as the 

Member (Mr. McPherson) has just said it is, I think it might have even been a greater step and a more 

beneficial step last year than whenever the Government gets around to doing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to say a fair amount on this Resolution, I agree heartily with the objectives for 

the University which the mover of the Resolution put before us. I, however, have to suggest that the 

change which is being proposed here is not adequate to do that job, I would, as a result like to offer 

some amendment which I hope the Members of the Government and other Members of the Legislature 

would consider in all sincerity, to see if we cannot between us do something even more effective than 

just this step here. I would, as a result, ask, Mr. Speaker, for permission to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:24 o‘clock p.m. 


