



















































Hansard: March 28, 1969


1779 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

39th Day 

 

March 28, 1969 
 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

RETURNS NO. 97 AND 100 
 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to ask the Provincial 

Secretary (Mr. Heald) when I may expect Orders for Return Nos. 97 and 100? 

 

Hon. D.V. Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — As soon as I receive them. 

 

RETURN NO. 136 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Both the Provincial Secretary and the Premier said 

yesterday that Return No. 136 which was ordered by the Legislature on April 2, 1968, would be tabled 

today. Is it available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — That’s the one dealing with the directorship of the Ministers. Yes, it is going to be 

tabled today. It is on my desk. There was one slight inaccuracy as far as I myself was concerned and I 

am having it changed. It will be released later today. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

DEATH OF GENERAL DWIGHT E. EISENHOWER 
 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — I wish to announce to the Committee, at about five minutes ago, the former 

President of the United States, General Dwight E. Eisenhower passed away. I just wanted to indicate to 

the Members of the Committee that later this day or perhaps tomorrow a form of condolences will be 

arranged and presented to the House in the normal way. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I trust that when I introduce the students that those Members who represent the 

constituencies from whence the students come will feel perfectly free to rise. I apologize for not having 

said this the first time I tried this drill out the other day. 

 

On behalf of all the Members of the Legislature I wish to extend a very warm and cordial welcome to 

the following student groups: in the Speaker’s gallery from the constituency of Morse, represented by 

the Hon. Premier, 14 members of the Rush Lake 4H Club. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 28, 1969 

1780 
 

Mr. Speaker: — In the east gallery from the constituency of the Member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault), 

55 students from Birch Hills school. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — In the west gallery from the constituency of Regina South represented by the Minister 

of Public Health (Mr. Grant), 75 students from the W.C. Howe school, escorted by Mr. McBennett and 

Mr. Ochitiva. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — In the east gallery and the west gallery, from the constituency of Weyburn, represented 

by the Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper), 70 students from the Weyburn junior high school, escorted 

by Mr. Fletcher and Mr. Nedelcov. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member from Kinistino gave to me the names of those who were escorting the 36 

pupils from Birch Hills high school and somehow or another I have lost it, for which I express my 

apologies and I will ask the Member for Kinistino to introduce them. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a great pleasure and an honor for me to 

be able to do this. The teachers are, Wayne Van Zandbergen, Vic William, Maurice Mareshal, Grant 

Gaetz; bus drivers, Terry Hegland and Jim Belding and I wish them a very educational trip and a safe 

journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO CADETS OF THE WYLIE-MITCHELL SQUADRON NO. 30 
 

Mr. Speaker: — We have here with us seated at the rear of the Chamber on either side of the large 

doors, the Wylie-Mitchell Squadron No. 30 of the Royal Canadian Air Cadets from Estevan, 

Saskatchewan. They have been awarded the Royal Canadian Achievement Award for the best all-around 

squadron of air cadets in Canada during the year 1968. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — A few words of explanation in regard thereto. The Wylie-Mitchell Squadron No. 30 

from Estevan was formed during the Second World War. Its charter was granted in 1941 and it was 

named for two Estevan boys, Robert Mitchell and Brock Wylie who were the first from Estevan to lose 

their lives serving in the Royal Canadian Air Force in the last war. It was the third squadron to be 

formed in the province and its initial Commanding Officer was Flight Lieutenant Neufeld, then principal 

of the Estevan collegiate. In number the strength of the squadron has been from 60 to the present 

strength of 120 boys. Some of the officers commanding in the past have been Mr. Taylor, Mr. Walker 



 
March 28, 1969 

1781 
 

and Ken Nicholson. During their command the Guthrie Trophy for the best squadron in the province 

was won several times and today has been retired in the possession of this squadron. 

 

Of the many individual awards, Wylie-Mitchell has repeatedly been in the top bracket, culminating in 

the winning of the coveted award of being the top squadron in Canada in 1968. Mention should be made 

to Major McManus, the current officer commanding, to whom much of the credit must go along with the 

efficient staff of officers and instructors. The sponsoring civilian committee has always been large and 

presently three originals in the persons of Mr. Nicholson and Mr. Ken John who incidentally are with us 

today along with Mr. W.A. Perkins, QC are still active. Mr. Ken Armstrong of Midale presently heads 

this committee which same is representative of Estevan and surrounding area from which the boys 

come. 

 

This committee down through the years has on a couple of occasions won the DeRosenroll Trophy for 

the best civilian committee in Saskatchewan. I am now going to read the names of the Members who 

represent this group here in the Legislature this afternoon and I would ask, as I read the names, that they 

should rise and remain standing until I have read all their names: from Midale, Mr. Meryle Venaas, Mr. 

Glen Venaas, Mr. Brian Molberg, Mr. William Ramage, Mr. Jim Young; from Torquay, Mr. Robert 

Ereth; from North Portal, Mr. Murray Arnold, Mr. David Arnold; from Bienfait, Mr. Lee Dzuba, Mr. 

Bill Graham; from Estevan, Don Clayton, Brian Fugierud, Brian Bonkowski, Ken Slawson; from 

Lampman, Randy Third, Geof. Savill. Commanding Officer, Mr. McManus, Lieutenant, William 

Capuchowski. 

 

I would further draw to the Members’ attention the fact that the Provincial Chairman of the Air Cadets 

of the Province of Saskatchewan is a person in service of the Province of Saskatchewan, Mr. W. Fyles. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the award in the frame on the Clerk’s table 

in the centre of the House, and also to the fine trophy on the table which was won by this outstanding 

group. Indeed, I think that this is a proud day in the history of the Province of Saskatchewan to know 

that this outstanding group from our province has won this award for proficiency throughout all Canada. 

I congratulate them on behalf of the Legislature and I ask any Members who wish to join their words 

with mine to rise and do so now. 

 

Hon. D.G. Mr. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to congratulate this wonderful group of young men and the young men that 

they represent back home, the Wylie-Mitchell Squadron from Weyburn. Estevan, I am sorry. What a 

terrible thing to say. I am sorry, Ian. I will never live that one down. I congratulate them and wish them 

well in their service in the air cadets and their services to the community in the years ahead. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, let me on 



 
March 28, 1969 

1782 
 

behalf of Members on this side of the Legislature add my congratulations and encouragement to the 

group that is with us this afternoon. 

 

This is the second time this week that we have had the opportunity to honor in this Legislature, 

Saskatchewan young people who are champions of Canada. It does help to make us proud as I am sure 

the residents back home are proud of you as well. It is an extremely handsome trophy which you have 

won and brought to the Province. We wish to congratulate you and to thank those who have assisted you 

and who have sponsored you through the years. To that are added our very best wishes indeed. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I desire to associate myself with what has 

been said by the Deputy Premier (Mr. Steuart) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) in 

extending my personal congratulations and I am sure that I speak for all Members of the Legislature to 

this very fine group of men from Estevan. 

 

I rise in my place today because I did spend four years in the last war in the RCAF and I feel a 

particularly close association with the air cadet movement in Canada. One of the most heartwarming 

experiences that I have had in public life was to be given the privilege and opportunity a couple of years 

ago of addressing a very large and a very enthusiastic and a very impressive group of air cadets here in 

the city of Regina. I have a great deal of respect for this association and this movement. Of course as has 

been said these young men from Estevan do honor not only to themselves, their city, their community, 

but to the whole Province of Saskatchewan in bringing this kind of distinction to our province. 

 

The other thing that I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is on a personal note. The name of this squadron 

bears two very distinguished names, two citizens of this province who lost their lives in the last war. I 

knew very well the late Brock Wylie when he was attending university as I was. I think that these young 

men in this squadron have done and are doing a fantastic job of keeping the faith with these kind of 

people, the citizens who gave their lives for this country. So I join with everything that has been said 

here in extending our congratulations and best wishes to this group. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, it is my distinct honor to represent the area 

where the Wylie-Mitchell Squadron is headquartered. These 16 boys that we have here this afternoon 

represent the cream of the air cadet crop in the Estevan area. I should also draw to the attention of the 

House that the first row in the Speaker’s gallery contains the civilian committee who sponsor these 

young gentlemen and keep the squadron alive. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure for me as the 



 
March 28, 1969 

1783 
 

Member from the Weyburn constituency to add words of congratulations to those expressed by the 

Deputy Premier, Leader of the Opposition and other Members. This group known as the Wylie-Mitchell 

Air Cadet Squadron, by winning this award for all-around proficiency is certainly a credit to Canada, 

and it has brought honor to Saskatchewan, particularly Southeastern Saskatchewan, the year of 1968 

being the first time, as Mr. Speaker mentioned, that this award has ever been won by the Province of 

Saskatchewan. There are some members of this squadron that are from the town and district of Midale. 

This is in the constituency of Weyburn. So on behalf of myself and the Weyburn constituency let me 

extend sincere congratulations to this fine group of cadets and assure them that we wish them every 

success in the future. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. Mr. MacDonald (Minister of Social Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell the boys 

to stand easy but I promise them that I won’t be too long. 

 

First of all I want to associate myself with the words of yourself, Sir, and all the other Members of the 

Assembly in expressing congratulations to members of No. 30 squadron in Estevan. 

 

I was always convinced there were two great air cadet squadrons on the Soo line, No. 140 at Notre 

Dame and No. 30 at Estevan. I was always convinced that No. 140 came first, but after looking at that 

beautiful trophy today I begin to realize that it is No. 30 squadron in Estevan that has distinguished 

themselves and the entire air cadet movement in this province. I might add a little personal note, I have 

had considerable to do with the members of No. 30 squadron Estevan in the 10 or 12 years that I spent at 

air cadet camp each summer as director of the physical education program. I was a Commanding Officer 

of the Royal Canadian air cadet squadron for some 15 years. I enjoyed every moment of the time and 

experience that I spent in the air cadet movement. I am convinced that it is a great movement, it is a 

great youth movement. As well it gives to the young people of Saskatchewan and all those who 

participate in the cadet movement the opportunity to appreciate the importance of discipline and fair 

play that go with military life as well as the youth activities involved. 

 

I do want to say congratulations. We are proud of you in the Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan 

and I know that we express that pride for the entire province and people in general. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, fellow Members of the Legislature and 

guests. I just want to rise this afternoon and echo the comments of congratulations to the squadron. I had 

the opportunity of being in the air cadets for four years myself and attained the exalted rank of Flight 

Sergeant. I see they still have that summer camp and take flying training. I found the experience in the 

air cadets valuable to me in my life and I am sure that all these young men will as well. 



 
March 28, 1969 

1784 
 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, as a former member of the RCAF I would like to add 

my congratulations to those of the other Members here. I don’t like to discourage these young people, 

but they might be interested in knowing how many of the present Members at one time served in the 

RCAF. I wonder if it would just be in order if the former members of the RCAF would stand up for a 

moment to let them know who did serve at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I apologize when I introduced the air cadets in not having them to stand easy and to 

take their seats when I had finished the introduction. I hope that they will feel perfectly free to sit down 

now and stay in the Legislature as long as they please and watch the proceedings. If they have no other 

commitments anywhere else, they are most welcome to stay here and watch the proceedings from their 

seats, as long as they please. You are very welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF HAROLD FRASER 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I now wish to introduce to the House, seated behind the rail, a former Member of this 

Legislature, Mr. Harold Fraser who was the Member for Prince Albert between 1940 and 1944 and who 

is visiting us today. 

 

I think the Member for Weyburn now wishes to say something in connection with a sporting event that 

took place very recently. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO WEYBURN MIDGET HOCKEY TEAM 
 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, recently the Weyburn Midget Hockey Team defeated the 

Saskatoon Midget Hockey Team in playoff finals for our province, thus bringing the Midget Hockey 

championship crown to the city of Weyburn for the season of 1968-69. 

 

This team was coached by Mr. Dwight McMillan and the manager was Mr. C. Madison. Some of the 

Members of the team are in the gallery today, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure that all Members join with me 

in congratulating the Weyburn team in this recent championship victory. 

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO TURTLEFORD TIGER HOCKEY TEAM 
 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I have wondered just why the Hon. Member for 

Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) had been so quiet lately, but the Turtleford Tiger Hockey Team won the 

championship of the Big Four League last Friday night by defeating the Meadow Lake Hockey Team, 3 

to 1. I just want to take this opportunity of drawing the attention of Members of the House to the fact 

that we do have some good sports up in the Turtleford area, and I am very happy that the Turtleford 

Tigers won their league. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 28, 1969 

1785 
 

WELCOME TO THE SING-OUT SASKATCHEWAN GROUP OF MOOSE JAW 
 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I have a very pleasant function to perform at 

this moment. It relates to a group of young people that are occupying the back two rows of the Speaker’s 

gallery today. They are about 50 in all. They are the Sing-Out Saskatchewan group that hails from 

Moose Jaw. They performed in the rotunda of the Legislative Building around the well here, only a few 

minutes ago, and I am sure that Members enjoyed their performance. This group is accompanied by Mr. 

Bob Baker, Mr. Ron Thompson and Jim Buchanan. I am sure that all Members would like to indicate 

their approval and their appreciation of the performance that they offered in the Legislative Building 

today and wish them all success in their future undertakings. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now we have introduced the cadets and the Sing-Out group and groups of certain 

hockey competitions from Turtleford and Weyburn, so I think that the next order of business is the 

introduction of sausages. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT GRAND CHAMPION HEREFORD BULL 
 

Mr. T.M. Breker (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, you have the original here too. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to make an announcement. Bill Kirsch of Pilger which is about 20 miles north of Humboldt sold his 

Grand Champion Hereford bull at the bull sale this morning for $39,000. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Breker: — This is an all-time record for a Canadian Provincial open bull sale. The previous high 

was something like $10,000 at Calgary some years ago. Buyers of the Kirsch entry were D.H. 

Williamson of Ashfield, North Carolina and Dr. J. Montgomery of Meota, Tennessee. Secondly, Mr. 

Speaker, you will have noticed that there is a small package of sausage on your desk manufactured by 

Central Meat in Humboldt. This gift is to bring to your attention that the Government of Saskatchewan, 

the Government of Canada and the proprietors of small abattoirs are co-operating in the inspection of 

abattoirs and have extended the service to eight small abattoirs in this province, a service offered 

formerly only to centres like Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

The inspection will commence in Humboldt on April 1, the first such inspection of the Province. This 

product is sold locally from Watrous to Melfort and in delicatessens of Vancouver, Calgary and 

Winnipeg. As the Member for Humboldt, I am extremely proud of the ability of my constituents in 

curing, preparing and in growing good meat. Mr. Speaker, you will pardon Mr. Barnhart if he doesn’t 

use grand champions in his sausage, I am sure. However, if you have these sausages for breakfast it 

really doesn’t matter whether the honey on your toast comes from Melfort-Tisdale or Nipawin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 28, 1969 

1786 
 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to join with the Member 

for Humboldt in congratulating Mr. William Kirsch of Pilger, Saskatchewan, for having won the 

recognition of having sold the highest-priced Hereford bull, in fact the highest priced bull of any breed 

sold in Saskatchewan. I think the fact that the Grand Champion bull this morning sold for $39,000 

indicates first of all the quality of cattle that we have here in our province. I think the second thing that it 

indicates is the quality of Saskatchewan cattle that is now recognized far beyond our boundaries. I want 

to thank, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I am sure the Hereford breeders of our 

province, the Montview farms for Meota, Tennessee and the Robertson Hereford Farms of Nashville, 

North Carolina for having taken part in the Regina bull sale and paying this price for this exceptional 

bull. 

 

And just to indicate to you, Sir, and the Members of this Legislature the fact that the Grand Champion 

bull sold for $39,000 didn’t indicate that the bidding stopped there, because the Davis Brothers of 

Whitewood, I understand just as the House opened this afternoon, have sold one bull now at $12,000 

and another one at $10,000 and there are bids coming in at $8,000 a piece. So it would indicate that the 

Hereford sale in Saskatchewan, especially in Regina is going very well. I think it is quite significant that 

in a year when we have had difficulties with wheat marketing and one thing or another, that people who 

have diversified and who have had cattle enterprise in Saskatchewan are now paying off because the 

averages for all breeds have been quite significant. The Shorthorn high price was $3,900 to Mr. Dreger 

of the constituency represented by the Member for Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher) and this bull was sold to the 

Remittal Cattle Company of Olds, Alberta. And the average for the 89 Shorthorns sold to date was 

$602.53. For the Horned Herefords the high was $21,025 and this bull was bred by Mr. Norman Babey 

of Lloydminster and sold to Albert Beitch of Prince Albert. I would point out here that Norman Babey 

was one of our first master farmers in Saskatchewan. The average for the Horned Herefords at this sale 

has been $608 for 141 head. An Aberdeen Angus bull sold for $15,050 and this was bred by Mr. J. 

Davidson of Ponteix, Saskatchewan. The average for the Angus was $485.54. 

 

I would point out that the Department of Agriculture will be or is in the process of buying some 80 bulls 

at this Regina sale. 

 

So to all who have contributed in making this sale such a success, we in the Department and in the 

Government want to express our sincere appreciation and especially to those buyers from outside of the 

province and from the United States, who come up and express their confidence in the type of quality 

that we produce here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just make a small correction on what the 

Member from Qu’Appelle-Wolseley (Mr. McFarlane) said. The fact is that Mr. Dreger comes from the 

Melville constituency, not Yorkton constituency. He is from Lorlie and he is a very successful cattle 

breeder there. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


