



















































Hansard: April 03, 1969


1895 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

44th Day 

 

Thursday, April 3, 1969 
 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On Orders of the Day. 

QUESTIONS 
 

STATEMENT IN THE LEADER POST BY MR. TANNER 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the Orders of the Day I believe that one Mr. 

Gordon Tanner was employed by the Provincial Government as the Director of EMO. May I ask the 

Minister in Charge or the Premier if Mr. Tanner was speaking Government policy when in an address at 

Stenen, reported in The Leader Post this morning, he was attributed to have said that statements that the 

presence of anti-ballistic missiles in North Dakota and Montana holds a threat to Saskatchewan lives 

were described here Monday as uninformed and emotional Is Mr. Tanner speaking for the Government 

with whom he is employed? 

 

Hon. W.A. Mr. Thatcher (Premier): — In this particular instance I can’t say that he is. I haven’t read 

the article which the Leader of the Opposition mentioned. I didn’t even know Mr. Tanner was speaking 

up there. I will certainly look at the article and, if it is as he says, perhaps we should have a talk to Mr. 

Tanner. 

 

BRIGADIER ALEX ROSS 
 

Mr. Lloyd: — I agree that Mr. Tanner needs talking to. May I ask a supplementary question? Is 

Brigadier Alex Ross, who is described as the Co-ordinator for Canada Emergency Organization for the 

Saskatchewan Region, an appointee of the Saskatchewan Government? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Oh no, you know the Brigadier is about 80 and no one could tell Brigadier Ross what 

to say, certainly not this Government. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I submit that some government ought to, Mr. Speaker. I have the assurance of the 

Premier that he is not, he is listed here as Director for the Saskatchewan Region. I object most strongly. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Minister informs me that as far as he knows he is just one of these volunteers 

that they have in each community. 



 
April 3, 1969 

 
1896 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, I ask the Government to clear up the clarification of this comment that the massive 

build up of nuclear arms is ensuring peace for us, of his suggestion that if there is a nuclear war it will be 

limited in nature. The fact that there is a threat now of a nuclear nature really doesn’t make much 

difference for it is highly objectionable. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 135 
 

Mr. Smishek (Regina North East) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 135 

showing: 

 

For the fiscal year 1967-68, and with respect to the following companies: 

 

Beattie Ramsay Construction Limited, 

Evans Construction Company Limited, 

Piggott Construction Limited, 

Poole Construction Limited, 

Ramsay Bird Limited, 

South Construction Company Limited, 

Wappell Concrete and Construction Company Limited. 

 

1. Construction progress reports including dates and amounts and when such progress reports were 

received by the Department of Highways. 

2. Dates such progress reports were approved by the Department of Highways. 

3. Dates such progress reports were received by the Treasury Department. 

4. Dates the cheques were issued for payment. 

5. Dates the cheques were cashed. 

6. Copies of the actual documents, papers and cancelled cheques, involved in the above. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — The other day on behalf of the Government I gave an undertaking 

that questions of this kind would be answered, and I am not going back on that undertaking. I would tell 

the Hon. Member, however, that if we answer this question in its present form it will take a girl or two 

girls several months to get the answer. It will take several thousand dollars of the taxpayer’s money, and 

I wonder if the Hon. Member wouldn’t consider asking us for the specific contract that he has in mind 

and let us pull them out instead of just taking the whole shotgun approach. Now I say again if he insists 

on this we will go ahead with it, but I would give him the undertaking that if there were any specific 

contract he wanted we would pull it out and it would certainly save the taxpayer a lot of money and the 

Department a lot of work. 



 
April 3, 1969 

 

1897 

Mr. Smishek: — The truth of the situation is, the reason I placed the question is because the day before 

yesterday the Premier assured us that if we wanted this information that he will certainly provide it. It is 

not a contract that we are after. This motion that I have just moved, Mr. Speaker, arises out of a request 

that I made in Public Accounts, and which was denied to us in that Committee. During the discussion 

the Premier said that any information of this nature that we would ask for would be provided. I, 

therefore, phrased the motion in such a way that it would be identical to what we asked for in Public 

Accounts. During the Public Accounts Committee discussion on the matter we were assured by the Civil 

Service that this information could be obtained readily. It would not require a great deal of work. There 

are perhaps 200 documents and in this regard it would have been better that we had the opportunity to 

examine it in Public Accounts. It would not require making duplicate copies. But in view of the 

circumstances, in view of what is happening, Mr. Speaker, I must insist that the motion be adopted and 

based on the information provided to us by the Civil Service that this would not require a great deal of 

work, I stand by the observations made by the Civil Service and to ask for that Return to be made to us. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 
 

At 4:10 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having entered the Chamber, took his seat 

upon the Throne and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Government was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you for, and congratulate you on the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence 

that the approval of the programs and plans presented to you will continue to provide the services 

necessary to the orderly growth and development of our province. 

 

The legislation you have passed in this second session of the sixteenth Legislature has been designed to 

both speed the development of those resources Providence has bestowed on us, and to ensure equal 

access to the opportunities arising from development. 

 

You have given approval to measures designed to accelerate the further development of our vast 

agricultural resource, and to speed diversification of farming operations. 

 

You have agreed to the setting of a ceiling on the utilization fees for hospital and medical services that 

must be paid 



 
April 3, 1969 

 
1898 

by a family. 

 

In line with substantial support from my government, you have approved increased spending for all 

levels of education, including both campuses of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would particularly congratulate you on your agreement to establish Canada’s first Indian and Metis 

Department. It is our hope that this agency will succeed in making available to these citizens 

opportunities to which they have not had access in the past. 

 

You have also approved a design for a provincial flag for Saskatchewan. 

 

Agreement has been reached to establish a committee to streamline and modernize the rules of this 

Legislature. 

 

You have also approved the setting up of a legislative committee to propose methods of electoral 

reform. 

 

In order to provide further protection to investors in the province, you have given approval to a new 

Trust and Loan Companies Licensing Act. 

 

With your agreement, my government will now establish a Municipal Finance Corporation to assist 

municipalities with the serious problems in raising revenues to provide services necessary to sound 

growth. 

 

You have also approved legislation which will help Saskatchewan cities to meet the future costs of 

effective pollution control. 

 

You have agreed to large expenditures for the expansion and maintenance of the province’s highway 

system. 

 

You have approved the establishment of parole services and the extension of probation services for 

inmates of our penal institutions. 

 

You have also approved amendments to The Trade Union Act. 

 

You have also approved a measure which will permit the province to rebate the provincial share of the 

Estate Tax collected from estates in Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, you have given approval to many other measures designed to improve the lot of individuals in 

our province and make possible the fullest development of our resources. 

 

I thank you for the provision you have made to meet the further requirements of the public service and I 

assure you the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 



 
April 3, 1969 

 

1899 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to 

the activities of the session and wish you the full blessing of Providence as you return again to your 

respective homes. 

 

The Hon. Mr. Heald, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


