




















































Hansard: March 04, 1969


908 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

21st Day 

 

Tuesday, March 4, 1969 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to this Assembly a group of 

grade 12 students in the Speaker‟s gallery from the Langbank school. Langbank is one of our smaller 

high schools, but what they lack in size, they more than make up for in quality. They have always had a 

fine scholastic record, and last year one of the class had the second highest average in the six school 

units in our area. I hope they have a pleasant and a rewarding day. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, through you I would like to introduce 

to the Assembly, students from Brevoort Park school and Hollistan school in the city of Saskatoon, who 

are in the Speaker‟s gallery with their teachers, Mrs. Bond and Mr. Lasecki. On behalf of the House I 

congratulate Mrs. Bond and Mr. Lasecki for showing sufficient interest to bring their students to the 

Assembly this day. It is our hope that the students will enjoy their stay in Regina and learn something 

from their visit to this House. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, today I have my students at last. I should like 

to introduce 36 students from St. Mary‟s grade eight class — I introduced them last week, but they never 

showed up because of the snowstorm. The grade eight class are led by their teachers, Mr. Hugh Bitz, 

Mrs. Bartlet and Miss Fornwald, and their two drivers, Leo Seipp and Jim Mack. Now, Mr. Bitz you will 

probably recognize, many on both sides of the House, as the leader of the famous Blue Barons Orchestra 

which is a great contribution to the social life in the Estevan area. He has taken this band, incidentally, to 

Eastern Canada, and these young men are a credit to our community. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce through you to 

the Members of the House a group of students from Thornton school which is located on Lorne Avenue 

in the Nutana South constituency of Saskatoon. These students are here this afternoon as part of a tour, 

and I hope that they find their stay in the House profitable, interesting, and that they enjoy the entire 

visit to Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

909 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

RETURN NO. 26 
 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 26 showing: 

 

(1) The number of hospitals constructed in 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, and the name and location of each 

such hospital. 

 

(2) The number of major additions to hospitals constructed in 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968 and the name 

and location of each such hospital. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce an amendment 

to clarify the wording of this motion, if I may. I would move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) that Return No. 26 be amended: 

 

That the word “constructed” in part (1) thereof be deleted, and the word “completed” substituted 

therefore; and the words “in excess of Fifty Thousand Dollars be inserted after the word “additions” in 

part (2) thereof.” 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 31 
 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 31 

showing: 

 

For all provincial capital improvement projects with an estimated bid value exceeding $100,000 

finalized in the current fiscal year upon which final total payments made since April 1, 1968, exceeded 

the estimated bid value by 10 per cent; (a) names of contractors; (b) date of awarding each contract; (c) 

estimated bid price; (d) total final payment; (e) number of working days allowed in the contract for 

completion of project; and (f) number of actual working days to complete the project; and (g) amount 

of liquidated damage charges assessed against the contractor (i) per day; and (ii) in total. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to this motion, 

seconded by Mr. Blakeney (Regina Centre) that Return No. 31 be amended: 

 

That the word “highway” be inserted between the words “provincial” and “capital” in the first line. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RETURN NO. 32 
 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North) moved that an Order of the 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

910 

Assembly do issue for Return No. 32 showing: 

 

Copies of all communications between Department of Highways district engineers and the Chief 

Maintenance Engineer in 1968 regarding assessment of the results of the 1968 crack sealing program. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is privileged information 

between Highway personnel and I am not prepared to provide any information. I beg the House to drop 

this question. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! If the Member had anything to say on his motion, he should have said it 

when he moved it. These returns are all debatable, and Members should speak when they make their 

motion. You can‟t speak after somebody else has spoken, except to close the debate. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, on this point I would like to speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that exactly the same motion was introduced in this 

Chamber last session. We got the answer last session. Suddenly it becomes privileged document. What 

has this Government across the way to hide, Mr. Speaker? It looks very much as if the Government is 

not going to answer questions on Highways, at least not this session. We can expect the answer next 

year. Now it wants to throw this out even. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a word or two to the remarks made by the Member for 

Melfort-Tisdale. 

 

A year ago in this House I placed a question on the Order Paper asking for copies of communications 

between the Department of Highways, and their maintenance engineers with respect to the crack sealing 

program. We were given information to the effect that one-third of the highway mileage only was to be 

filled in the coming year. I think it is a matter of public interest, Mr. Speaker, to the Members of this 

House and to the members of the public when maintenance costs are being cut to this extent. I think it is 

a matter that has been noticed by each and everyone of us as we have travelled about the highways, the 

state of maintenance that has been carried on by the Government over the past number of years. 

Accordingly I wonder again what it is the Government is trying to hide with respect to the 

communications between the Department of Highways and their maintenance department. We can only 

conclude from this, Mr. Speaker, that there is something in this corner of the Highway Department that 

they prefer that the general public shouldn‟t know anything about. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Just to clarify the point of order, I should apologize 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

911 

 

to the Member for Moose Jaw, because he was probably rising to close the debate in the first place. I 

certainly did not wish anyone else to be shut off from taking part. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 23 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Meakes Baker 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Kramer Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Blakeney Snyder Kwasnica 

Davies Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Dewhurst Brockelbank  

 

NAYS — 33 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher Grant Weatherald 

Howes Coderre Mitchell 

McFarlane Larochelle Gardner 

Boldt MacDonald Coupland 

Cameron Estey McPherson 

Steuart Hooker Charlebois 

Heald Gallagher Forsyth 

McIsaac MacLennan McIvor 

Guy Heggie Schmeiser 

Barrie Breker  

Loken 

MacDougall 

Leith 

Radloff 

 

 

RETURN NO. 33 
 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 33 showing: 

 

Copies of the existing union agreement or agreements including wage and salary schedules, between 

the Saskatchewan Timber Board and its organized employees. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, a very brief discussion on this. I believe that 

the Hon. Member has been ill-advised by possibly the Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) and 

the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) and the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) 

who are in the labor movement to realize that such a question is not proper. The information that is 

available in the Department of Labour insofar as every agreement that is filed there is privileged 

information. It is a contract between two parties which they agreed to, it is between these two parties to 

give. We have a copy of every agreement that is ever signed in this province and is registered with the 

Department of Labour for that purpose. For this reason, I feel that it is absolutely improper to make this 

public, because the information in these agreements would be to an advantage to another union who 

would want to raid this particular union. This often happens. I think it is a most improper question and 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

912 

I would ask the House to turn it down. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know whether I heard the Hon. Member 

correctly. He, I take it, is taking the position that a copy of an existing union agreement between a 

Crown agency and employees is privileged information. I find that to be an absolutely remarkable 

proposition. If this were a private company, then I would accept the Minister of Labour‟s explanation. I 

agree that, if for example Interprovincial Steel and the Steelworkers of America have signed a contract 

and filed it with the Minister, then it follows I think that this should not be tabled because, at least, I 

don‟t object to the proposition that this should not be tabled. I would consider that issue at another time. 

This is not the case here. The Saskatchewan Timber Board is a wholly owned Crown company and 

incorporated under The Crown Corporations Act. We are here faced with the proposition that a union 

agreement between a Crown enterprise and its employees is not public information. I simply can‟t 

believe that this is the Government‟s position. We have for many years had available to us copies of the 

agreement between the Saskatchewan Government Employees‟ Association and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. We had this morning, and I think properly, an undertaking by a minister of the Crown to 

file a union agreement between a Crown corporation and its employees. I think that it is entirely 

improper for the Government to suggest that a union agreement between a government agency and its 

employees is not public information. I would ask the Government to reconsider its position with respect 

to this motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to concur with the remarks of the 

previous speaker, but in addition to that, I want to take exception to the remarks of the Minister of 

Labour that the Hon. Member from Canora was ill-advised by either myself or the Hon. Members from 

Moose Jaw South or Moose Jaw North. Surely, Mr. Speaker, those kinds of accusations have no basis of 

fact that somebody advised the Member. I think the Hon. Member from Canora does have within his 

constituency, people who are working for this Crown corporation, and I believe he is entitled to this kind 

of information. I might inform the Hon. Minister that I had the opportunity of serving on the Crown 

Corporation Committee several years back and requests have been made by Members in the Crown 

Corporation Committee asking for copies of the collective bargaining agreements between various 

Crown corporations and the particular unions, and they have always been provided. I am wondering 

whether the Government, or the Minister at least, is trying to hide something. Certainly I would concur 

with the proposition put forward by the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) that where it is 

a collective bargaining agreement between a private employer and a union, this should be considered 

privileged information. But certainly we are not dealing with a private employer. We are dealing with an 

agency of the Government. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this information should be made available to 

Members of the Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

913 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I just have one or two words to say 

in regard to this point. As some of the Members opposite know, this agreement was filed pursuant to a 

statute of our province. There is no argument whatever in my opinion as to whether the Timber Board 

emanates from the Crown, or doesn‟t emanate from the Crown. This document was filed with the 

Government in good faith and shouldn‟t be disclosed by the Department of Labour, to any party . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . Not asking the Department of Labour to disclose it, we‟re asking the 

Saskatchewan Timber Board to disclose it! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . Protecting the IWA, that‟s all I‟m thinking of! 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . Your cousins anyway! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — When we were on the other side and we asked the question, 

what is the salary of Cass Beggs, manager of the Power Corporation — this is a public utility — you 

wouldn‟t give it to us. You never gave us that information. You didn‟t give us the information of what 

the salary was of the manager of SGIO, or Telephones. What‟s the difference? 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways is trying to 

throw dust in our eyes. He is admirably equipped to do it. He has got both the dust and what else it 

takes. As a matter of records, it can be substantiated, I am sure, that full details with respect to the 

employment of Mr. Cass Beggs was revealed in committees in this Legislature, time after time, time 

after time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Just you hold your cool a little bit there. There was refusal I know, with regard to some 

other employees, that is quite true. But, never, Mr. Speaker, never with respect to the sort of thing that 

we are talking about here. I say to the Minister of Municipal Affairs that that was about the weakest 

attempt at a legal justification for this motion that I have ever heard from anybody, lawyer or non-lawyer 

or anyone else. Mr. Speaker, the records will show — and I hope the Government does reconsider — the 

records will show that year after year when they sat on this side of the House they used to ask regularly 

for copies of the collective bargaining agreements, as they were in effect between Crown corporations 

and its employees. Year after year, these were filed by the dozens. The record is perfectly plain on it. 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs said the Department of Labour had no business to file this. That may 

be true, I don‟t know why the Minister of Labour was the one to speak on it. He was a little eager, it 

seems to me, because it is not directed necessarily or particularly or appropriately to him. The person 

who should be speaking on this is the Minister who is in charge of this particular Crown corporation. 

That is where the question is directed. I hope that 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

914 

the Government will see fit to reconsider its position on this and to file this agreement and other 

agreements, as asked for between Crown corporations and its employees. It has always been done and 

there is no reason in the world why it shouldn‟t be done now. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, I want to respond first of all to the remarks of the 

Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) about . . . 

 

Mr. Coderre: — You weren‟t even in the House, how can . . . 

 

Mr. Davies — Mr. Speaker, I am afraid that the Minister of Labour constantly has to be advised as to 

House rules and procedure. It is not necessary, Mr. Minister, for me to be in the House to reply to 

allegations made by the Minister. He should know that. I want to tell the Minister that this is before the 

House, not because I have advised Mr. Matsalla to put it before the House, but because Mr. Matsalla 

wants the information. He is entitled to that information and there is no reason why this House should 

not have this information. We are dealing here, Mr. Speaker, with information that obviously pertains to 

expenditures made by the Saskatchewan Timber Board. This is one of the agencies that is part of other 

public employees‟ groups of the Crown. They total probably 20,000 employees in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. I say the Members of this House are entitled to know what the employees in any division 

of any Crown agency or any section of this Government are receiving in wages and salaries. When this 

information is contained within the confines of a trade union agreement, surely there is not substance or 

credence in trying to prevent this information from coming to the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have noticed this year, in other questions that have come before this House, that the 

Minister of Labour and some of his colleagues have turned these into Orders for Returns so as to 

prolong the bringing of this information to the Members of this House, so that this cannot be received in 

time for use to be made of it in speeches before this House. 

 

But this of course is in a different vein. It is a deliberate refusal to give to the House information which 

it has the right to receive. In terms of past practice, as has been pointed out by the Leader of the 

Opposition, it is absolutely intolerable that the Members of this Assembly should be denied facts that 

they have been getting for the last 20 or 25 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say a few words, first of all to get the record straight, 

I had no advice from the Hon. Members for Moose Jaw South, Moose Jaw North or Regina North East, 

with regard to this question or motion. I would like to say that I was the one that initiated the question, 

and I am sure that, if I had received advice from the Members, I wouldn‟t have been ill-advised. The 

remarks of the Hon. Minister of Labour are certainly uncalled for. I want to say that I represent an area 

where a timber industry is being developed and I am interested in its development. I am also interested 

in the welfare of the workers in this industry. Therefore I say that I and the Members of this House 

should be entitled to this 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

915 

 

information. 
 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 23 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd Meakes Baker 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Kramer Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Blakeney Snyder Kwasnica 

Davies Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Dewhurst Brockelbank  
 

NAYS — 33 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher Grant Weatherald 

Howes Coderre Mitchell 

McFarlane Larochelle Gardner 

Boldt MacDonald Coupland 

Cameron Estey McPherson 

Steuart Hooker Charlebois 

Heald Gallagher Forsyth 

McIsaac MacLennan McIvor 

Guy Heggie Schmeiser 

Barrie  Breker  

Loken 

MacDougall 

Leith 

Radloff 

 

 

RETURN NO. 34 
 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 34 showing: 
 

With respect to the agreement between the Government and Simpson Timber Company: 
 

(1) Whether a “complete pulp mill feasibility report” has been prepared as specified in Clause 3. 
 

(2) If so, the cost of this report. 
 

(3) A copy of the report. 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I ask Members to vote against this, because 

by making the report public it could have adverse effects on our efforts to get a pulp mill development in 

that part of the province. While it won‟t affect Simpson Timber Company, which made the report, it is 

not the only company we are negotiating with. I feel it is not in the public interest to make this report 

available. 
 

Mr. Davies — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the agreement which we are referring to here in clause 3 of 

that agreement was drawn sometime ago. Because there is some doubt, some criticism as to exactly what 

the operation is in that area, I think in order to 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

916 

clear it up, it would be justifiable for the Government to table such information. 

 

In regard to any undue information that would be made available to other companies that are negotiating 

in that area or other areas respecting the cost of the report itself and the internal nature of what Simpsons 

is doing in money relationships with the Government, I would be willing to leave that out. But to satisfy 

the people not only in that area, but all the people of the province whose natural wealth is involved on, 

what exactly is going on between the Government and Simpsons, I would hope that we could support 

this Return. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 23 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Meakes Baker 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Kramer Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Blakeney Snyder Kwasnica 

Davies  Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Dewhurst Brockelbank  

 

NAYS — 33 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Leith 

Howes Grant Radloff 

McFarlane Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Larochelle Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Gardner 

Steuart Estey Coupland 

Heald Hooker McPherson 

McIsaac Gallagher Charlebois 

Guy McLennan Forsyth 

Barrie Heggie McIvor 

Loken Breker Schmeiser 

 

RETURN NO. 43 
 

Mr. Thibault (Kinistino) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 43 showing: 

 

With respect to payments to physicians under the schedule of fees of the Medical Care Insurance 

Commission, since May 22, 1964: (a) the dates on which general increases in the schedule went into 

effect; (b) the estimated dollar value; and (c) the percentage rate of increase in each case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of words in this motion 

that should be changed to clarify the subject. I also feel that it might be extended to give a better picture 

of the actual facts. I would like to move this amendment, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald): 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

917 

 

That all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

“With respect to the Schedule of Fees of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan (a) 

whether there has been a general increase in this schedule since 1959; (b) if so, the dates the increases 

became effective; (c) whether any increases became effective between 1959 and July 1, 1962, and if 

so, the estimated dollar increases; (d) the percentage rate of increase; (e) the estimated annual dollar 

increase to the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission of any increases effective since 

July 1, 1962; (f) the percentage rate of increase; (g) the average annual percentage rate of increase per 

year since 1959; and (h) the average annual percentage rate of increase since July 1, 1962. 

 

Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I find it rather difficult to understand why the 

Government is amending in this way. I presume that it is amending it in this way because it is prepared 

to give the information which the amendment would then call for. I find it exceedingly hard to 

understand how it is in a position to do this in the light of the argument we just had over a previous 

return. If you will remember, Sir, that in a previous discussion this afternoon we asked for the collective 

bargaining agreement between the Saskatchewan Timber Board and its organized employees. Members 

across the way argued that this couldn‟t be made public property. The Minister of Municipal Affairs 

(Mr. Estey), who is a lawyer, even went into the laws of Saskatchewan as to why this couldn‟t be done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — My point of order would be, Mr. Speaker, that the Hon. Leader 

of the Opposition in developing his argument in this motion is making reference to a debate on a 

previous motion and I think he is out of order when he does so. 

 

Mr. Thibault (Kinistino): — On the point of order, we should have a copy of the amendment, we 

haven‟t received one. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, the Attorney General raised the point of order and I felt, Sir, that I was only using 

relevant and proper information to argue why the Government couldn‟t possibly offer this kind of 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, well the arguments in one debate cannot be renewed in another debate. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me put it this way then. If the Government is free to provide, as it 

seems to feel it is, a copy of what could be called a collective bargaining agreement with regard to one 

group of people in the province, I don‟t see why it isn‟t equally free to provide in regard to another. If 

the Government feels that it must refuse it, for example in the case of a Crown corporation, then I don‟t 

see how it can feel free to make available information with regard to the Saskatchewan College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, particularly 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

918 

when it is going to go back to the time before there was any direct relationship between this and the 

Medical Care Insurance Commission. There was no direct relationship because there was no Medical 

Care Insurance Commission. The whole thing seems to be a very strange sort of procedure that the 

Government is proposing. However, we haven‟t had a copy of the amendment, Mr. Speaker. I think it 

must be admitted that the amendment is long and complicated and therefore I would ask leave to adjourn 

the debate until we have had a chance to see the amendment and talk about it. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RETURN NO. 48 
 

Mr. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for 

Return No. 48 showing: 

 

Copies of all agreements between the Government or its agencies and (a) Waskesiu Holding Ltd.; (b) 

Woodland Enterprises. 

 

Hon. Mr. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Again I would have to ask the House to treat this motion as 

privileged information. 

 

Mr. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Am I to understand that copies of agreements between the 

Government and Woodland Enterprises are privileged information? If I am not misled, Woodland 

Enterprises is a company which is owned by the Government of Saskatchewan. If I am not misled, 

Woodland Enterprises Ltd., has, at least on the register as its shareholders, Saskatchewan Pulpwood 

Ltd., which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Saskatchewan Forest Products and also one Steven 

Wiltshire who at that time was a Government employee and held that share in trust. Now what we are 

now being told is that agreements between the Government and Crown corporations are not now to be 

disclosed, and I find that to be even more remarkable a proposition. I don‟t know about Waskesiu 

Holdings Ltd., I am not sure what its corporate status is, but I understand, if I am not misled — and I am 

sure the Minister will clear this up when he closes the debate — Woodland Enterprises is in fact entirely 

beneficially owned by the Government of Saskatchewan. If this be the case I would wonder on what 

conceivable principle the Government could say that an agreement between the Department of Natural 

Resources and one of the Crown corporations, for example, would not be available to be seen by the 

public. I am absolutely unable to appreciate how, for example, Woodland Enterprises would be able to, 

let us say, market timber or cut timber under a deal with the Department of Natural Resources which 

agreement would not be made available to the public. If this is what the Government is saying, and I 

think it is, then I think we must take the position that this is entirely improper on the part of the 

Government and we do take that position. 

 

Hon. Mr. Steuart: — Was the Hon. Member asking me a question? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, I was raising a question 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

919 

 

in the debate which I trusted the Hon. Member would answer when he closed the debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Steuart: — I don‟t close it, but if you want me to answer the question, I‟ll answer it. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Fine, go ahead. 

 

Hon. Mr. Steuart: — In the first place the question — and I can‟t be responsible if the Member words 

his question wrong — asked between the Government or its agency in Waskesiu Holdings, Waskesiu 

Holdings is not a Government-owned business. It also asks for agreements between the Government and 

its agencies and Woodland Enterprises. Yes, Woodland Enterprises is owned by a Crown corporation. 

It‟s owned by the Government, but the Crown corporation, Saskatchewan Timber Board, has agreements 

with Woodland Enterprises that are not in the public interest. 

 

Mr. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — If this sort of procedure is going to continue, as the Deputy Premier 

(Mr. Steuart) has now outlined, what are we going to see in the future? The Department of Education 

turned into a Crown corporation so that we are denied information of the same sort that is now being 

asked for in this motion. By the device of making its Departments creatures of the Crown, that is Crown 

enterprises, this Government could deny the House every scrap of information that it has a right to ask 

and which is now being given to the House. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 23 

Messieurs 

 

Lloyd Meakes Baker 

Wooff Berezowsky Pepper 

Kramer Smishek Bowerman 

Willis Thibault Matsalla 

Wood Whelan Messer 

Blakeney Snyder Kwasnica 

Davies Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Dewhurst Brockelbank  

 

NAYS — 32 

Messieurs 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Grant Weatherald 

McFarlane Coderre Mitchell 

Boldt Larochelle Gardner 

Cameron MacDonald Coupland 

Steuart Estey McPherson 

Heald Hooker Charlebois 

McIsaac MacLennan Forsyth 

Guy Heggie McIvor 

Barrie Breker Schmeiser 

Loken Leith  



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

920 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 — ESTABLISHMENT OF A PROVINCIAL CONSUMERS’ AGENCY 
 

Mr. Davies (Moose Jaw South) moved, seconded by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North East): 

 

That this Assembly, believing that action to help and protect consumers is vital and essential, 

recommend to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan the establishment of a Provincial 

Consumers‟ Agency, on lines proposed in February of 1968 by the Batten Commission, that would 

develop a full and effective program of consumer assistance, education and protection, in conjunction 

if possible with the Federal Department of Consumer Affairs, and report as often as required to a 

Standing Committee of the Legislature on Consumer Problems respecting their work; the Committee 

to be so constituted that it would from time to time sit to receive representations from the public on all 

matters relating to the welfare of consumers. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is now about a year ago since I moved and spoke to a similar Resolution in this 

Chamber. The resolution that I shall move this afternoon has some additions and I shall be explaining 

these as I go along. Perhaps it is appropriate that I begin this afternoon by a quotation, reported in the 

last edition of the Co-op Commentary, from the book, “The Plot to Make You Buy,” which was written 

by John Fisher, an expatriate of the marketing industry. Mr. Fisher says, if I may quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The slowly gathering clamour for new forms of government protection in consumer matters is not 

motivated by malcontents, radicals, and seekers after the millennium. It is the ground swell of a feeling 

culminating from years of steady abuse by the uncontrolled forces of marketing in Canada and the 

United States. Most certainly these forces have helped to give us the highest standard of living in the 

world . . . but our standard of living has been achieved at the expense of many of our old established 

moral standards and produces its own nasty by-products in polluted air and water, appalling traffic 

fatalities, inadequate public services, juvenile delinquency, intolerance, selfishness, broken marriages 

and the highest incidence of stress diseases in the world. 

 

Fisher goes on to say: 

 

Perhaps the saddest fact of all is that the forces of organized marketing have created a schizophrenic 

society whose moral standards are becoming quite questionable. Great store is set by the efficient 

production of goods, and it is the highest form of human endeavor to perfect a new aerosol can of hair 

spray. But question the ingredients that go into the hair spray or its misleading advertising campaign 

and the cry goes up that you are upsetting the natural forces of the market place . . . Question why that 

hair spray factory is allowed to pour forth its filth into the air and rivers of your city and you will be 

told to hush up or some other city may be the future site of such industries. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

921 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that quotation is more than ever relevant because of the fact that this week in 

Canada we are celebrating Consumers‟ Week and the Canadian Association of Consumers all across this 

country will be endeavoring to do all they can do to bring the plight of consumers before members of the 

public and governments, trying to get government, in particular, to do that which will be helpful to 

consumers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my Resolution of a year ago called for the creation of a Consumers‟ Agency by the 

Government of Saskatchewan that would make every effort to work closely with the appropriate branch 

or department of the Government of Canada. And as I say, a year has gone by. No steps appear to have 

been taken in that desirable direction. Another year has elapsed during which Saskatchewan consumers 

have not enjoyed the kind of broad and effective program of consumer protection, education and 

information that could have been launched, and that could have secured some valuable results up to this 

time. At one point in my talk last year, Mr. Speaker, I commented with regard to the very heavy costs 

that the Saskatchewan public pay because of being overcharged in grocery items at supermarkets. I said, 

at that time: 

 

We can afford to spend a fair amount of money to try and prevent this outright robbery — and I think 

that‟s what it is — of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

At this point in my talk, the Premier interjected: “That‟s a lot of bunk.” I can‟t help but think that the 

Government has taken this overall view of the Batten Commission Report and its recommendations and 

this is why, to this time, no real action has been taken to bring about the principal recommendation of 

that Report; namely, the setting up of a Provincial Consumers‟ Agency which would, as soon as 

possible, become an effective department of this Government. When the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) 

rose to speak on my Resolution, last year, he said that he agreed with the Resolution, except with the 

portion suggesting the creation of an agency that would carry out Government programs. He said that 

the setting up of a department, agency or commission on consumers‟ affairs in Saskatchewan at this time 

was premature. But he did add, I‟m quoting from his speech at that time: 

 

Government involvement where public opinion expects such participation is not only legitimate, it is 

the duty of those administering the affairs of the Province to accept that responsibility. 

 

But the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) last year also said that it would not be proper to embark upon the 

establishment of a consumers‟ affairs agency before consultation with the Governments of Alberta and 

Manitoba. Discussions of a relevant kind, he said, would avoid what he called, “hasty measures,” and 

might reveal, he said, more practical alternatives. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said, many months have gone by and the pressure of the public at large for 

effective consumer protection has grown. I don‟t see any signs of implementation of the Batten 

Commission recommendation for a consumers‟ agency. The news media have not been supplied with 

references to any discussions between the Premiers of the Prairie Provinces as to what Saskatchewan 

believes can be done to assist the whole 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

922 

area of consumer protection. The fact, Mr. Speaker, seems to be very evident that this Liberal 

Government in Saskatchewan has ignored its obvious responsibilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — The way was open for them during the past year to create an agency that would 

co-operate with the new Federal Department of Consumer Affairs. This path hasn‟t been taken. A year 

has been lost because of most regrettable inactivity on the part of this Government. In the meantime, the 

fact that cities like Regina and Saskatoon are shown to have the highest food prices in Canada confirms 

the thinking of the Batten Commission that, in one of the greatest food-producing areas of the world, 

consumers are forced to pay the highest prices for their groceries. Those who are responsible, Mr. 

Speaker, for the implementation of these high prices plainly do not feel that the Government of 

Saskatchewan intends any action that will reverse a direction that has imposed inordinately high costs on 

Saskatchewan families. In other words, the large corporate concerns feel that they have nothing to fear 

from a program of action by this Government to help consumers. 

 

In the Resolution that‟s now before us, I have gone further than the recommendation of last year. As 

well as calling for the establishment of a Provincial Consumers‟ Agency that would develop a full and 

effective program of consumer assistance and education and protection in conjunction, if possible with 

the Federal Department of Consumer Affairs, I propose that there be created a Standing Committee of 

the Legislature on Consumer Problems. The Agency would report to the Standing Committee as often as 

this would be required. But in addition, the Committee would sit from time to time to receive 

representations from the general public on all questions concerning consumers‟ complaints or 

suggestions and their general welfare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the time has come for the Legislature to recognize that the problems of consumers 

have such far-reaching importance that we need as Legislators to go directly to the public to learn the 

extent of the problems that are besetting Saskatchewan families and by this means thereby derive a 

better grasp of how we can, in this House, devise legislative programs that will meet these difficulties. I 

find, Mr. Speaker, in conversations with many citizens, that they shrug their shoulders at the possibility 

of securing redress of complaints. They have become so used to bad quality associated often with high 

prices, that they are constantly faced with so many little irritations, that they appear to have in many 

cases given up the struggle. The most valuable thing that could be secured by the creation of a Standing 

Committee on Consumer Affairs would be to get complaints and suggestions and information direction 

from the consumers themselves. I do not believe that MLAs can understand the full extent of the 

situation I am trying to describe, unless we do as I am now suggesting in the creation of a Standing 

Committee of the House. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while no action with respect to setting up a Consumer‟s Agency has been taken in 

this Province, it is encouraging to note that some progress is being made at the Federal level in 

following the creation of a new Ministry of Consumer and Co-operative Affairs under the Hon. Ron 

Basford. This Department has instituted an address for complainants 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

923 

 

to write to at Box 99 in Ottawa. Some of the complaints are not, in my opinion, answered very well. But 

it is a fact that this step has been taken and I believe that this step is a good one. 

 

Mr. Basford, in a talk before the Montreal Board of Trade, has advised manufacturers that the concept of 

“Let the buyer beware” should be replaced by “Let the seller take care.” Mr. Basford has informed his 

listeners and the Board of Trade that the customer feels that the market place is letting him down; and 

that he is beginning to tell producers and retailers that their actions are not good enough. Mr. Basford 

also went on to say, and I‟m quoting from the press report: 

 

He is demanding protection against fraud and deception. He is demanding protection against hazardous 

substances. He is demanding full and accurate information and true prices. 

 

Mr. Basford also said that: 

 

The prime responsibility for what goes on in the market place rests with the businessman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this House should understand that the Resolution before us today is not one 

that suggests and recommends action on certain fairly restricted lines. It is really one that has to do with 

a large part of what goes on in the whole of society today. Anyone that has taken even a brief look at 

consumer issues knows that while the corporate concerns are represented by hundreds of able, 

experienced and clever individuals, many of them professional people, the consumer goes almost 

completely unrepresented in the face of very large issues which are of vital and great significance to 

him. The most prominent of consumer groups in Canada is of course the Canadian Association of 

Consumers. It‟s an organization that relies largely on the strength of individual membership fees. It has 

sought to promote the consumers‟ welfare through national and provincial branches. However, it is hard 

to avoid the impression of an organization that is under-financed and under-manned in the presence of 

the numerous powerful lobbying groups that are in existence in society. 

 

I would hope that eventually there would develop out of implementation of the proposals that I make 

today, further progressive moves. One thing that could be done is to establish a Consumer Advocacy 

Office, free of political entanglement with the existing administration of government, to serve 

impartially the consumer interest. Indissolubly associated with the consumer interest is the need of 

government support of research and product and service performance, and of safety and health 

standards, and technological progress in the consumer sector; comparable, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to that 

reflected in the several existing research councils that are now concerned more or less solely with 

producer interests. We have a National Research Council. We have Research Councils in Ontario, 

British Columbia and Saskatchewan by way of example. Why, Mr. Speaker, should their functions not 

be extended to better reflect their service role to both business and to the public. But these are extensions 

of the kind of ideas that are contained within the Resolution. I believe that what is proposed in the 

Resolution takes precedence and should be proceeded with immediately by this Government. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

924 

I have said that this Resolution is connected with the welfare of other salient parts of our society, and 

one, Mr. Speaker, doesn‟t have to look very far to see that this is quite true. Personal bankruptcies in the 

United States for example, have jumped 240 per cent in the last 10 years and the bulk of these have been 

consumer bankruptcies. From the middle 1950s to the middle 1960s, instalment debts jumped 130 per 

cent in North America. Not only are American families buying more goods on credit, including small 

items that traditionally were bought for cash, but they‟re paying higher finance rates and taking longer to 

pay. Sidney Margolius, a United States economist, says that a family that habitually carries $1,500 for 

instalment debts very likely pays out in the neighborhood of $225 a year just in finance charges or 

almost $7,000 over its major buying years. This family is also probably carrying a typical mortgage on 

its home, and would pay out at least double the cost of the home in 25 or 30 years of mortgage interest. 

These days we‟re talking, therefore, in terms of about $40,000 to $50,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a typical wage-earner today may work four or five years of his life just to pay interest fees 

that are apart from the interest that he pays on his home. In a province like Saskatchewan, that is anxious 

to sell the maximum quantity possible of the food materials it produces, it‟s surely very hard to do so 

through the very many so-called cereal breakfast foods that are on the market shelves today. The 

manufacturer buys wheat, corn and other cereals, and he makes stuff called A-Puffa Rice, Sugar Pops; 

you name them! I‟m sure everybody‟s heard of them. Today‟s families, with incredible innocence, pay 

30 cents for a few ounces of what are actually three cents worth of ingredients. It‟s a pretty hard 

proposition for the basic producer of this province to benefit very much from that kind of operation. 

 

The lack of standards for products everywhere on which consumers and retailers as well can rely causes 

a great deal of waste in money and resources. The uneven quality and the lack of standards of many 

goods cost you money at two levels; as a consumer and as a taxpayer. As one example, a Defense 

Department official in the United States estimated in 1966 that close to $3 billion a year in tax money is 

wasted because of unreliable quality; and that is five to ten per cent of this department‟s entire expense 

dollar. It can easily be seen that there is enormous wastage in terms of this example. One has only to talk 

to the housewife about the lack of standards, and the lack of quality in clothing, household furnishing, 

food, and other equipment to understand the extent of the great losses incurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadian families are today running very hard but often are notably ignorant about how to 

handle their hard-won pay cheques. In many cases there are two pay cheques in each family, as more 

and more married women try to catch up with inadequate household budgets, or budgets that are 

inadequate to meet the demands imposed or induced by mass advertising campaigns. Mr. Speaker, many 

Canadian families do not know how to buy adequate nourishment, and this is attested to by frequent 

surveys of various public health departments across Canada. It has been reliably stated that only about 

one-half of all United States households eat meals that fully come up to the nutritional standards of the 

National Research Council of the United States. There is very good reason to believe that a similar 

situation 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

925 

 

exists in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, goods and services have become more and more complicated as years go by. There is a 

greater consumer innocence at a time when the consumer needs to be most educated and most aware of 

what is going on. The real question before the nation is, as Sidney Margolius said recently: 

 

Whether our law should continue to permit the exploitation of the credulous and the economic 

seduction of the innocent. 

 

At one time in our history the sale of an article largely depended upon its excellence. This appears to be 

no longer the case, with thousands of foods and other items used today. Breakfast cereals, which I 

already mentioned, are a good example. Their use has jumped immensely; so have their prices. The 

United States National Commission on Food Marketing found that while ingredients in breakfast cereals 

represent about 21 cents of the manufacturers‟ sales dollar, advertising and sales promotion alone take 

20 cents. Mr. Speaker, advertising in sales costs almost as must as the ingredients cost themselves. The 

major part of the advertising, incidentally, goes to television at 12 cents on the dollar. 

 

$2 billion a year is spent on cosmetics and toiletries in the United States alone. This figure has doubled 

in a little over 10 years, most of it by larger firms who now spend 15 to 40 per cent of their sales dollar 

for advertising. This is more in many cases than the ingredients for these products cost. Usually 80 to 95 

per cent of the advertising money goes to television. The magazine Advertising Age, Mr. Speaker, states 

that advertising expenditures of three leading soap and toiletries companies alone are $430 million a 

year; and that‟s 10 to 25 per cent of their sales dollar. Now, by comparison, the entire budget of the 

United Nations is $117 million. In other words, the United Nations whole budget is $117 million as 

against $430 million spent in advertising for three soap and toiletry companies alone. Two and one-half 

times more spent in soap and toiletries for three companies than is spent by the whole U.N.! 

 

Some additional idea of the monstrous disproportion that advertising has assumed in our national life 

can be seen in the $40 million a year that the Bristol-Myers Company spends to advertise Clairol hair 

coloring. In contrast the United States Government spends $48 million a year to meet all the expenses of 

the huge T.V.A. electric power complex in that country. In 1967, the United States Department of 

Agriculture found that food costs in the United States had risen to $78 billion a year, compared to $53 

billion, just 10 years before. Now this increase of 46 per cent means that the United States food bill for 

the family has increased just about that much. But of that increase, and that increase constitutes $25 

billion, only $7 million can be attributed to higher farm prices according to the United States 

Department of Agriculture. The other $18 million, which is 72 per cent of the food increase in that 

period of time, had been commandeered by higher marketing costs which included supermarket margins 

and other distribution expenses. Mr. Speaker, since supermarket profit margins are higher in Canada 

than in the United States, it may be taken that a like situation must exist in this country, too. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

926 

Perhaps some of my friends in the House, especially those opposite, will want to say that it is the 

increase in labor costs that is mainly responsible for the increase in food costs. I might tell them here, 

Mr. Speaker, that the United States Department of Agriculture reports that labor costs have not increased 

as rapidly as other major components of the marketing bill, to quote them precisely. The Department 

found that while hourly rates of workers went up in the 10-year period mentioned, during this period of 

10 years, labor costs as a percentage of the total marketing cost had actually decreased nine per cent 

because of increased automation by the food processors and stores. The one component of the nation‟s 

food bill that did rise very sharply is food advertising. This now amounts to $2½ billion a year, a jump 

of 180 per cent in 10 years. You get the picture; a decrease in labor costs in that period of 10 years of 

nine per cent; an increase in food advertising budgets of 180 per cent. 

 

Last year, when we were talking about the Consumers‟ Resolution, the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) 

made some comment to the effect that a consumers‟ agency might cost money. Well, it certainly would, 

and should. The point is that the billions of dollars that people in North America are now paying for 

shoddy goods, misinformation, and being led into bad buying habits in general, is money that they pay 

themselves. Money spent on public information and research can save the public many times more than 

that which is spent in the way that I am suggesting in this House. Lung cancer for example kills as many 

or almost as many in Canada as do automobiles, yet we permit the most flagrant use of tobacco 

advertising, introducing a lethal habit among millions of young people who might not otherwise have 

entered upon it. The business of smoking is constantly being thrust upon young people as something that 

they must do if they are going to “swing with it.” With all the talk and concern that there is about drug 

addiction in Canada today, it seems very strange to me, Mr. Speaker, that there is not a great deal more 

done about the extent of harm in tobacco advertising. It is one thing for a person to acquire a habit on his 

own. But is quite another for a person to get it, because it is insidiously introduced into his home by 

television and other similar means every day of the month. 

 

The United States Bureau of Standards was started many years ago, back in 1927. It cost $2 million a 

year to operate just in its first year. But in that first year of operation alone, the Bureau of Standards 

saved the United States Government, (just the Government), $100 million. Of course this figure has 

risen proportionately since that time. And it may be useful to note at this point that this was the Bureau 

that many years later was responsible for forcing the automobile industry to undertake at least partial 

reforms in the field of safety. The argument that we cannot afford to spend public money on programs of 

consumer education, safety, protection and information, simply does not wash, Mr. Attorney General. 

What we need is prompt steps to check the profligate and the unbridled spending of people‟s money in 

private advertising — and that is exactly what it is — and start to spend some of the money saved to 

inform people on what they have a right to know. 

 

The job to help consumers can be done only when their elected representatives and particularly the 

people that happen to be in ministerial control take their full responsibility and act to exercise remedial 

measures and control. This 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

927 

 

includes, Mr. Speaker, assistance to all consumers‟ organizations that exist, in trying to aid and finance 

them in their work, so as to vitalize and to expand their activities. 

 

The Attorney General says, “Why did you not do these things when you were here?” I want to tell the 

Attorney General that he would be blind not to admit the dozens of programs in Government 

departments that were effective to help the consumer over many years; I think that he would admit this 

is a fair statement. He must also see that the programs about which I am talking have come into 

existence in recent years, because of the crystalization of the public sentiment and because of the fact 

that we have come to understand the importance of these programs. 

 

We‟ve also had a tremendous period of inflation in the last five or six years, years by the way, of Liberal 

Government, not only here but at Ottawa, and therefore it is incumbent, more incumbent than ever, for 

his Government to give leadership in these programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canada has sometimes prided itself on being ahead of the United States in certain fields of 

progressive legislation. In Saskatchewan, indeed, we could claim this with some justice, with respect to 

items of legislation like auto insurance, minimum wage, hospitalization, medical care legislation and so 

on, that were passed by the CCF Government. This claim cannot be advanced by this Government with 

respect to consumer matters of the kind that I am talking about. Canada is very far behind the United 

States respecting consumer protection activities. It was the Kennedy Administration that began the 

Consumer Advisory Council within the Council of Economic Advisors. It was the Johnston 

Administration that carried consumer representation further with the appointment of a special advisor on 

consumer affairs. The Truth in Packaging Bill and other steps that were taken during the last several 

years have further strengthened the position of the American consumer, although consumer 

organizations are still very far from satisfied with the results in that country. In Canada as yet, only very 

halting steps have been taken, and a much more vigorous movement needs to develop if we are to keep 

abreast of protection in the United States and in other parts of the world. 

 

There has been a great accent, and rightly so, on the need to fight poverty in this country. Certainly the 

existence of 25 to 30 per cent of the population who exist as poverty-area families, dictates the need for 

the most rapid action in that quarter. It has, however, pertinent to this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, been 

disclosed by a number of studies that it is the poor who pay more, almost all down the line as consumers 

than other sections of the population. It is the poor who have the least access to the best information on 

buying. It is the poor who are most often victimized with respect to instalment buying and buying over 

time in general. It is the poor who, because of their lack of cash, have the least opportunity to bargain 

and who often pay the highest prices for articles that are in other cases acquired at a lower cost. 

 

In considering an attack on poverty everywhere, proper adequate consumer information is of the 

essence. This Provincial Government has stated that it is going to hold a plebiscite with respect to a drug 

program. One of the things that the public might well ask for is a little more valid information on the 

subject of drugs. Certainly consumers are entitled to 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

928 

information that they do not now possess. Sidney Margolius in his new book, “The Innocent Consumer 

versus the Exploiters” has told us that the price of household medicines under generic names is a 

fraction of the brand name price. He has also told us with respect to hearing aids that people pay $300 to 

$400 for some highly advertised hearing aid, when standard aids are available for $125 to $200. 

 

Differences in cost between brand and generic prescription drugs are startling. Mr. Margolius says that 

the cost to the pharmacist in the United States — and I believe that applies generally here — for 

meticorten, a brand-name drug, is $17.90 per 100 tablets; for prednisone, the generic manufactured 

under licence from the same company, 30 to 50 cents per 100. The customer may pay as little as $3 per 

100 for the generic equivalent; from $25 to $30 for the meticorten name. There are many other 

examples. Some of the Members of this House may be familiar with them. In our country, the House of 

Commons Special Committee of 1966 and 1967 went into the question of drug prices. They found out 

that the drug companies of this country have a profit rate twice that of the ordinary company in 

manufacturing. 

 

The Royal Commission on Health Services found much the same. They found that there was 

over-pricing in drugs all down the line. I refer you again to the House of Commons Special Committee. 

It found that the average rate of return on all drugs manufactured, 42 of them I think there were, from 

1953 to 1964, was 20 per cent per year on invested capital, 20 per cent on the investment for that whole 

period of time. In 1964, it apparently had gone up to 24 per cent. They found that only 7 cents of their 

sales dollar was spent in research by drug companies, while their marketing costs were 30 cents of the 

sales dollar, including in large part, promotion and advertising. I think that the House has been informed, 

probably through other debates, that in North America from $3,000 to $5,000 is spent by drug 

companies in influencing each doctor in the United States and Canada. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that, whatever anyone in this House may think, we will have to face up to the need 

to establish as soon as possible a public drug program of real consequence. This can be more effectively 

established when better information is given to the consumer and when the consumer interest is further 

protected by exercising valid public control on drug manufacturers that have to this time virtually 

completely ignored the rights of their buying public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — I want to suggest to this Government that in following the steps that I have proposed in 

my Resolution it will receive active support from many significant parts of the population and many 

organizations that are dedicated to the interest of consumers. 

 

The Consumers Co-operative movement in Saskatchewan is, as everyone knows, very strong; so it the 

credit union movement. Their educational centres have placed a considerable accent on consumer 

education in their publications, especially over the past several years. I feel positive that these and other 

organizations, like farm and labor groups, will readily respond to any genuine and sincere program that 

might be evolved to help 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

929 

 

consumers on the part of this Government. 

 

The Government may well contend, and I would agree with them, that action by governments is not 

enough to defend the public in matters like these. I would say, however, that nowhere in Canada is there 

a larger group of people that will assist the Government in consumers‟ affairs than there is in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. Historically, we have developed many groups that have the welfare of the 

public at heart in many diverse respects. These organizations have become aware of the vacuum that 

exists in the area of consumers‟ affairs. These organizations will be enthusiastic auxiliaries in any 

government program to assist consumers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the failure on the part of this Government to act aggressively for consumers and the 

peculiar response of the Federal Government to the Batten Report have been highlighted by the recent 

efforts of the Canadian Association of Consumers. In January, 1969, the Consumers Association wrote 

to the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, expressing their deep indignation over the 

manner in which the 1968 Batten Report had been received by the Director of the Combines 

Investigation Act. The Canadian Association of Consumers reiterated its demand for a complete Federal 

investigation into the alleged excess profits by the grocery trade in the Western provinces. 

 

Mr. Basford, in reply stated that he is planning a meeting with Prairie Government Ministers about 

grocery prices. Now, last year the Premier and the Attorney General told us that they were going to talk 

about these matters with the other two Prairie Governments. If as little action results after Mr. Basford‟s 

meeting as has resulted during the last year, we may expect very, very little indeed from these efforts. 

 

The Government must see that it has an obligation, a moral obligation indeed, to act just as soon as 

possible in doing the kind of thing that is suggested in this Resolution. It is a fact that the increase in 

grocery prices has continued in Saskatchewan during the past year. There is no doubt in my mind that 

this has taken place in large part because of the inactivity and the apathy on the part of this Government. 

 

Mr. Basford, in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix story of January 21, 1969, said that meetings with the 

Ministers of the three Prairie Provinces to discuss high grocery prices would take place as he put it, 

“when they are ready,” possibly late this month or early February. Well, February has come and gone. I 

ask this Government; have these meetings been held? If so, what has been the response: What action has 

been taken? 

 

Mr. Speaker, a great deal more could be said in justification of this Resolution. However, I believe that 

all Members of this House must be aware of the abuses and the necessities that spell the need for action 

to help consumers. Consumers are being hurt and victimized every day that goes by. The longer that 

action is delayed, the longer consumers will suffer. I call upon this Government to make a forthright 

declaration that will proceed with action as is called for in this Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

930 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate I must say 

that the Hon. Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies) took a great deal of trouble to probably confuse the 

issue by statistical information. He then started bragging about what they had done when they were in 

the Government and then didn‟t say what this Government has done. I believe that the records of the 

Attorney General of this Province (Mr. Heald), so far as consumer legislation is concerned, stands 

second to none on this continent. There has been more legislation brought in here under his able 

administration than by any other administration on this continent. 

 

I am wondering what happened to the former Attorney General when he had an employee by the name 

of Blakeney, I believe, who is now the Member for Regina Centre, to allow company after company to 

fleece the people of this province. Unfortunately I was one that was fleeced. The Hon. Member from 

Moose Jaw stands there and, while he was a Member of this House, did allow the people of Moose Jaw 

and surrounding districts to be fleeced by what had happened re that cemetery south of Moose Jaw. This 

Government had to bail out the Socialists. There, the Member for Regina Centre sits, glum, and hasn‟t 

done one thing while in this capacity. He allowed these fastbuck artists to run away with things. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Who fleeced you this time? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The guy who fleeced me, or the group who fleeced me, are those that you permitted to 

run loose across this province and do that in various places, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, the 

cemeteries. You were the registrar of the companies that allowed this type of thing at that particular 

time. 

 

Much can be said about the matter of packaging. You mentioned a few moments ago something about 

packaging. I notice that in some stores you find a pound of chocolates for 98 cents, two pounds for 

$2.25; four pounds for $6. I often wonder whether the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies 

in his capacity as political education or something with the Federation of Labour, couldn‟t do more and 

involve himself more in assisting the consumers rather than getting them involved in political affairs. I 

think that it would be a great thing, for the consumers would show some leadership instead of getting 

involved and mixing up people. I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that assistance to consumers in this province 

stands second to none in this continent. I think that we can thank the Attorney General who has brought 

forward good progressive legislation and I am sure that there will be more to come. 

 

In view of the remarks that have been made, Mr. Speaker, I believe that I would like to have the 

opportunity to study the remarks of the Hon. Member and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 5 — EXPRESS RAIL RATES 
 

Mr. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University) moved, seconded by Mr. McPherson (Regina South 

West): 

 

That this Legislature urge the Government of Saskatchewan 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

931 

 

to immediately and forcefully protest to the Express Transport Association of Canada the 

discriminatory express rail rates that apply to Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, we have here, I think, discrimination in rates. Certainly to say that it is ridiculous 

is putting it mildly, and of course it is only natural that we should protest as strongly and as clearly as 

possible. The rates were introduced and then, of course, as we have heard recently, have been 

withdrawn. But we wonder why we are continually fighting unfair rate structures here in Saskatchewan. 

I think of the example that we had in the late „50s where they had preferential rates introduced to 

Western Canada and we had a rate structure for Edmonton and Calgary. The rate was set the same. The 

rate from Montreal, Toronto to Calgary and to Edmonton was exactly the same, but here in 

Saskatchewan we had Regina with a 25 cent preferential over Saskatoon. I remember this very well 

because those of us in the Board of Trade Movement in Saskatoon protested vehemently over this 

discrimination against us there. We asked the reasons why and we were told at the time that naturally 

rates had to be set on mileage, and of course, Saskatoon is further from Montreal than Regina. Therefore 

we had to pay the 25 cent difference and we still are paying that difference. 

 

However, in this latest situation when we asked why is it that we have to pay more for our express 

freight rates to Regina and Saskatoon, than it costs to take them to Edmonton and Calgary, well, they 

said, of course rates must be set on volume. It appears that the logic has switched from mileage to 

volume. Well, it is very difficult to understand the reasoning behind the setting of the rate structures by 

the Association. I would only ask here that we watch. I would suggest that the strongest possible 

representation be made by this Government that any future rates be based on logical criteria and that the 

Saskatchewan centres be given reductions that are proportionate to those granted to other centres. In 

other words, if there is a reduction given to Edmonton, Calgary, Vancouver, then for goodness sake give 

it to us too. All we ask is a proportionate reduction. All we are actually asking is for fair treatment. We 

have been listening here to how the consumer pays. Well believe me if we have to pay these 

unreasonable freight rates into this part of the country, it is pretty hard for us to keep down the cost to 

the consumer. And so I think that we as a Government should protest very strongly against any rates that 

are set that are not logical and based on a proper criterion. Having said this, I would respectfully ask the 

privilege to withdraw this motion because of the fact that the rates themselves have been withdrawn by 

the Association. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — I oppose the motion to withdraw, and consequently I 

will make some remarks on the Resolution. 

 

Have you ruled that the motion is in order, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I put the motion before the House and if it hadn‟t been in order I wouldn‟t have, would 

I. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

932 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the discriminatory situation, which arose 

when the Express Transport Association decided to experiment with rail express rates, should have 

generated a renewed awareness of Saskatchewan‟s position in the national transportation picture. We 

were faced with a situation where the engineer didn‟t know what the man in the caboose was doing and, 

Mr. Speaker, he didn‟t care. The Engineer in this case, the Express Transport Association, was running 

the operation in a manner which suited them best without regard to the desire or the needs of us in the 

caboose. 

 

Saskatchewan as a land-locked province is very dependent on rail transportation. In addition the very 

nature of the grain-growing economy necessitates a heavy reliance on rail systems as a means of 

gathering our products together prior to export shipment. The fact that we have no genuine national 

transportation policy which takes our needs into consideration has been amply demonstrated. Proof of 

that was shown when the Express Transport Association, without apparent consultation, was able to 

invoke the freight-wise discriminatory structure that this Resolution protests against. I have no hesitation 

in asking, Mr. Speaker, that the breakdown in the effective movement of damp and dry wheat and grain 

can be partly marked off against the lack of a responsive national transportation policy. 

 

In conclusion for a land-lock province such as ours, if it is heavily dependent on rail transportation, and 

it is, it is imperative that we have representation on an over-riding body which has direct access to the 

Board of Transport Commissioners. If we make progress towards this end, then we can expect 

sympathetic and effective response on such vital matters as wheat and coarse grain movement, 

rationalized branch-line abandonment, meaningful passenger service, further development of Hudson 

Bay Route Association at Churchill and last, but not least, Mr. Speaker, undiscriminatory freight rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to the 

Resolution because I think there is indeed something very important here that we need to be aware of. 

The mere fact that some request and some pressure from the Government here and from other Members 

at Ottawa caused the change of decision at this time is no assurance that the same thing is going to work 

another time. I think that this House needs to support the intent of the Resolution which the Member 

from Saskatoon City Park-University has put before us. 

 

Let me just take a minute to say what the Express Transport Association tried to do with respect to these 

particular freight rates. The effect of this is shown by this kind of an example. Under the rates which 

were in effect for a while, to make a 200-pound shipment from Montreal to Swift Current by way of 

Winnipeg was this: to send it first to Winnipeg and then re-ship it to Swift Current would have cost 

$13.45. However, for the same order, if shipped to Regina and then to Swift Current, the cost would 

have been $16.82 — a difference of 25 per cent. If 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

933 

 

however, instead of sending it that way, the 200-pound article was to go to Calgary or Edmonton, the 

cost would have only been $11 or 25 per cent less than shipping the same goods to Regina. 

 

This is clearly in itself, Mr. Speaker, a situation which should raise questions about the rate-making 

procedures of the railways. I think that we have to go back a bit and realize that at one time the changing 

of freight rates was a function, at least the approval of these freight rates, was a function of a board of 

the Federal Government. With the passing of the new legislation in 1967, I think it was — I have 

forgotten the specific date — Yes, the railways were given the right to set their own rates. This action 

follows them being given that right. It seems to me that this is a right which should not be left just in the 

hands of corporations. When corporations set prices of this kind, they are in fact levying taxes on the 

people of Canada. I don‟t believe that they should have the right to levy these taxes without reference to 

some public body. Some day I hope that we will return to a situation in which the rate at which these 

freight rates are levied will be subject to approval by some organization like the Canada Transport 

Board, or whatever, the right board is. I think we need to be very concerned about the fact that the 

railways can set a rate which is in effect for a couple of months and then they withdraw them and set 

some other kind of a rate. Railways, Mr. Speaker, are part of our national system for development of our 

country. Freight rates certainly ought to be a part of our national financial consideration. I think we need 

to protest this in the strongest way possible. I think that the Government ought to consider making 

representations that the right to decide on railway rates should not be left with the railways themselves, 

but should be subject to some supervision by the appropriate agency of the Government of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — I just want to add my words to those of the previous speakers. 

This proposal would be very hard on Regina as it would be hard on Saskatoon. I don‟t know what part 

the Government played in having these discriminatory rates withdrawn, but to the extent that the 

Government played a part in having them withdrawn, I would like to congratulate the Government for 

its efforts. Having the rates withdrawn was very valuable it seems to me for Regina and Saskatoon. It is 

a matter for regret that they had to be withdrawn by withdrawing a benefit to Calgary and Edmonton 

rather than conferring a similar benefit on Regina and Saskatoon. We certainly regret that. On the other 

hand, the principle of non-discrimination on these rates is so vital to the continued industrial 

development of Regina and Saskatoon that we must express a preference for non-discrimination, even if 

it is rather hard on our friends in Calgary and Edmonton. I think that it would be wise for this House to 

pass a Resolution. In order to tidy things up and bring it in line with the facts, I think we ought to move 

a small amendment to this Resolution, because in fact discriminatory express rail rates do not apply to 

Regina and Saskatoon, or do not apply in the way that this Resolution was aimed at. Accordingly I will 

move, seconded by the Member for Wadena (Mr. Dewhurst): 

 

That the words “the discriminatory express rail rates that apply to Regina and Saskatoon” be deleted 

and the 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

934 

following words substituted therefor: 

 

“their threatened application of discriminatory express rail rates to Regina and Saskatoon.” 

 

With that change, Mr. Speaker, the Resolution will read: 

 

That this Legislature urge the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately and forcefully protest to 

the Express Transport Association of Canada their threatened application of discriminatory express 

rates to Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

I think that this is still desirable. I think that this Legislature should go on record as being unhappy about 

the proposed application of these rates. If this amendment is undesirable because it disturbs a newly 

created relationship between the Government and the Express Transport Association, I would not want 

to urge anything that will upset what is now a moderately successful apple cart. But it seems to me that 

we ought, as a Legislature, to go on record as opposing this sort of thing and to let the Express Transport 

Association know that the Legislature of Saskatchewan thought it sufficiently important to be the subject 

of a Resolution. 

 

STATEMENT ON POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Just before I deal with the amendment I propose to deal with the point of order which 

was raised on the motion. I refer Hon. Members to Erskine May‟s Parliamentary Practice, 17th edition, 

page 402: 

 

Proposal of Motion — When a Member is at liberty to make a motion, he may speak in its favor before 

he actually proposes it. But his speech is only allowed upon the understanding, first, that he speaks to 

the motion; and, secondly, that he concludes by proposing his motion formally. 

 

And further, I think it is well known that a motion once moved becomes the property not of the mover 

thereof, but of the House itself and can therefore only be withdrawn by unanimous consent. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — I think that as far as I am concerned I certainly agree with 

both the motion and the amendment. 

 

But I would like to point out to the House that when this situation arose Premier Thatcher got immediate 

action. He picked up the phone, he talked to the Hon. Mr. Hellyer, the Minister of Transport, and Mr. 

Sinclair, the President of the Canadian Pacific Railroad. He got the two of them together and they 

changed this discriminatory action immediately. At the same time, I agree that something like this 

shouldn‟t be able to happen almost at the whim of the railways. As far as we are concerned on this side 

of the House, we have and we will continue to fight and work as hard as we can to get Western Canada 

and Saskatchewan in particular a better deal in regard to express rates or freight rates. If this motion and 

this amendment will help, then I think that our side of the House will support it. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

935 

 

But again I want to point, we can talk all we want, but in this case, it was the Premier that got action, got 

results and got it immediately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Will the Hon. Member permit a question before he 

takes his seat. 

 

He suggested that the Premier had got in touch with Mr. Sinclair and the Federal Government 

immediately this situation arose, by telephone. What date was that? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, I don‟t know. But the record is there. He phoned them immediately that it came 

to his attention, or the day before the motion was brought in. He picked up the phone and phoned them. I 

think he phoned two or three times and got the action. They got together, and the result was that they 

withdrew the privilege from the other people, so at least we are all even. It was kind of a negative result. 

We would have much sooner seen everyone get the better express rates. But at least we got action so that 

Saskatoon and Regina are not at a disadvantage. There is no question. I don‟t know whether you are 

questioning whether he did this or not, he did it . . . 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on the amendment I really didn‟t intend to 

say anymore, and I don‟t want to take away any of the glory or credit which the Premier is being given. I 

thought just to complete the record, Mr. Speaker, I might read a comment from the Saskatoon 

Star-Phoenix, February 21. It was the comment that Mr. Sinclair, the President of the Canadian Pacific 

Railway made about this decision. He says that “the rates were put on and dropped.” These are Mr. 

Sinclair‟s words, because it didn‟t work out as expected. Then referring to complaints that were made 

about the rates, he said the complaints had nothing to do with the decision to drop the special rate, I 

thought that perhaps . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That‟s his story. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — I don‟t think it really matters who get the credit or who doesn‟t get 

the credit. When I phoned Mr. Sinclair, he had never heard of these rate changes, according to what he 

told me. He promised me he would look into the matter. When we still didn‟t get much action, I phoned 

Mr. Hellyer. Believe me between the two of them, within a few hours, the matter was settled. I don‟t 

know whether this will happen again. It has happened over the years far too often. In any event this 

particular matter has been settled, and I was pleased with the co-operation which we received from Mr. 

Sinclair and Mr. Hellyer. 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, I must say that I appreciate the 

fact now that this motion was not permitted to be withdrawn, because it has brought some comments to 

the floor of the House. I must say that in general I am in agreement with these, but where I 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

936 

voted for the amendment, I would like to point out that the amendment was put in this way, that the 

express rates were threatened. These were not threatened rates, these rates were actually put into force 

and they are still in force. I don‟t think that we should be confused on this. While they are still in force, 

there has been a statutory notice placed that will have them withdrawn within the 30 days of the time 

that they were put there. It is only to point out this, I am in agreement with the comments generally, but 

here I think we should be clear that they were not threatened rates. They were rates that were actually 

put into effect. The other point of course is that I don‟t think that we should sell the Premier short on the 

effort that he has made in regard to these rates. It has had a very real effect and I don‟t think that 

anything was intended to belittle the efforts that he made. But believe me his effort was a major one and 

I think we should be grateful for it. The other point that I would like to make in conclusion is the fact 

that now, because this motion has been put — and I am sure it will pass — I think that when the protest 

does go to the rate association, the point should be made very clear, and I think this should also be made 

to the Federal Government, to Mr. Hellyer, that some standard criterion should be set. It should be a 

logical criterion and through it, if any rates are placed, that the centres in Saskatchewan should be given 

a proportionate reduction or a proportionate treatment to what other centres are given in Western 

Canada. With that I will conclude my remarks. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 9 — INCLUSION OF HEARING AIDS UNDER THE SASKATCHEWAN 

MEDICAL INSURANCE ACT 
 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North) moved, seconded by Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan early action 

to determine the most appropriate, effective and economical manner in which hearing aids may be 

included as an insured service under The Saskatchewan Medical Insurance Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Resolution I trust is one that requires a minimum of explanation to this 

House. It is not a Resolution that initially calls upon the Government to spend any excessive sums of 

money, but it requires that action be taken to investigate and to conclude upon the most expedient and 

the most economical method by which an extremely important service may be provided to a large 

number of handicapped people. This, I suggest, should represent a most worthy and a most legitimate 

undertaking for this Legislature to recommend to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I have within my circle of acquaintances, Mr. Speaker, a number of senior citizens who have become 

afflicted with defective hearing in varying degrees over the last number of years. Several of these people 

are in what has to be described as their declining years and are living in financial circumstances which 

make it all but impossible for them to purchase a device which is designed to correct their hearing loss. I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

937 

 

that there is mounting evidence to indicate that excessive prices are being charged to those who require 

this service in Order that they may live reasonably normal and contented lives. 

 

Because of this and the many inquiries that I have had directed to me in recent months by pensioners in 

particular, Mr. Speaker, I have attempted to gather together as much information as possible on the 

whole matter. I am convinced that the information that I have still must be regarded as incomplete, but I 

believe it does throw a good deal of light onto the whole question. 

 

Some of the information that I have originates with the Minister of Health in Great Britain, the British 

Consulate in Ottawa and from a variety of other sources. It is a matter of interest, also, Mr. Speaker, that 

a survey was conducted into this matter in British Columbia during 1966, and that the report was 

completed and handed over to the Government of British Columbia in 1967. There was also a United 

States Senate report in 1962. All of this information I suggest is readily available to the Government. 

There are some very interesting conclusions that have been noted in studies and other material that are 

readily available. For instance, well over half of those who wear hearing aids are people of 65 years of 

age or over. Another statistic that perhaps is not surprising, but is nevertheless true indicates that more 

than twice as many people suffer from a hearing loss than those that suffer from visual defects. The loss 

of hearing is then by far the single most common impairment in our country today. 

 

Members will be aware that hearing aids are provided in Great Britain under the National Health Plan. It 

is a matter of record that hearing aids purchased in bulk quantities, with excessive profits done away 

with, have been made available at a price which is within reasonable limits. The cost of manufacturing 

each unit is kept to a minimum, because the General Post Office in Great Britain which is charged with 

the responsibility obtains components in bulk and places competitive contracts with suitable 

electro-engineering firms for assembly of the hearing aids. The performance standard of the product was 

first laid down by the electro-acoustic committee of the Medical Research Council and hence the name, 

Mr. Speaker, „MEDRESCO,‟ which is the name of the aid provided to hearing centres in selected 

hospitals throughout the country. These hearing aid centres, Mr. Speaker, are responsible for fitting and 

issuing aids to individual patients after initial assessments have been made by hospital otologists and 

other technicians. 

 

A preponderance of evidence would appear to indicate that the British service has met with widespread 

acceptance. The original „Medresco‟ hearing aid was described as a somewhat clumsy and less 

cosmetically attractive than some of the smaller in-the-ear and behind-the-ear aids. But the British 

Columbia survey of 1966 indicated that this type was the cheapest and the most economical to maintain 

and the most satisfactory from a technical point of view. I want for just a moment, Mr. Speaker, to read 

a quotation from Bevin‟s book, “In Place of Fear,” which relates something of the British experience in 

bringing hearing aids under the National Health Service in Great Britain. 

 

The way that seemed to offer the best chance of success, was to bring the hearing specialist and the 

aural technicians into conference with each other, to see if a 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

938 

satisfactory aid could be devised, which could then be put into mass production and distributed through 

the hospitals. The effort met with outstanding success. By September, 1951, 152,000 aids had been 

distributed and the users are enthusiastic about them. They cost approximately one-tenth of those on 

sale commercially. By bulk ordering of common essentials and cutting out unnecessary retail profit 

margins, substantial economies can be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem as it appears to apply to the Canadian and Saskatchewan scene appears to 

revolve around the excessive cost of these appliances. As has been mentioned, the vast majority of those 

with hearing defects are over the age of 65, and in many cases these people are living within very 

limited means. 

 

I believe that the pertinent question that we as a Legislature must ask ourselves, is whether we, as a 

civilized and organized society, can allow excessive profits to be made at the expense of excluding 

many people from a service which is vital to their health, comfort and their well-being. The British 

Columbia survey presented some rather startling figures with respect to the markup from the wholesaler 

to the retailer. For the least expensive hearing aid, the British Columbia survey showed among the five 

different firms, a retail markup of from 49 per cent to 306 per cent. For the most expensive hearing aid, 

these same five firms showed a markup of from 97 to 278 per cent. The British Columbia survey gave 

examples of numerous types of hearing aids with suggested retail prices for these five British Columbia 

firms. The vast majority of examples indicated a retail markup of as much as 200 per cent to 300 per 

cent. Other information indicated that hearing aids, which cost $35 in Japan, are being sold for upwards 

of $400 in Vancouver, and others, which cost $77 to manufacture, are being sold for $700. 

 

It should be noted also that there are no manufacturers of hearing aids in Canada, unless a manufacturer 

has gone into production in recent months, since the beginning at least of 1967. Most of the hearing aids 

sold in Canada are imported from the United States and Europe, with over 80 per cent of the imports of 

hearing aids and parts originating in the United States. It should be remembered also, Mr. Speaker, that 

hearing aids and hearing aid parts are imported duty-free into Canada under tariff items 48200-1 and 

48205-1 of the Canada Customs Tariff. I am not familiar with the actual connotation of the tariff items, 

but the indication is that they do arrive in our country duty-free. It is worthy of note too, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of cost, that they are also exempt from Provincial and Federal sales tax. I suppose I should say that 

rather quietly, Mr. Speaker, unless it prompts the Provincial Treasurer to look upon this as another 

source of revenue. 

 

Well, all of this would, Mr. Speaker, seem to indicate that there is some real reason to ask that a full and 

complete investigation be conducted into the hearing aid industry. I am not suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that 

I have all of the available information. What I do suggest is that, on the face of evidence that is readily 

available, there would appear to be no way in which a respectable commercial firm can justify a 

percentage markup of anywhere from 100 to 300 per cent, as has been shown in the British Columbia 

survey. I don‟t have at my disposal any figures 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

939 

 

to demonstrate the markup from the manufacturer to the wholesaler, nor do I have available any 

information to indicate the cost of advertising and other sales techniques. I leave it to Members of this 

House to judge what other hidden costs may be involved. 

 

I have been of the opinion for some time, Mr. Speaker, that these appliances should be included as an 

insured service under The Medical Care Insurance Act. However, I think, in light of information that has 

been provided, it must be agreed that the inclusion of this service must be preceded by a rational 

approach to the whole matter of providing this service at a realistic cost. With this in mind, I am hopeful 

that recognition will be given to the need for a study in depth into the whole matter of costs, 

maintenance and other matters which will make it possible for us to judge what steps should be taken to 

provide this service at a reasonable cost. With this in mind, I hope that Members on both sides of the 

House will see their way clear to support this Resolution, which I am convinced is worthy of the 

consideration of Members on both sides of the House, irrespective of political creed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I for one consider this a very, very important motion, but 

my colleague has covered the ground very well. I will endeavor to be as brief as possible. 

 

I suppose it is only human and only natural that one should be vitally interested in a matter which has 

affected oneself, and in many respects still does. I am referring to this problem of hearing aids for those 

unfortunate enough to need such appliances. At best, Mr. Speaker, regardless of cost, they are indeed a 

poor substitute for the natural ear. Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt was a very understanding individual when 

she said, “People who need hearing aids are not just awed by the cost, which is high, but many do not 

like to acknowledge that they do not hear well.” But, Mr. Speaker, sooner or later regardless of feeling 

or emotions, they come face to face with the cold fact of price. I mean just that, Mr. Speaker. I have here 

on my desk, a little instrument that I purchased some three years ago in this very city, for the price of 

$340. When I was overseas at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, I dropped into a hearing 

aid establishment and had a little discussion with the proprietor. I asked him what he could sell an 

instrument like this for. He was very frank with me, he said, “That is a beautiful instrument, it is new, 

and we don‟t have it in at the moment but it is coming very shortly.” Well I said, in dollars and cents I 

would like to know what it would cost. He told me that they would retail it at $150. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

that instrument was going to be manufactured somewhere on this continent and transported all the way 

to Britain. It will sell for one-half the price you or I pay for it in the city of Regina. This is not a 

high-priced instrument as my colleague pointed out to you, $350 for the instrument and molded ear 

fitting is only half the price that many of these hearing aids are being retailed at. $340 is not the top 

price, but again as my colleague from Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) pointed out, it is not by any means 

the lowest price. But in my own experience, ignorant as I was of all this kind of thing, this was the only 

type and the only price of instrument that I was told anything about. The Consumers‟ Union has done a 

great deal of work 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

940 

tabulating prices, models, materials, performances according to manufacturers‟ claims with regard to 

hearing aids. On the whole they found that, while the odd instrument might not quite perform quite to 

the advertising level of the company‟s claim, on the whole they reasonably accomplished fairly well 

what the company claimed they would. However, the Consumers‟ Union found there was little 

comparison, Mr. Speaker, between price and performance or materials and performance. I would judge 

myself that $10 would cover all the material there was in an instrument like this. But the cheaper 

models, not quite so compact an instrument, gave equally good reception. In the case of the breast 

pocket model one of course has to be careful in keeping them free from the clothing, the microphone 

being covered up and therefore interfering with reception. For the most part, aids are sold by exclusive 

outlets devoted to one make, but there are opticians in some of the larger cities who carry several brands. 

There are shops that carry more than one make, but by and large they are exclusive houses dealing only 

with one firm. 

 

There‟s a costly and at times a misleading element which enters in when high-priced travelling salesmen 

are employed. They do not alone cover the urban centres, Mr. Speaker, but we find them out in the rural 

areas, dealing with individuals and people who are absolutely ignorant of this kind of thing, but needing 

them in the worst way. Often they are led into buying a high-priced instrument, which, had they had the 

proper information, they would never have purchased. The State of Oregon is the only state in the 

United States of America that requires by law a minimal examination and certificate for those selling 

and fitting hearing aids to the public. This certificate is the only means the public has of judging the 

person‟s ability to advise and to fit hearing aids suitable to those in need. The American Speech and 

Hearing Association gives reliable information and will issue certificates of competence to any 

audiologist who meets their fairly strict standards. What I‟m really saying, Mr. Speaker, is that here in 

Saskatchewan the public lack this protection when they go to market to purchase hearing aid equipment. 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the information compiled by consumer unions on price, material and the 

reliability of the equipment be made public by the Department of Public Health, the Department of 

Social Welfare. I don‟t mean to go out as salesmen, I mean that you just put this information where the 

buying public is, especially this group that my colleague referred to, so many of them 65 and over, may 

pick it up and at least be aware of what they need and what the price and the reliability of any instrument 

that they wish to purchase. This, Mr. Speaker, would give at least some measure of protection to those 

least able to defend themselves on the commercial markets of today. This information might be made 

available, even through pickup pamphlets placed where the public could at any time get one and at least 

have a minimum amount of $700. I think that the least a government could do is to make sure that these 

people know to some extent what they are doing and they are not left to the mercies of the open trade. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — I can‟t disagree with a lot of what the mover and 

seconder have said about the question of hearing aids. I expect 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

941 

 

that I‟ll need one very shortly myself and to prepare for it, I a few months ago, ordered one from across 

the sea, the type mentioned by the Member on the other side of the House and the price is actually $33 

laid down for a single model. If you order them in quantities you can get them for less than that. So, I‟m 

ready for the occasion when I need one myself. I have had some experience in purchasing the $300 

models, having bought three of them for a member of my family who insists on throwing them away 

occasionally or losing them. I find that on occasions it is very difficult to get these hearing aids working 

adequately and that the suppliers in some cases, I won‟t say in every case, in some cases do spend 

considerable time in adjusting ear pieces and listening to complaints in trying to get them to work 

properly, because, as the Hon. Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) said, even at their best they are a 

very poor substitute for the ear. But I think we must bear in mind that in the Medical Care Insurance Act 

there are many items that possibly could be added and included and Members in this House have 

suggested some on previous occasions. To the Hon. Member for Turtleford and myself a hearing aid 

may be of top priority, but I can tell you there are other items that have been brought to my attention that 

are of even greater priority than hearing aids. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we should consider this 

along with other priorities that are being considered. During the past year I have gathered considerable 

information and am continually doing so on surveys and studies that have been taken place elsewhere. I 

don‟t think we should get into an exhaustive study within our own province because it would be a 

duplication of what has been done elsewhere to some extent. I feel that there is some merit in 

considering these along with other items that might be added to medicare. I would like to move the 

following amendment, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre): 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

“requests the Government, when considering extension of services under The Saskatchewan Medical 

Insurance Act, and having regard to other priorities, to consider also the inclusion of hearing aids as an 

insured service.” 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RETURN NO. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey) for 

Return No. 9 showing: 

 

(1) The total acreage of Crown land sold under the Saskatchewan Government Land Selling Program 

since January 1, 1967; 

(2) The Government‟s objective, if any, of acres of land sales for the year 1969; 

(3) (a) The name of each purchaser of land up to December 31, 1968; (b) the number of acres 

purchased, and the location of each purchase; and (c) the total selling price for each purchase. 

(4) (a) The amount of down payment on all purchases that were not fully paid for on date of purchase; 

(b) the 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

942 

length of repayment in terms of years on purchases that were not fully paid for; and (c) the interest on 

unpaid balance. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in order to provide the information 

that the Member has requested in this Order for Return, I would point out firstly that it would take a 

great deal of time on behalf of the staff and the department, probably all of this session and part of the 

summer because there would be about in the neighborhood of 1,791 files to go through and the 

compiling of the information would necessitate about some 40 odd pages of information. We go from 

there to a request for divulging the names of all those persons who have purchased land, how much they 

have put down and how much each one still owes in the amounts of installment payments. However, I 

think I can still provide the Member and this House with most of the information they would require and 

in order to do that and to expedite the information, I would move the following amendment: 

 

That all the words after the word “sold” in paragraph (1) be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

“by the Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture from January 1, 1967, to December 31, 1968”; 

 

That paragraph (3) be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

“(3) (a) the number of purchases of land from January 1, 1967 to December 31, 1968; (b) the total 

value of all sales of land from January 1, 1967 to December 31, 1968; (c) the interest rate charged for 

installment sales; and (d) the total revenue received from land sold between January 1, 1967 and 

December 31, 1968;” and 

 

That paragraph (4) be deleted. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, on account of the lengthy amendment and a detailed 

question, I would like to adjourn debate on the amendment if this is in order. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RETURN NO. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Snyder (Moose Jaw North) 

for the Return No. 19 showing: 

 

The number of patients who have been admitted to and the number patients discharged from the 

Weyburn Mental Institution, and the North Battleford Institution during each of the calendar years 

1965, 1966, 1967, and 1968. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, in order that information supplied herein 

will be more comprehensive and give a better opportunity for the Members to make comparison, I 

would like to move an amendment to this motion: 

 

That the figures “1960, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1964,” be 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

943 

 

inserted after the word “years” in the third line. 

 

Amendment agreed to 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 27 — An Act to 

amend The Live Stock Purchase and Sale Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this amendment is required to provide legislative authority for the premium 

payments which were made to encourage live stock improvement under the following policies in the 

Department; the boar premium policy, the graded ram purchase policy, the elite swine herd policy. As a 

matter of interest, when the municipal boar purchase policy and the graded ram purchase policy were 

first developed, assistance was given to a producer indirectly by departmental purchase and resale of top 

quality sires. The resale was at a specified price based on quality, and the resale price to the producer 

was usually lower than the Department‟s purchase price. In recent years it has become evident that these 

policies would have a more beneficial effect if the producer was encouraged to make his own purchase 

of high quality animals and received from the Department a premium based on quality, as an incentive 

to encourage the use of top-quality sires. In addition, a new swine herd policy was introduced in 1964. 

This policy provides incentive for the production of high quality breeding stocks measured by record of 

performance, and incentive is provided by paying a premium to the swine breeder for top quality 

breeding stock purchased and sold for breeding purposes. 

 

Section 5 of The Live Stock Purchase and Sale Act provided legislative authority for the purchase and 

resale of top quality breeding animals. However, it is now necessary to add a section to this clause which 

also provides for the more modern concept of premium payments. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend 

The Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act and to repeal certain other Acts. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the objective of this amendment is to consolidate one essential item from each of 

three livestock Acts into The Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act, thus permitting repeal of the 

other three Acts in question. First The Agisters and Livery Stable Act. The proposed addition providing 

for regulations is: 

 

To permit the drafting regulations under The Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act to provide for 

minimum standards of cleanliness and sanitation in boarding stables. 

 

This is the only provision of the old Agisters Act and Livery Stable Keepers Act which it would appear 

necessary to retain. In fact it is anticipated that very limited reference 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

944 

will be made to regulations established under this proposed revision. 

 

The Stock Railway Accidents Act has simply prescribed the measures to be taken in reporting an 

accident with live stock by the person in charge of a train. The Act makes reference to reporting the 

accident to the nearest station agent and having the station agent post notice of the accident in the 

station. These provisions are now obsolete insofar as many of railroad stations are no longer functioning 

and are not staffed by a station agent, and no provision is made for the reporting of live stock accidents 

involving motor vehicles. It is proposed that these matters be covered by regulations under The Live 

Stock and Live Stock Products Act, thus enabling repeal of The Stock Railway Accidents Act. 

 

The Injured Animals Act, for the purpose of simplicity and flexibility, it is considered desirable to make 

provisions for the destruction or disposal of injured, sick or dead animals which have been abandoned 

by their owners. The Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act thus permits repeal of The Injured 

Animals Act. The Injured Animals Act simply describes the procedure to be followed by a constable or 

an inspector of an incorporated Humane Society or Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to 

proceed with the destruction of animals which have been injured beyond repair and which have been 

abandoned by their owners or where the owner refuses to destroy the animal in question. 

 

The proposed amendment to The Live Stock and Live Stock Products Act makes provision for 

regulations which will accomplish the objective of The Injured Animals Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The 

Department of Industry and Commerce Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the symbol, “SID” was proposed to provide a suitable design for promotional 

purposes. The design is taken from the symbol which depicts man, industry and our basic resource, 

agriculture. These are incorporated in the design which has SID at the base depicting the name of the 

Department, also standing for S — service, I — industry, and D — Department of Industry and 

Commerce but the use of “SID” is proposed for use in promotional work of this Department. 

 

It is necessary to stay in step with the promotional world. There is always difficulty with the name of an 

organization when it is too long and unwielding. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. Thatcher moved second reading of Bill No. 33 — An Act to amend The Liquor Board 

Superannuation Act. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech indicated the Government is proposing an adjustment to Civil 

Service pensions. As Hon. Members know, for quite a number of years the maximum 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

945 

 

pension has been $6,000 regardless of the salary, and regardless of the annual contribution that the civil 

servant made. As the cost of living has gone up, the Government now believes this ceiling is unrealistic. 

We are moving in the Civil Service and Crown corporations, to bring this ceiling up to a more realistic 

level. We hope that ultimately the ceiling will reach the figure of $8,050. This Act does for the Liquor 

Board employees precisely what similar Bills are doing for other groups. It will affect about 300 

employees in all. 

 

Mr. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — I have been informed that this Bill is in keeping with the other Bills 

that have passed at this session. I now ask the Premier whether there is any distinguishable difference 

between this Bill and the other Bills that have received passage. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No, I believe they‟re all precisely the same. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 34 — An Act respecting 

Annual Holidays, Hours of Work, and other Employment Standards. 
 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this looks like a mighty big Bill that probably could take a couple hours of the 

House, but actually it is only a consolidation of eight or more Acts that are normally administered by 

The Department of Labour. This is something that has been requested both by labor and management. 

The Acts repealed have been difficult to interpret. Sometimes some of the Acts were in contradiction to 

the other and by consolidating them into one Bill, there are actually only two changes of principle. 

 

One is a section that is in the Act which in fact will close the gap where employees were not paid their 

wages. You will notice that a couple years ago we brought in what was known as „The Third Party 

Demand‟ but today under the present Act an employee can only claim for his wages and have first 

priority when a firm goes under The Bankruptcy Act. But you may find that a firm can in fact be 

defunct, and the creditors will take over the firm to liquidate it, so that they get their equity out of it. 

This has always left the employee sort of holding the bag. This Section, that I‟m mentioning, will in fact 

close that gap. This is one that‟s been of major concern, so that in the last two years you notice that two 

major loopholes in the Act have now been closed. 

 

The other Section is to make it possible for the Crown to come under the provisions of the Act. You will 

notice of course that the Act is to come in force only on the date fixed by proclamation by the Lieutenant 

Governor-in-Council. As many Members are aware there are exemptions which have been agreed 

between the union and the employer where, say for example, a 44-hour week, where they wish to work 

five days rather than 5½ days. These are exemption orders, and until these orders are all brought into 

line to conform with the Act, it will not be proclaimed. 

 

There are only two principles as I‟ve mentioned in it. I think it‟s another step, closing another hole 

where the employees 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

946 

have not been able to get the wages. The Act itself, I think, can best be dealt with clause by clause. I 

could start here and probably hold you for the next hour and take it clause by clause. It would be a 

tedious thing which can be best handled in the Committee. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, the Bill we have before us today is, as the 

Minister explained, a consolidation of a number of pieces of labor legislation that have for years been 

features in Saskatchewan. Now the intention is as I understand it from the Minister, to effect a 

consolidation in such a manner as will ensure that there will be no loss in benefits or protection that is 

afforded by the existing statutes. 

 

I‟d want to say to the Minister that I approve of the fact that, from reports I have received, his officials 

have done a commendable job of meeting with organizations like the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour to discuss the changes in the consolidating Bill. 

 

I believe, also, Mr. Speaker, that as the Minister has said, some improvements have been made in this 

Bill. They may not be very far-reaching, but to the extent that any improvements exist within the Bill I 

am certainly glad to welcome them with the Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in any consolidation of eight labour statutes as is the case here, it‟s my opinion that 

we should exercise the greatest of care to guarantee that, because of changes in wording and 

construction, there will be no modifications that will hurt the present Labour Acts. The Minister well 

knows, as I do, that the task of consolidating this kind of legislation is not an easy one. I am glad, as I‟ve 

said that he and his staff have conferred with labor organizations on this Bill. I hope that the advice he 

has received will have benefited him and his people. I also hope that in the future he would exercise the 

same kind of consultation on other pieces of legislation. Of course I hope also that the essence of the 

advice that he has received with respect to this Bill will have been recognized in any changes we now 

have before us. 

 

The draft Bill, Mr. Speaker, Makes revisions from the former legislation, which may be subject to some 

question when the relevant Sections come up in Committee. The Minister has already suggested this. I 

may say that I have some reservations that a number of the revisions are in all cases more beneficial than 

the present legislation. I don‟t propose to point out those matters now, because it would not be in 

conformity with the debate on second reading. In Committee, however, this can be done. 

 

I believe that the change, that makes the whole Act applicable to the Crown, is an improvement, whereas 

before only the Equal Pay Act and the wage collection provision of The Employees Wage Act applied. 

Also the provision that now requires an employers‟ records to be kept for a period of five years, is 

better. Previously the provision applied to The Annual Holidays Act and the requirement stipulated the 

records would be kept for two years in the case of some other pieces of legislation. This sweeps across 

the purview of the eight Acts. 

 

The extension, Mr. Speaker, of the period for prosecutions 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

947 

 

of employers who haven‟t complied with the provisions of the different Acts is again, I think, a step 

ahead. I note that power has been given in the Act to supply enabling regulations regarding certain 

matters. As I‟ve listed them, they are: 1. The determination of the cash value of board and lodging where 

this has not been determined by the Minimum Wage Board. 2. With respect to information concerning 

wages and working conditions to be furnished by an employer to an employee when he is hired. 3. The 

bonding of employers convicted of failure to pay wages. The Minister touched upon this. 4. The 

prohibiting of an employer from requiring an employee to live in accommodations the employee 

considers unsuitable. 

 

Now none of these, at least probably three of these, are very world-shaking but they are changes that I 

think we should note. 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the regulations that govern these matters, that were formerly matters of 

the legislation, will be adequate for the job to be done. For example, employers who had been convicted 

of violations under The Minimum Wage Act were previously required to put up a bond. Now, as I 

understand it, this is no longer required, Mr. Minister, and I‟m subject to your correction. The only 

requirements that will be stated are those that you may see fit to include in your regulations. Again I 

simply say this is an example of the need to expressly stipulate requirements that now set these subjects 

forward in a specific fashion in the statutes. 

 

In other Sections, power is conveyed on the Government to make regulations respecting the 

maintenance of wages where hours of work are reduced that concern employees who are now wholly or 

partly exempted by Ministerial or some other kind of order, from the 44-hour week provisions; and of 

course those hours may subsequently be reduced from where they are now to 44 hours or some reduced 

number beyond that. It will be seen, Mr. Minister, that the need to provide adequate regulations is, as 

I‟ve already said, germane to the future improvement of workers, insofar as this particular part of the 

Act is concerned that is insofar as this particular part of the Act is concerned that is hours, because again 

I point out that, if this is not provided, the ability of your Department to make changes in hours will not 

be possible. 

 

One of the sections of The Minimum Wage Act now provides that Provincial Magistrates or Justices of 

the Peace can order an employer to pay, as well as any wages found to be owing, a reasonable fee to 

legal counsel not exceeding $100, the counsel to be the solicitor of the employee. This section, I don‟t 

think, Mr. Minister, occurs in the draft Bill before us. Again I am subject to any correction you can give 

me. It is probably argued, if it is not there, that most wage cases are now handled by the Department of 

Labour and that for this reason there would not be a problem, of recovering a lawyer‟s fee. As well, I 

understand that the present $100 maximum fee that is permitted to be paid to legal counsel is considered 

to be inadequate. I think there may be something to that assumption. 

 

I‟m a little worried about this section. At the same time I‟d be glad to see how it works out in practice. I 

do feel on the whole that it would be proper and wise to insert a section in the present draft Bill that 

would be in conformity with the present Minimum Wage Act section to provide for the payment of a 

lawyer‟s fee in the kind of case that I have cited where a 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

948 

workman has to have representation in the court for the recovery of amounts owing to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to sum up what I‟ve said to this point, I feel that the principle of the consolidation is 

worthwhile and one that has become more necessary, as the years have gone by and the legislation has 

grown. The new Statute should, I think, be more understandable; and the effect, of course, is to have all 

the labor standards of these eight pieces under one Act. This is by itself demonstrably a more efficient 

way of handling labor standards legislation. There are some improvements in the application of 

administrative and enforcement provisions that I believe should be supported. As I‟ve said, I do feel that 

a great deal will depend upon the new regulations that the Government adopts to expedite the legislation 

that is now before us, when it has received approval of the House. I say once more that the regulations 

will need to cover many matters in a very positive and a very particular way. That is what the legislation 

now does. That is what the Bill does not do in any particularity. That is why the regulations must echo in 

effect the language of the present legislation. Otherwise the working people of the province may suffer 

badly from the consequences. 

 

Having said all this, Mr. Speaker, I must point out to the Government that basically the Bill before us, 

with some slight improvements, is nothing but the synthesis of legislation that was on the books when 

the former CCF Government left office. The fundamental benefits are the same as obtained at that time 

five years ago. I think the question that the Government must answer to the working people of this 

province is why it dos not, up to this time when this Bill is being considered, bring proposals to this 

House that would materially improve the lot of the province‟s wage and salary earners. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the 44-hour week that was implemented by a CCF 

Government is still standard in this province. The annual vacations of two weeks after one year, three 

weeks after five continuous years of service with one employer are still the basis. They‟ve not been 

improved upon basically by this Government. We now have the lowest minimum wage conditions in 

Canada west of the Maritimes, where once Saskatchewan had the highest minimum wage rate in 

Canada. I say nothing is proposed here either to improve upon the equal pay and other conditions for 

female labor. This legislation, Mr. Speaker, as everyone knows, was also a part of a progressive 

approach to labor matters by the Government preceding the present Thatcher Liberal Administration. 

 

Now I would like to see the present Bill so drafted that it would require a much more active Minimum 

Wage Board participation in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — It should be necessary, in my opinion, that the Board meet with working people and 

employers‟ representatives from time to time to discuss with them the kind of floor wages that should 

apply across Saskatchewan. I say that the Board should be undertaking to discuss with classes of 

employers and employees 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

949 

 

certain wage scales that would have the effect of improving purchasing power and also business 

conditions all across this province. 

 

In my opinion, one of the places where the draft Bill before us fails to measure up to the existing 

provisions of The Minimum Wage Act is where it mentions the duties of the Minimum Wage Board. 

Again I strongly feel, Mr. Minister, that the Minimum Wage Board should at least undertake public 

hearings from time to time so as to secure the kind of representations that would enable it to understand 

what it ought to be doing. The Minister would agree with me, I believe, when I say that, since his 

Government has taken office, the Minimum Wage Board has not met on one occasion on public 

hearings to hear employees who are affected by minimum wages or to hear representatives from 

organizations of employees and employers. The Board has been paralyzed by the action of this 

Government. The Board has failed to live up to the kind of existence that would make it an effective 

body in this province. 

 

I believe that the Minimum Wage Board has not held hearings to receive public representations on one 

occasion since this Government has come to office. I have a question in this regard on the Order Paper, 

Mr. Minister. You can tell me if I‟m wrong, I don‟t think I am. I say the fact that it has not done so is 

significant and to my mind more than a coincidence. 

 

The Minimum Wage Board‟s duties should be so defined in this present Bill that the Board becomes a 

meaningful instrument and not merely an appendage of the Government. I think that‟s what it has 

become. For example, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, it is highly improper that the Premier of this 

province should have on at least one occasion made such statements as that a minimum wage increase 

will be the same for some time to come. If the Minimum Wage Board is to be a kind of impartial 

authority, it should be given the right to make its recommendations. The Government should not be 

exercising pressure to the extent of suggesting that it doesn‟t want to receive representations from the 

Board to the Cabinet, and that there won‟t be any improvements in minimum wage standards for some 

time to come. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — False. 

 

Mr. Davies — Mr. Speaker, the statement is not false. I can produce the statement for the Minister. He 

well knows that this statement was made by the Premier of this province two or three years ago. I say 

the fact is that the Government has over previous years exercised an undue influence and pressure on the 

Board. 

 

The aspects that I am mentioning, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the minimum wage and other standards, 

are of great importance at a time when we are all acutely aware of the great extent of poverty in our 

midst. All authorities are coming to realize that one of the best ways of combating poverty is through 

labor standards. Now after all, if there was no minimum wage floor in this province, it‟s crystal clear 

that poverty would be worse amongst us than it is at the present time. Conversely if we institute a decent 

minimum wage, we may then be sure that poverty levels will constitute less of a hazard to society and 

people in these brackets will improve their economic circumstances. All society, not just this section, 

will benefit. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

950 

Mr. Speaker, this Government must make up its mind that it has a direct obligation to act with respect to 

improved minimum wage conditions. If it will not act by present regulations, it should act through this 

Statute to effectively change the present adverse position of workers in this province in relation to 

minimum wages. 

 

Nothing more reveals the extent of negligence of the Government in this field than to note how the 

Saskatchewan Minimum Wage has declined in proportion to average weekly earning in Saskatchewan. 

In 1946 the minimum wage represented 57.5 per cent, just about 58 per cent, of the average weekly 

wages and salaries that they were being paid in the province at that time. Today, this percentage has 

dropped to 44.3 per cent. These figures are on the assumption that the employee of today works a 

weekly schedule of 44 hours. As a matter of fact, if the employee works 40 hours a week, the figure 

drops from the percentage of 44.3 per cent to 40.2 per cent. I submit, Mr. Minister, since the average 

weekly hours of work by your own figures are around 40, that therefore, what has happened since 1946 

is that the relationship of the minimum wage to the average weekly wage in the province has declined 

from 58 per cent to 40.2 per cent. There is just no ducking the figures or the consequences. 

 

Not only is the Saskatchewan employee in a far worse position compared with his counterparts in all 

provinces west of the Maritimes. He has also suffered proportionate reverses throughout the years 

because minimum wage rises have not kept pace with general wage improvements. Nothing could be 

more illustrative of the need to update and upgrade the minimum wage conditions in Saskatchewan. 

They are unconscionably low at the present time; and they are contributing to poverty, to suffering and 

to unemployment in this region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has similarly failed in this Bill to do that which would constitute not only 

an improvement in hours of work but accomplish a situation where we would overcome a strong trend to 

unemployment in Saskatchewan, especially over the last six months. Even in mid-December there was 

4.5 per cent of the labor force unemployed — excluding the farmers of the province from the labor force 

figure. Today, this figure is probably much higher. The outlook for 1969 is by no means encouraging. A 

reduction of weekly hours of work in Saskatchewan by legislation is not only a desirable thing, Mr. 

Minister, from the viewpoint of the wage earners themselves; a reduction of the hours of weekly work 

by legislation has become pressing and necessary as a device for creating work for the jobless people in 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — Around 1960 there was a book written by the editor of the Scientific American, entitled 

“Science in the Cause of Man.” The editor-author pointed out that if hours of work had remained in 

1960, as they had been in 1900, some 27 million additional citizens would have been unemployed in the 

United States of America. We need, because of examples like this, to move to a lower legal schedule of 

weekly hours. And I say apart from every other consideration, Mr. Minister, it is 22 years since the 

present basic weekly hours of work were legislated. I say that it is high time that some improvement 

factor be worked into this legislation. I ask the Minister to consider 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

951 

 

this. The Government has an imperative duty to consider what I think is a very, very vital aspect. 

 

To sum up on these remarks, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Government should consider an immediate 

adjustment in basic minimum wages and the lowering of the legal weekly hours of work in this 

province. A minimum wage of at least $1.50 an hour should be considered immediately by this 

Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — If the Government does not see fit to act on this recommendation, and your comments 

seem to indicate that you won‟t, may I suggest that at least the $1.25 minimum wage be introduced. I 

point out that the Government has been dragging its feet to an almost incredible degree with respect to 

the $1.25 per hour minimum. After all, the Federal Government has had this rate in effect now for some 

three years without any corresponding action on the part of this Liberal Government. 

 

I used to sit on your side of the House, Mr. Minister, and I used to listen to some of your colleagues talk 

about matters of this kind. We at that time had the highest single minimum wage across Canada, when 

there was no legal Federal minimum wage and when it was a very difficult thing for a Province like 

Saskatchewan to maintain the higher kind of a rate because of the implied competition from other 

provinces. But we did it. Now the Federal Government has acted. Now every one of the large provinces 

has acted to effect a $1.25 per hour minimum wage. I say that, when the accusation is made that you are 

dragging your feet, it is a matter of fact and not a matter of opinion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I comment on one other aspect with respect to labor standard, that is with respect to 

the part-time worker. At the present time the differential in pay between the part-time worker and the 

full-time worker is such that employers are much encouraged to hire part-time labor. I don‟t need to tell 

Members of the House that we are in a period when we have evening shopping and there is a great deal 

of employment of part-time people. This kind of a condition has a disrupting effect on employment 

conditions generally. I say that it does not encourage a stable income for the family breadwinner. 

Formerly, the regulations of the CCF Government established a part-time hourly regulation that, being 

somewhat higher, rather considerably higher, for the worker concerned who was only required to turn 

out for three or four hours a day, constituted a very strong inducement for the employer to hire a worker 

on a full-time weekly basis. This Bill, or the regulations that are foreseen under the new Act, should 

expressly provide for the kind of differential that formerly obtained, if working people in this province 

are to have real protection, the kind of protection that did to some extent at least obtain previously. 

 

I say again that protection for the part-time worker, Mr. Speaker, is becoming more and more important 

in industry, especially in service industry. I want to point out to the House that the numbers of 

employees in service industry have, because of all the known conditions, risen very sharply, so that 

today we probably have something like 68 per cent of all employees in this country in the service 

industry. That is why the regulations, I have suggested, are of first rate importance. I have indicated that 

the present Government has not taken the 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

952 

steps in the Bill before us to provide these conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was looking not so long ago at the average wage and salary figures for Saskatchewan. I 

note that a very large number of the service employees in Saskatchewan are on very low wages indeed. 

In fact the wages of employees in much of the service industry, such as for example, hotels, motels, and 

the like are about half the average weekly wage of all employees in Saskatchewan. That is why I have 

chosen tonight to speak as I have in terms of the importance of doing something additional, something 

re-inforcing in the Bill that we now have before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the record of the present Government with respect to amendments to the pieces of 

legislation that are being consolidated by this Bill is certainly a very poor one. I have given the Minister 

every bit of credit that is coming to his Government for some changes that have been made. None of 

them, are fundamental in the terms that I have been urging during the last 20 minutes. The main change 

that I can cite, to give all possible credit, is the one implemented in 1967 that enables employees that are 

owed money by wage-defaulting employers to be able to collect these wages on somewhat more 

favorable conditions. But apart from that, this Statute points out clearly enough that in the five years that 

this Government has been in power, progress in labor standards has been practically stationary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies — Now is the time, now is the opportunity for the Government to change this legislation in 

the manner that I have suggested, so that some genuine, meaningful, forward steps can be taken. The 

fact that the Bill comes before us without these proposals is significant of the apathetic viewpoint that 

this Government has respecting such changes. Other legislation before us illustrates that, while its 

attitude on labor standards changes is anything but enthusiastic, it will go to almost any lengths when it 

comes to restrictive measures against the employees of this Province. 

 

It may be that in bringing this consolidation before the House, the Government is attempting to make it 

look as though it is implementing new and decisive changes. As I have said, this is definitely not so. The 

Bill we are asked to approve here tonight is simply a consensus of good work done in the past, and not 

basically because of the activities of this Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to be supporting this Bill as will my colleagues, because of the positive fact of 

consolidation, as well as the obvious point that it represents existing legislation in a collected and a 

combined form. I will be wanting very earnestly to question the Minister in Committee in ample detail, 

and I shall review some of the proposals that I have referred to at the time the Bill comes to the 

Committee stage. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few remarks to those made by 

the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South. I can‟t help but be reminded of the promises made by the 

Liberal party when they did try to gain office — the promises that they made to the workers 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

953 

 

in 1964. They said, if they were elected, they would maintain and improve workers‟ wages, vacations, 

hours of work, compensation, trade union rights and security. Well, Mr. Speaker, let us take a look at the 

first three promises made, as far as improving workers‟ wages, vacations, and hours of work. The Hon. 

Member for Moose Jaw South has already described the record of this Government. I will say this at the 

outset that the Bill that is before us consolidating the eight main labor Statutes is perhaps a worthwhile 

move on the part of the Government. It is going to probably simplify things, but really when you take 

away that main feature of consolidation there is nothing new. There is nothing new. There is really 

nothing new for the workers to look forward to. There is no reduction in hours of work as was promised. 

There is no improvement in annual vacations. There is no improvement in minimum wages. There is no 

improvement in other standards. Mr. Speaker, you will recall, since I entered this House I have made 

several attempts to bring in a Bill to reduce hours of work. I proposed in 1965 that hours of work be 

reduced from the present 44 hours in the city to 40 hours, from 48 in the country to 44. In fact I 

proposed that all communities with 1,000 population or more should have a 40-hour work week legal 

standard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — You will recall that in 1965 the Liberals voted against it. In 1966 they voted against it. 

In 1967 they voted against it. Mr. Speaker, in 1968 when I tried to move first reading of the Bill and get 

leave to present the Bill, every Member opposite stood up and voted against my right to introduce the 

Bill. These people opposite say they are friends of labor. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me suggest what the 

Minister can do if he wants to show a hand of friendship to labor. I would suggest, before this Bill goes 

much further, that he bring in amendments and agree to House amendments that in this Labour 

Standards Bill we will establish a 40-hour work week for all communities with 1,000 population or 

more, and in those communities with a population of less than 1,000 an immediate reduction from 48 to 

44. Another improvement that the Minister can make is in regard to annual vacation. It has been quite a 

number of years since annual vacations were improved in this province. It was really the former CCF 

Government on taking office that legislated two weeks vacation after one year of service. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe it was in 1957 that it moved to three weeks after five years of service. Mr. Speaker, I would 

suggest that the time is right now to bring in an amendment for three weeks annual vacation after one 

year of service, and it‟s time we moved to four weeks annual vacation. Here I suggest four weeks annual 

vacation after 10 years of service. The Government has recognized the principle of four weeks annual 

vacation in many of its collective bargaining agreements in respect to Government employees and 

Crown corporation employees. Many private industries have recognized four weeks annual vacation as a 

right of the worker. I might suggest that it is not asking too much at this time to move with a step of four 

weeks annual vacation after 10 years of service. 

 

The Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) has discussed the need for improving the 

minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, as I understand it the Economic Council of Canada has said that any 

person or any family earning an income of less than $3,000 a year is living in poverty. Saskatchewan 

minimum wages of 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

954 

$1.05 an hour in cities and 95 cents in rural areas is a sub-minimum level, a level below the poverty 

level established by the Economic Council of Canada. In fact, the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South 

has described clearly that Saskatchewan has the dubious honor of having the lowest minimum wage 

west of Ontario. Ontario, as of the first of January this year, established a minimum wage of $1.30 an 

hour, in general and in case of construction industry, $1.55 an hour. Saskatchewan has only $1.05 an 

hour minimum in the case of cities and 95 cents an hour in places other than cities. The minimum wage 

in respect of part-time employees has not been increased in many instances, since 1964, Mr. Speaker. 

Another suggestion I would like to make to the Minister to consider is an improvement in the case of 

statutory holidays. Eight legal statutory holidays in this province have been an established norm for 

many years. I suggest that the time has come for us to add Boxing Day and the first Monday in August 

as a citizens‟ day to be added to the list of the eight we now have. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Add you birthday as well! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — If the Minister is prepared to go that far, I will welcome the proposal. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . His picture on the red square . . . “Smishek Day.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . Mr. Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, let me refer a little further in regard to the minimum wage. One of the 

things that is bothersome, in the current proposal, is that no criteria are established for the Minimum 

Wage Board as to how it should operate. It seems to me it is important for us to establish some guide 

lines for the Minimum Wage Board to consider. I would suggest that one of the criteria that should be 

written into the Act, is the rising cost of living. It should be recognized as one reason to raise minimum 

wages. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — The other criterion is the increase in productivity. The third one is to have some 

relationship between the minimum wage and the regular or the average wage in the province. Mr. 

Speaker, I notice that last year, according to the Annual Report of this Department between 1967 and 

1968, the average wage in Saskatchewan was $95.68 a week. At that time we had a $38 minimum. The 

minimum has been increased to $1.05 an hour where there is a 40-hour work week, $42. However, in 

that same period the actual wages or the average wages increased, in Saskatchewan by $6.68. This is a 

demonstration of how the workers in this province continually fall behind. I was interested in reading an 

article the other day, Mr. Speaker, in the newspaper that the average minimum wage in the case of farm 

labor in Canada was $1.27 an hour. Now, here in Saskatchewan, the legal minimum wage is below what 

is the going rate in the case of farm labor in Canada. In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, 

farm people do provide living accommodations and board for the farm laborer. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

955 

 

Blank page due to numbering error. 



 

March 4, 1969 

 

 

956 

In the case of industry it does not provide such things to the wage earners. These are areas that need to 

be given consideration. One other area that was completely missed in as far as establishing some 

protection and some standards is in regard to women‟s employment. Here prior to this Government 

taking office, we had a women‟s bureau established. That bureau was dissolved and no legislation has 

been passed ever since. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in this Labor Standards Bill, here is an 

opportunity for us to establish some minimum standards and some protection for women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Bill as far as it goes. But in the areas that I have just described it is 

completely inadequate. I would hope that the Minister will see fit to bring in appropriate amendments. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


