



















































Hansard: February 25, 1969


609 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

16th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 25, 1969. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Biggar): — Mr. Speaker, I note that we have today, as we have almost every day, a 

number of students from various parts of the Province and I want to welcome them all. In particular 

today, Mr. Speaker, may I welcome a group of students from Perdue, I understand the grade 8, 9 and 12 

classes. If there is any doubt about the location of Perdue in the minds of the Members, may I say that 

Saskatoon is about 40 miles east of Perdue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The students attending the Perdue high school at least come from some of the other 

communities around and the general rural neighborhood. This is an entirely agricultural community, 

very active and very energetic. They have made their mark at times in the field of junior sports and other 

competitions. I am sure all of us here, Mr. Speaker, through you, welcome them here and hope that they 

have had a good stay in Regina and that they will have a safe trip back home to their homes in that 

community. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, may I on your 

behalf introduce to the Members of the Legislature a class of 23 grade 10 students from the Riverview 

high school in my constituency of Moose Jaw South. They are in the east gallery and they are 

accompanied by Mr. Norman Sanders, who is the composition and literature teacher. The House will 

probably be interested to know, Mr. Speaker, that this class has organized itself in a mock parliament 

and are looking with special interest therefore to the conduct of the proceedings this afternoon. Mr. 

Speaker, Members will want to commend them for this activity and I hope that they will learn something 

valuable and interesting here this afternoon. 

 

I would also like to welcome two other groups from Moose Jaw North — Mr. Snyder will be doing this 

— Pallister Heights school and Lindale school. I hope that all three high school classes this afternoon 

will have entertaining and interesting experiences and return home safely. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

610 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I. H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan); — I want to welcome some students this afternoon that didn‘t 

show up. I don‘t know why they didn‘t show up. They were supposed to come in and I was about to 

blame the Minister of Highways for that little road he got through Weyburn, because it is such a mess. 

You can‘t tell whether you are going to Estevan or coming to Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — We tried to talk them out of putting that road through Weyburn in the first place. 

We wanted to go around Weyburn. This was planned by the former Government, so I guess they went 

ahead with it. 

 

On the other hand, I am not so sure, maybe they got stuck when they got to the outskirts of Regina, 

because in Estevan we are used to cleaner streets. With the Major here, maybe he can get up and 

welcome the students that haven‘t arrived this afternoon for me. This is also in conjunction with my 

Resolution, Sir, that you welcome students in the first place. I would say that any students coming from 

the south would be better to proceed right straight through to the beautiful city of Saskatoon, where the 

streets are wide and clean. If the Major would want to welcome my students, when his time comes, 

maybe he could show his good faith by buying them a cup of coffee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G. T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, my pleasure is doubled today in welcoming 

two groups of students from the constituency of Moose Jaw North. I want to first of all welcome a group 

from Lindale school, some 60 of them. They are situated in the west gallery behind me, accompanied I 

understand by Mr. Scoraback and I am sure that all Members will want to welcome them here. 

 

Additionally in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, are 30 grade five students, one of the younger groups that 

we have had attending this Legislature. I am sure that all Members will want to join with me in 

welcoming this class of students accompanied by Mrs. Wood, to the Legislature today. They have had a 

tour of the steel mill and had a very full day. I am sure they have enjoyed their day and we trust that the 

proceedings here won‘t in any way destroy the image they have had of the Legislature so far. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce through you and 

to the Members of the House, 44 students of the grade 7 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

611 

class of Pleasant Hill school in Saskatoon Riversdale. Members will know that Pleasant Hill school is 

one of the oldest and I might add one of the finest schools in the Saskatoon school system. The students 

are accompanied by Mr. Rathgeber and Mr. Giddons. I wish them a good trip back home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

ANNUAL REPORTS — SASKATCHEWAN HOSPITAL PLAN, MEDICARE PLAN 

 

Mr. W. E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 

question to the Hon. Minister of Health (Mr. Grant). I am wondering when we can expect the Annual 

Report for the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan and the Medical Care Insurance Plan tabled in the 

House. 

 

Hon. G. B. Grant (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, well before the deadline. 

 

BILLS 36, 37 AND 38 NOT RECEIVED 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Government. I 

see on the Blue Paper for second reading today are Bills Nos. 36, 37 and 38, yet we have not received 

them on our desks. I wonder when we may receive these Bills. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Well, I am sure you will be receiving them momentarily, but 

I will look into it. Nos. 36, 37 and 38? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — I would suggest Mr. House Leader that maybe the Bills won‘t be called today for 

second reading, because we haven‘t had a chance to look at them. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I think they are coming behind you. That‘s fair enough. I think the Bills will be there in a 

minute or two. 

 

CUSTOMARY HONOR TO SPORTSMANSHIP 

 

Mr. G. R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I am of the opinion 

that it has been a custom of this House on previous occasions to honor various of its worthy 

Saskatchewan champions for their endeavors and for their activities in sportsmanship. I am wondering, 

Sir, if this honorable custom is being planned with respect to the Canadian Schoolboy Curling 

Champions, the Bob Miller rink from Shellbrook. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

612 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — The matter is under consideration. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

MISQUOTE IN LEADER POST 

 

Mr. D. W. Michayluk (Redberry): — I rise on a point of privilege to bring to the attention of the Hon. 

Members of the House and to the members of the press. Appearing in this morning‘s edition of The 

Leader Post, a statement has been attributed to me by the press that the Liberal Government has, since 

its election, imposed $80,000 increase in taxes. If my memory serves me correctly, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that in the course of my Budget Debate speech I mentioned that an increase was $80 million, I mean $80 

million instead of $80,000. I don‘t mind being misquoted, but when I am misquoted 1000 times 

downwards . . . I would ask the press for a correction on this statement. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

COVERAGE UNDER SASKATCHEWAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to 

direct a question to the Minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. In view of the 

fact that any changes will take place very shortly in either The Automobile Insurance Act, the 

compulsory section or Saskatchewan Government Insurance rates, can the Minister (Mr. Boldt) assure 

the House that the coverage in both instances will remain the same. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — I won‘t assure the House that the coverage will be the same. 

The coverage will be increased. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to put 

a supplementary question to the Minister of Highways, the Minister in charge of the Insurance Office. 

Will he assure the House that he will give an announcement to the House of any changes in coverage 

prior to the time that he gives a public announcement with respect to it? 

 

Mr. Boldt: — No, I can‘t do that. The SGIO Agency Conference is on Friday and Saturday and the 

proposed changes will be brought forward to the agents. A discussion will take place at Saskatoon this 

coming weekend. I don‘t intend to make the announcement to the House before the agents will know 

about the changes. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

613 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a supplementary question. Could the Minister assure us that 

there are no reductions in coverage. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — I think that question was answered before. 

 

LOCATION OF SPRUCE HOME ROAD 

 

Mr. W. J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the 

Day, I note in the press in a report of yesterday‘s debate that the Minister said once again that the road 

from Spruce Home to the mill was not in my constituency. Would the Minister be so kind as to correct 

that statement or tell me what constituency that road has been built in. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member knows that I did not say that that road was not in his 

constituency. I said that was not his road, that is the road for the pulp mill! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Steuart 

(Provincial Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the chair and the proposed amendment thereto, by 

Mr. Blakeney (Regina Centre). 

 

Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise in this Budget Debate. 

 

The years of drought back in the thirties was more than a disconcerting factor in the hearts and souls of 

the farmers of Saskatchewan. It left Mr. Farmer almost in a realm of despair. At the time, with debts 

piling up higher than could be casually observed with any sense of values, with the soil being moved 

around faster than even the most modern machinery of that day would be expected to cope with, there 

appeared to be no ready answer to a situation that could only lead to a complete loss of land financially, 

and a growing feeling of insecurity as to the potential value of the agricultural industry. But a sudden 

miracle happened, and at the time when almost everyone had given up all hope, there suddenly appeared 

on the scene, a ray of sunshine. In July, 1933, the Regina Manifesto, a program offered by a Socialist 

party was promising under its Section 4 security of tenure for the farmer upon his farm, on conditions to 

be laid down by individual provinces; insurance against unavoidable crop failure; removal of the tariff 

burden from the operations of agriculture; encouragement of producer and consumer co-operatives. This 

Section 4 was a grand and ideal plan, 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

614 

which could give security to the farmer, promise him adequate protection as a small farmer, and relieve 

him of any doubts as to the possibility of ever losing his land. But, Mr. Speaker, the only sad part in this 

true philosophy of this great Magna Carta was more truly expounded in the first part which stated: 

 

We believe that these evils, insecurity and hardship can be removed only in a planned and socialized 

economy, in which our natural resources and the principal means of production and distribution are 

owned, controlled and operated by the state. 

 

This spirit of controversy which was a part of the first document ever put out by the Socialists of 

Saskatchewan has since been the basic method of operation. Although the clamor has always been — 

help out the farmer — the true nature of their policies has been aimed at destroying the same group that 

at various times helped them get into power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Schmeiser: — In 1935, The Case for Socialism was written by Fred Henderson, and published by 

the Socialist party. This publication was sold at Socialist meetings around the time of the 1938 election 

and was intended for use in Socialist study groups. On page 21, I quote: 

 

It is this private ownership of land and capital which we Socialists indict as the root cause of poverty. 

We challenge its justice and its right to exist or continue. We trace directly to it the ruin, the wide-

spread misery and destitution of the mass of the people. 

 

Again from the same book on page 23, I quote: 

 

The fight against private ownership of land and capital, the fight for Socialism, for the nation‘s control 

of its own resources, is the last fight in the age-long struggle of humanity for freedom; a struggle 

which can have but one end. And that end is the final disappearance from human society of the right of 

an owning class to live upon the labor of a subject class. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this, I believe, makes it rather obvious that the Socialists did not have in 1938 the desire or 

the intention of assisting the farmer in protecting his rights of ownership, and the astute observer can 

readily see that there was now only a time factor involved before a realistic application of voiced 

policies could be effectively made operative. 

 

Increments of land socialization became more evident as the years progressed. In a radio broadcast 

reported in The Commonwealth of December 13, 1944, Joe Phelps, the Minister of Natural Resources, 

of the Socialist party in power said: 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

615 

The new Mineral Taxation Act was perhaps one of the most important pieces of legislation. It is a new 

tax and is the first step by the Department in restoring the natural resources to the state. 

 

The Commonwealth of November 14, 1945 was a bit more explicit when it said, ―Mineral rights over 

large areas will revert to the Crown.‖ That is in fact what happened, and because many farmers 

defaulted on paying their mineral tax, their mineral rights were confiscated. 

 

It might interest our Socialist friends to be reminded that the present Government has abolished this 

mineral tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Schmeiser: — Another step taken by the Socialist Government about this time to assist in proving 

their true intentions in regard to farmers was their refusal to sell provincially owned lands to veterans, 

but rather to offer them 33-year leases. 

 

Mr. H. D. Hainley, on January 10, 1943, said: 

 

The CCF has considered socialization of land. There are many advantages to the farmer from some 

sort of socialization. We can learn much from Russia in this respect. Social security cannot be obtained 

as long as we leave the control of our production in the hands of private individuals. 

 

Then Colin Cameron in the CCF news on January 27, 1944, ventured on a criticism of the CCF‘s official 

position with regard to the place of the family farm and suggested that such a position was an illogical 

one for the Socialists to take in theory, and that in actual practice we should have sooner or later to 

accept the idea of collectivism in agriculture as in other lines of production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, suddenly bad weather occurred in 1951 and 1952. The grain companies were refusing to 

take damp grain into country elevators because terminal drying facilities were overloaded. To help meet 

this situation what did the Socialists do to a maximum of 1,000 miles on one-way travel for grain dryers 

brought into the province for farm drying. Sixty-five commercial dryers were brought in under this 

policy and assistance paid was about $11,000. 

 

Just a method of comparison, the present Government is faced with a similar plight, but already 1,340 

dryers are operating across the province. 

 

In the month of August, 1956, the Winnipeg Declaration of Principles of the CCF presented what 

appeared to be a change in 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

616 

policy and said: 

 

The CCF will protect and make more widespread the ownership of family farms by those who work 

them, of homes by those who live in them, and of all personal possessions necessary for the well-being 

of the Canadian people. 

 

It was only a few weeks later that all illusions were dispelled when on September 7th of the same year, 

David Lewis, National Chairman of the CCF said: 

 

The party‘s Winnipeg Declaration represents no change in the policy. In my opinion, the people of 

Canada have had a false idea of the goals of the CCF. This is why the Regina Manifesto has been 

superseded by the Winnipeg Declaration, but the goals are unchanged. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our Socialist friends are deprived of their mandate and are now resorting to political 

expedience in their quest for getting votes. All of us who have lived in Saskatchewan are well aware of 

this Socialist trademark. Their motto has always been, ―If it doesn‘t bring you votes don‘t do it, but if it 

does bring you votes, try it over and over again.‖ What the old party members are afraid to voice in the 

ranks of the farming population is still openly confirmed in the Young NDP. The Times Herald of 

Moose Jaw reported on January 20th of this year, ―Saskatchewan Young New Democrats Sunday voted 

to press for the nationalization of all farm lands in Canada.‖ 

 

Mind you, Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new for the people of Saskatchewan, as there was a time when 

the Socialists were in power and did nationalize practically everything but the farmers‘ land. The little 

interest, which is becoming more and more evident, that these Socialists have for the farmers, would 

make any farm owner cringe with fear at the remote possibility of their return to power. This could only 

mean that every farmer in Saskatchewan would lose his lands to the state. The natural forthcoming step 

also becomes more evident. As soon as the land becomes state-owned, there is no need for any kind of 

municipal government, as has happened in Russia and China and as would naturally happen here in 

Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Speaker, the history of the Socialist party in Saskatchewan bears out the fact that it has always been 

dominated by a certain segment of our society. In its early years and humble beginnings it was a farm-

dominated movement. Since it changed its name from CCF to NDP it has become dominated by the 

labor unions. At its last convention the treasurer reported that the party is financed by membership fees 

and by affiliation of trade union organizations. He went on to show that out of an income of $292,000 in 

1967, $21,000 came from membership fees and $271,000 from trade union fees and other miscellaneous 

contributions. If we are to quote Tommy Douglas who once said, ―He who pays the piper, calls the 

tune,‖ I feel that every Saskatchewan farmer has reason to be scared of the baited promises 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

617 

that appear on individual platforms and never become a real part of their national policies of our 

Socialist friends. 

 

If you are still suffering under the delusions that are sponsored by the leaders of the NDP, who maintain 

that they are a party for all classes, keep in mind the words of Len Wallace, an official of the Wholesale 

Retail Workers Union, who told the convention: 

 

The party had better make up its mind, that is, make up its mind to the fact that labor is dominant in the 

NDP, and the farmer is of little concern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Schmeiser: — I, as a Member from the Watrous constituency, as a farmer and as a Member 

interested in the general welfare of all those in my constituency, am very disturbed with this marriage to 

labor unions. I am very disturbed by the policies that are now part and portion of these various labor 

unions. I am very disturbed by the economic conditions that are sometimes created by the philosophies 

which guide their every movement and the means that are too often used to obtain a certain questionable 

end. I am also disturbed by the pitiful and immoral issues that are brought forward as an excuse to create 

havoc, and break down a society of well-being. The economic discomforts that the pawn workers have 

to suffer while leaders living in plush surroundings are mapping their everyday steps and force them to 

voice an unwilling yes to devastating policies. Workers should no longer be held like pawns in a giant 

chess game but treated as individuals. Many times I have had the personal experience of seeing parents 

who had to send money to their children who were out on strike against their will, to meet payments on 

homes, cars and other belongings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the very valuable potash industry in and around my constituency is disturbed with labor 

problems, and a closer analysis can lead a person to suspect that much of the labor unrest is caused by 

persistent agitation of labor union officials. We have frequent problems which the union workers could 

easily solve by conciliation. There are times when a strike is necessary and the right of the workers to 

withdraw their services should be upheld and maintained. However, strike measures should never be 

used as a lever of labor officials, or a method of throwing their weight around. 

 

At the Noranda Mine it is estimated that 35 per cent of the time wasted as a form of strike between June 

30 and September 20th, 1968 was actually due to illegal work stoppages. In January the unions struck 

over what they considered to be inadequate toilet conditions. But investigations showed that the alleged 

and also actual inadequate toilet conditions were the result of vandalism and destruction of private 

property, for which the union members were themselves responsible. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

618 

Mr. Speaker, trade unions exist for the purpose of assisting workers in obtaining a greater share of 

products or services, which the members produce for the benefit of the public. The economic burden of 

practically every strike is usually borne by our primary producers. As such we have to admit that our 

friend the farmer is hit the hardest, as every price increase is then built up into the costs of materials and 

services he must have in order to operate. 

 

Under The Trade Union Act, a union that truly represents a majority in a particular unit can insist that 

the employer deduct union dues from a worker‘s wages. By the same token it appears to me that the 

employee should have a say in his union. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to see a union call for a secret 

ballot on which at lest 75 per cent of the members would have to vote before any strike action can be 

called, also with a cooling-off period of a certain length of time. Unless this is done both the union and 

the individual strikers could be sued for damages by the employer or anyone else who is legally 

inconvenienced by said strike. Both the companies and the unions must stop saying that they want more 

light on the subject, because there is ample light to reveal the nature of the problem, and the solution that 

should be applied. It would also create a better picture of justice if the charges laid during a strike, were 

not dropped as soon as the strike ended. It should be up to the courts of our land to decide if a crime has 

been committed, if the accused is guilty and to assess the proper penalty. By so doing, it would increase 

the usefulness of our courts and would certainly discourage any intimidation and violence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to emphasize that keeping the peace in labor relations is a two-way 

proposition. Employers and unions have a conscious choice in the kind of relationship they wish to have. 

The management should have a positive acceptance of the union by collective bargaining while yet 

running the business profitably. The union leaders on the other hand should not police the company, but 

should act as a protest organization and yet remain partners of management. Unions that are strong, 

responsible and democratic, understand and realize that the job interests of their members depend upon 

the economic success of the business, with which they are presently associated. This is what unions and 

strikes were intended to be and, Mr. Speaker, I am wondering if this is what our Socialist friends are 

presently doing. Is their warm shoulder towards labor unions a step towards solving present day 

problems, or is it a dying person‘s last hope and attempt to get back into the driver‘s seat? Is it that at 

last our Socialists are becoming honest and are now endeavoring to show their true colors, to socialize 

the farmer and let the labor unions run the country with the same philosophies that are being used when 

strikes are engineered and promoted. I believe, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province will have no 

part of such a policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with great pleasure I will support the main 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

619 

motion and vote against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J. R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this 

debate, I hasten to congratulate the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) on the Budget he presented to this 

House last week. I also wish to compliment him on his usual capable presentation. The Budget has been 

aptly described as a responsible one. I couldn‘t describe it better. 

 

During this period of inflationary trends and extremely high interest rates, I believe the policies adopted 

by the Treasurer for the coming fiscal year are desirable and commendable. To have produced a 

balanced Budget without any significant tax increases indicates the competency of our Treasurer. It is 

evident that he is well qualified for his present important position. 

 

Despite their lengthy and usual loud outcries, I am certain the Opposition speakers have not impressed 

and will not impress anyone except possibly themselves. This is a good Budget. The public recognizes it 

as such and my friends of the Opposition know it is too. I don‘t envy them the task they consider they 

must perform in criticizing everything and anything emanating from this side of the Chamber, even a 

good Budget. 

 

I am not convinced that they are advocates of more and higher taxes, borrowing money at current high 

interest rates, nor deficit financing. Yet, Mr. Speaker, to implement their suggestions and to be able to 

satisfy even part of their criticisms, the Treasurer would have to resort to one or a combination of all 

these methods, to provide the huge sums necessary. Again, I say, the general public know and the 

Members opposite know that the financial program proposed by the Treasurer in the Budget is the 

proper and responsible one at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, due to health problems during the 1968 session of this Legislature, I was not able to 

participate in the debates. Hence this is the first session and first occasion I have had to speak since my 

election in 1967. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I therefore, wish to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank those both in the House 

and outside, who rendered their assistance, co-operation and consideration during my illness of a year 

ago. I sincerely appreciate the many kindnesses extended to me at that time. 

 

During the eight-year period I had the honor and pleasure of representing the Pelly Constituency in this 

Legislature, 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

620 

from 1956 to 1964, I became acquainted with many of those who are still Members in this House. Of 

course, now on both sides there are a number of new faces and I hope I shall have the opportunity of 

becoming better acquainted with them as time progresses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I propose to deal briefly with a few items directly associated with the Department of 

Natural Resources. During the year past, production of forest products was dramatically up from 

previous years. 1968 production will be among the highest recorded in the province. Members of our 

staff have been busily occupied in pulpwood and saw timber cruising as well as performing such duties 

as logging inspection to assure conservation, and good logging operation practices are being observed 

by the operators in our forests. 

 

During the past year our two nurseries at Big River and Prince Albert produced 17 million seedlings and 

transplants. In Northern Saskatchewan 440,000 plantings took place and 330,000 in southern locations. 

The perpetuation of our forest resource is our constant concern. 

 

The past summer was a bad fire season, particularly in the early part. We fought 328 forest fires last 

season and over 340,000 acres were burned over. Cost of forest fire suppression exceeded $1.5 million. 

With the abundant moisture received last fall and heavy snow fall this winter, we are hoping for a light 

fire season this coming summer. 

 

Production of pulpwood for the Prince Albert Pulp Mill, of course, accounted for much of our 1968 

forest production increase. This mill will utilize more than 500,000 cords of pulpwood annually in the 

production of bleached kraft pulp. I hope all Members in this House have had an opportunity to visit and 

inspect this large plant. It is one of the most up-to-date pulp mills in operation anywhere. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — From the wood obtained in our forest area, a very high grade of pulp is produced, which 

is in demand on the world markets. There is no question but that this large development, representing an 

investment in excess of $65 million, will be a successful project. If not now, in the future this venture 

will be recognized as one of the real achievements of this Government. The effect on employment 

possibilities in the northern part of our province is already noticeable and the benefits will increase as 

time passes. This is especially true when related to our citizens of Indian origin. It has had, and will 

have, a beneficial effect on the economy of Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

I have been rather amazed at some of the disparaging remarks made by some of my friends across the 

way in regard to this industry. It would appear they are hopeful it will fail. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

621 

All I can say in this regard is that it appears to me to follow the line of the old fable of Sour Grapes as 

far as they are concerned and indicates their wishful thinking. 

 

I recall over the years hearing great forecasts from the former CCF Government regarding the 

establishment of a pulp mill in Saskatchewan. This usually occurred shortly before general elections. 

Unfortunately it never materialized during their term of office, and little wonder with the philosophies 

and Socialist theories regarding private enterprise they consistently expounded in those years, and still 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — At long last we in Saskatchewan have a pulp mill to utilize forest products which were 

going to waste for many years and costing the taxpayer annually substantial sums to protect from fire 

and disease with little or no return. Future demand and prices for pulp are of interest to not only the pulp 

producers, but also to the Government. These two features determine the extent of production and the 

success and prosperity of the pulp industry. It appears we need have no concern in this connection. The 

future demand seems most favorable. 

 

In an address by R.N. Fowler, President of the Canadian Pulp and Paper Association, delivered at the 

annual luncheon of the Association in Montreal on January 31st last, which is very recent, he stated 

prospects for pulp production and sales are much brighter for 1969 and for the future. He said for the 

first time in several years the increase in world demand for chemical pulp exceeds the increase in world 

production capacity. This means, of course, good markets and likely more favorable prices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to deal briefly with our parks and recreation in the province. Almost two 

million people visited our major Provincial parks during the past season, as compared to slightly over 

one million in 1964. There was also a decided increase in use of our camp grounds and recreation sites, 

particularly in the northern forest areas. A great portion of this interest can be attributed to improved 

roads and camp facilities, which have received top priority by the Department. Camping permits issued 

within Provincial parks increased from 10,000 in 1964 to 26,000 in 1968. Camping permits issued at the 

four Trans-Canada highway camp grounds increased by 21 per cent per year from 1964 to 1968. 

 

General park revenues have more than doubled in the past four years. Capital expenditure has risen 

likewise during the same period. Park improvement capital expenditures for the five-year period prior to 

1964 amounted to slightly over $3 million. Since 1964 and up to date over $8 million have been spent 

on capital improvements. From this record, Mr. Speaker, the Government certainly cannot be accused of 

any neglect of 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

622 

outdoor recreation facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Supplementing our parks and recreation areas, our highway camp and picnic grounds 

program provides rest stops and overnight camping facilities for highway travellers and tourists. There 

are 120 such sites scattered across the province. They range in development from sites with such 

amenities as showers, laundries, running water, modern rest rooms and electrified sites to simple rest 

stops providing only picnic tables, a drinking water supply and modest rest rooms. Twenty-three new 

sites have been added and developed in recent years. The addition of two more in 1969 will probably 

bring this program to a close, for the time being at least. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it will be of interest to the Members of the House to quote a few of the comments 

received from park and camp ground users during the last season. One stated: 

 

The best Provincial park in Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec. We plan on 

stopping here every trip, possibly one week next year. 

 

Another is: 

 

Three years travel coast to coast. This park still tops. Puts Ontario and British Columbia to shame. 

 

Another is: 

 

We are over 2,000 miles from home and this is the nicest park we have been in. 

 

Another comment: 

 

The best laid-out park, the neatest, the best kept of anything we have yet seen which includes British 

Columbia, Alberta, Washington, Idaho, Montana and Wyoming. 

 

The final comment was: 

 

Provincial parks across Canada should use your parks as examples. 

 

Such comments are very gratifying and point out the high standard of planning and maintenance carried 

out by our staff members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — There are three new park and recreation areas 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

623 

receiving special development attention by the Department of Natural Resources. One is Lake 

Diefenbaker, where approximately 40,000 acres have been set aside for public enjoyment. This area has 

three Provincial parks under development. There are eight lake access points, which are boat launching 

ramps, already constructed. Three cottage sub-divisions are under development. In this area 1,300,000 

trees have been planted in the last 2 ½ years. 

 

Blackstrap Reservoir provides a major recreation site currently under development. This should prove of 

real benefit to citizens in the Saskatoon area. Camping and picnic facilities will be provided here 

together with several cottage subdivisions. 

 

As a result of improved access roads, expanded new camp facilities, and the opening of new areas of 

high recreation attraction, patronage of our Provincial forest areas has shown a marked increase. In the 

Candle Lake area for one example, usage has more than doubled in the past four years. 

 

In recent years, emphasis has been given to providing an adequate supply of good drinking water in 

parks and at recreation sites. For this purpose 138 new wells have been developed. Water distribution 

and sewage systems have been installed in three Provincial parks and at two Trans-Canada highway 

camp grounds. This program will be proceeded with until all our major parks and major camp grounds 

have the benefit of these services. 

 

Now I wish to mention, Mr. Speaker, our Regional Parks Program briefly. This is a program in which 

the Provincial Government, local governments and citizens are involved in joint development. They are 

designed chiefly to serve local citizens within a radius of 25 to 35 miles. There are 70 of these parks in 

operation in the province, 40 of which have been established since 1964. They involve the participation 

of over 300 municipal governments of all levels, representing over 300,000 people all contributing their 

share toward 40 per cent of cost assumed by the municipal participants. Capital assets in the 70 regional 

parks are estimated in excess of $2.5 million. Records indicate over 600,000 people made use of these 

park facilities in the past season. The involvement of local people creates keen interest in the 

development and protection of regional park properties and assures success of this program. It is a cost-

sharing park program unique to the Province of Saskatchewan and is not practised elsewhere in Canada. 

In my opinion, this is one of our finest programs. 

 

It has been decided that we have arrived at the point where we must pause and assess what has been 

achieved in park and recreational development, and survey, study and plan for future expansion of 

facilities. We must also endeavor to determine the need, the proper locations and extent of new 

development which will be required in the future. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

624 

Periodically, such studies and assessments are essential for adequate planning, if the funds available for 

this purpose are to be utilized in the best advantage. The first step in this study is underway. It will 

provide a province-wide inventory of recreation facilities, and is scheduled for completion in the latter 

part of the current year. 

 

A modest development and expansion program will proceed during 1969. It will not be as extensive as 

during the past four years. Once our future requirements are determined by the studies under way, I 

anticipate increased activity in capital projects related to our recreation and park areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the next few minutes I propose to deal briefly with the problems confronting our native 

people, the registered Indians and Metis. We in Saskatchewan are not alone with such problems but we 

do seem to have a large proportion of them. This is credited to the fact that we have in excess of 70,000 

people of Indian ancestry here. The Government fully realizes the difficulties experienced by a large 

number of these citizens and the low standard of living most of them have to accept. These are not new 

problems, Mr. Speaker, they have been with us for a long time. No one is more concerned and 

sympathetic to this situation than the Premier of this Province (Mr. Thatcher). The Government, led by 

him can rightly claim to have achieved more, initiated more programs and been more active in 

attempting to provide solutions than any other Provincial Government in Canada heretofore. 

 

The early establishment of a Department of this Government to deal exclusively with our native people 

indicates the search for solutions, and the rendering of assistance in various fields and will continue to 

receive top priority. Education, technical and vocational training, assistance for these citizens, will be 

expanded and intensified without delay. Only by providing such assistance to the younger people of 

Indian ancestry can we hope to achieve the results so desirable. Currently there are close to 1,000 native 

students attending special courses in various parts of the province. They are being trained as surveyors, 

barbers, heavy equipment operators, welders, skilled construction workers, mechanics, dental nurses and 

X-ray technicians, as well as in a number of other vocations. 

 

Some of these people are undergoing training in various branches of the Government and Crown 

corporations, in the mines, in the forests, in offices and hospitals, and generally throughout much of the 

economy of the province. Most of these citizens would not have had this opportunity for training and 

subsequently gainful employment but for the action of the Government in providing these benefits. 

 

During the past year the Indian and Metis Branch placed over 1,400 native people in all types of jobs 

and positions, many of them in the Public Service. In the majority of cases, these new employees have 

done extremely well. The records of 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

625 

the Public Service indicate that the job stability and achievements of these new recruits compare 

favorably with those of other national origins entering the Government service. The job placement 

results have been impressive and encouraging. 

 

Last August the Premier established the Task Force on Indian and Metis Opportunity. The interest 

shown by every sector of our society was amazing and most gratifying. The Task Force has been an 

outstanding success. Its activity has made a real impact on the general public and in particular, on 

prospective employers in business, industry and local government. The five committees of the Task 

Force have each accomplished a great deal, and all have done a remarkably good job in their respective 

field of activity. With co-operation and support from the native people, which is essential, we can look 

forward with optimism to the future and to the availability of many more opportunities and a better 

living standard for these native citizens than ever before. 

 

The Government, by adopting a realistic approach to this problem, has made significant progress and 

produced significant results. However, there is no reason for complacency. In order to secure a positive 

advantage in this regard for all concerned, continuous and consistent effort and expansion will have to 

be employed for extended periods of time. 

 

The majority of native people recognize and appreciate the genuine interest this Government has taken 

in them. They, the recipients, are in the best position to assess the degree of achievement obtained 

during a relatively short period of activity. Their response to and comments on the program are most 

favorable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Pelly constituency which I have the honor to represent is chiefly an agricultural one, 

with fine farmsteads and the best of soil. Wheat and coarse grains are the chief field crops and livestock 

production is an important item. Some of the finest cattle and hogs in the province are raised and 

marketed from this area. Diversified farm production has been a benefit particularly in years such as last 

season when large quantities of tough and damp grain resulted from poor harvest weather. 

 

This matter of damp grain is a serious problem. There is no question about the difficulties it has caused 

many of our people. Much as been said about it in recent weeks both inside and outside this House. It 

appears certain that individuals and groups have chosen to attempt to make use of this unfortunate 

situation for purely political purposes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — In my opinion they have grossly exaggerated the facts in many instances. Also they 

claim tremendous losses are 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

626 

inevitable. These same people, of course, try to imply that the fault for delay in drying grain is wholly 

that of the Governments, Federal and Provincial. From the record of the interests and activity of our 

Provincial Government and our Provincial Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) from the outset, it is 

evident that this type of criticism and condemnation is certainly not based on fact. 

 

A large portion of the constituency I represent was affected by wet harvest weather resulting in as large 

a volume of damp grain as possibly in any other area in the province, and much more than some. Due to 

the resourcefulness of our farm people, large quantities of grain were dried early in the season and 

drying has been progressing throughout the winter. It is true, quite true, that some of the farmers in my 

area lacked ready cash to pay for the drying. However, these very people, when assured of interest-free 

cash advances being provided by the Federal Government, are generally satisfied that this immediate 

problem of cash has been resolved for them. From the information I have gathered, this provision has 

met the general need in this area. Most farm people have pride and are realistic enough to know that no 

one receives anything for nothing. They were not clamoring for a hand-out, as so many vociferous 

critics have been doing recently. 

 

I have lived in this province most of my life and have been always closely associated with farm people. 

Over the years, particularly in the area I represent, farmers have been confronted with many problems 

and difficulties, frost damage, rust, hail, drought, and in some years an over-abundance of moisture, low 

prices for their production, quotas, storage problems, along with others. I have noted that irrespective of 

the problems confronting him from time to time, the farmer, with his characteristic resourcefulness, 

industry and sound judgment, has persevered and chiefly by his own initiative he has overcome these 

problems, come what may. The damp grain problem is just another unfortunate circumstance the farmer 

has to deal with. Those who have been and are critical, spreading gloom and doom, do the farm people 

an injustice. They fail to give them credit for what they accomplished in the past, even under more 

serious conditions than at the present time. Personally I question if there will be any substantial spoilage 

of grain, come early summer. I still have faith in the ability of our farm people to cope with the problem 

so that such losses shall not occur. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Of course I readily admit that the most serious and important problem affecting our 

farmers and rural economy is the inability to dispose of the grain produced and currently in storage on 

the farms. If the grain disposal problem can be solved, and I hope it will, then all other problems 

affecting our farm people will be very minor indeed compared to this one. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

627 

At this time I wish to voice my appreciation for the support I received from the good people of the Pelly 

constituency who once again in 1967 elected me as their representative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Also, I know they fully appreciate the honor bestowed on the constituency and myself 

with my appointment to the cabinet a little over a year ago. It is 25 years since the Pelly constituency 

was honored by being represented by a Cabinet Minister, when the late Hon. R. J. M. Parker held the 

position of Minister of Municipal Affairs in the Government of that era. 

 

For many years, Pelly constituency was sorely neglected by the former Socialist Government, 

particularly as concerning highway construction. Currently, thanks to the Minister of Highways (Mr. 

Grant) and (Mr. Boldt) since 1964 we have in this constituency dust-free, oiled and paved highways 

throughout the constituency. Our towns and villages, with the exception of one or two, enjoy the 

benefits of natural gas service, water and sewer systems and paved main streets. 

 

Our rural municipalities have benefited from substantially increased equalization grants. The assistance 

received by the rural municipalities in the construction, gravelling and maintenance of grid roads has 

been most beneficial, as indicated by the decided improvement in our municipal roads within the 

constituency in recent years. Marked improvement and progress by both urban and rural municipalities 

since 1964 is quite evident. 

 

Appreciation of the Liberal Government‘s consideration and assistance in their first three and one-half 

year term of office, as compared to that of the former Socialist Government, and endorsement of the 

Liberal Government was amply expressed by the people of the Pelly constituency in electing me to 

represent them in this House in the last election. 

 

Pelly constituency is one of the most attractive areas in the province. With its rivers, the Assiniboine and 

Swan, numerous lakes and beautiful countryside it can well claim the generally accepted title of The 

Garden of Saskatchewan. The population is very cosmopolitan. Those of Ukrainian and Russian 

ancestry predominate but many other groups of varying national origins are represented. Native Indian 

population on three sizeable Indian reservations add to those of many national and racial origins. I am 

happy to say they are all Canadians working and mingling together in harmony. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because the 1969-70 Budget provides for so many worthwhile programs during the coming 

year, and because I am satisfied it is an honest endeavor to provide our citizens with realistic and 

efficient use of the tax dollar, I shall oppose the amendment and support the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

628 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife): — Mr. Speaker, last year when I listened to the Provincial Treasurer 

present his Budget I was dumbfounded by the vast array of depressive taxes heaped upon the 

Saskatchewan people. On Tuesday last, when I listened to him again, I was dumbfounded by the 

absolute lack of new policies and programs and by the curtailment of others. I had expected to see some 

real action from the revenues of the oppressive taxation of last year‘s Budget, some $35 million worth of 

new taxes. But instead the Budget of 1969 is a hold-the-line cut-services Budget and the people of 

Saskatchewan must be deeply concerned that this Government can so boldly provide so little with the 

huge sum extracted in the last year. 

 

Does this Budget provide some assistance to the old age pensioners or for all the people of 

Saskatchewan in the form of a drug plan? No. Does it provide some help for the farmer? Very little. Or 

the businessman who has extended his credit to the limit? Does it provide anything for new jobs 

especially for the university students? No. Instead it cuts capital building expenditures. Does this Budget 

provide some relief from the increasing cost of living? Of course not. This Liberal Government never 

had any intention of implementing any of the findings of the Batten Royal Commission on Consumer 

Prices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Turning to education, Mr. Speaker, we find that the Government boasts education 

expenditures for the coming year will be $10 million more than last year. But, Mr. Speaker, this increase 

is $9.1 million less than the increase was last year and at a time when demands for university expansion 

and classroom space are so definitely needed. This is a disgraceful allotment for education indeed. The 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) needs to check his arithmetic too, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry he is not in 

his seat. In last year‘s Budget on page 23, he said and I quote: 

 

We propose to increase operating grants to schools by $2.7 million, a total of $60.3 million. 

 

And in this year‘s Budget Speech on page 19 he said, and I quote: 

 

Operating grants will account for $61.3 million, up $4.4 million or 7.7 per cent over the current year‘s 

estimate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if grants totalled $60.3 million last year and totalled $62.3 million for this year, that 

makes an increase of $2 million in my books, not $4.4 million as the Provincial Treasurer said. All I can 

say it is no wonder he has only got a majority of approximately 100 votes in his riding and with that 

kind of mathematical ability he should be downed by at least 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

629 

that many votes next time around. 

 

This $2 million increase in operating grants will never even begin to cover the rising costs of education. 

Even a 4 per cent increase in teachers‘ salaries would cost boards about $3 million. And this makes no 

provision for back pay or no provision for more teachers. This is the smallest increase percentage-wise 

in at least 15 years. What will this mean? Well it is simple, school boards will be faced with another 

crucial financial year. By holding the line on operating grants this Government will force school boards 

to increase mill rates again, as they have had to do quite regularly since this Liberal Government took 

office in 1964. 

 

In the Kinistino unit, for example, rural mill rates did not increase for eight years from 1955 to 1963. 

Then when the Liberals took office, mill rates jumped from 31 to 40, nine mill increase in four years. In 

the Yorkton School Unit, mill rates for urban centres jumped from 39 to 49 mills between 1965 and 

1968, up 10 mills in three years. And the trend is the same in all units across the province. Ask any unit 

secretary, he will tell you. In 1967 local ratepayers across the province paid some $65.7 million in local 

taxes. That‘s almost $70 for every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan for local school taxes. Add to 

this the most recent announcement to curtail the 25 per cent grant paid to school boards for the purchase 

of school buses. 

 

For the coming year, no doubt, mill rates will skyrocket again. The Saskatoon Public School Board has 

suggested that a 6.48 mill rate boost is necessary to keep abreast of the needs of the education in that 

city. But since this Government has demanded its hold-the-line memorandum, that city is now faced 

with paring its services and delaying its kindergarten classrooms, reducing its staff by about 11 while 

expecting a 450 pupil increase. This means only one thing, pushing the pupil-teacher ratio to about 5 to 

1. And a similar situation, Mr. Speaker, is building up in many centres across the province, 

Lloydminster, Prince Albert, North Battleford and others. 

 

What can you expect, Mr. Speaker, from a Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) who has little or no 

understanding of the term ―quality education‖? What can you expect of a Minister who has the 

philosophy, ―Save a buck, quality in education is of no significance for the people of Saskatchewan?‖ 

What can you expect of a Minister of Education whose knowledge of the classroom and the needs of 

teachers and students is practically nil? And what else can the people of Saskatchewan expect from a 

Minister who, when speaking to the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association last November, said that 

increasing the teacher-pupil ratio by one, just one, would result in a net saving of $3½ million? This 

reminds us of the big corporations and their assembly lines, Mr. Speaker. When employees in a car 

factory get a raise in wages, we are told that the assembly line is speeded up just one more notch. And so 

our 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

630 

misguided Minister of Education is using a big business approach to education in our province. Pack 

those classrooms so that no real meaningful exchange of ideas can be encouraged. Stifle initiative and 

creativity in students. Treat them like robots, since teachers in large schools can never really get to know 

many students on a personal basis with large classes. Pack those classes so that teachers are forced to 

rule with an iron hand. Mr. Speaker, assembly line production may be fine for huge corporations but it 

has no place in our modern schools in Saskatchewan today. It is unfair. It is degrading. It does not 

produce quality education. It is almost inhuman. But what can you expect from a Liberal Government 

whose election coffers are filled with finances from huge corporations? But I didn‘t think this would rule 

their philosophy of education, Mr. Speaker. And this is what is happening in Saskatchewan schools 

today because of the Minister‘s complete ignorance of the needs of education. 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — What‘s the ratio? 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — In short, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education is trying to portray himself as the 

constant guardian of educational spending while doing irreparable harm to education in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — I would like to turn for a minute, Mr. Speaker, to teachers‘ salaries. This 

Government by its meagre grants to schools puts the pressure on school boards to hold the line on 

salaries. And so the fight is on again between teachers and school boards. This is a frustrating exercise, 

Mr. Speaker, but a calculated plan by this anti-education Liberal Government to drive a deeper wedge 

between teachers and boards, and teachers and the general public. Why doesn‘t the Government see the 

narrowness of its policies? It may get teachers to accept meagre salary increases, by pressure, but when 

May 25 rolls along, that‘s resignation day, teachers will be leaving by the hundreds, something that the 

Government opposite doesn‘t worry about, at least not by the remarks made in the previous debate by 

Government Members, in spite of the fact that some 500 teachers left Saskatchewan last year and that‘s 

a total of 4.3 per cent of the total teaching force. That‘s the highest exodus since the ‘30s. No wonder 

teachers are leaving when one looks at the salary scales in neighboring provinces and I would like to 

look at some with you. 

 

The median starting salary for class 1 teacher in Saskatchewan‘s school units is $3,650 — and I choose 

the units because they are higher than the cities — $3,650. Alberta pays $360 more for that same 

teacher; Manitoba pays $700 more and British Columbia pays $1,500 more for that same class 1 teacher. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

631 

Let‘s take a look at a class 11 teacher. He gets a yearly median starting salary in Saskatchewan of 

$4,200. Alberta pays $500 more; Manitoba $700 more and British Columbia, $1,575 more. If the Hon. 

Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) and his Government are too naïve to see the implications of these 

statistics, then Saskatchewan is in a sad state indeed. If the Hon. Minister also thinks that his compulsory 

area bargaining is an asset to the whole matter, he should reconsider seriously. Instead, he sits in this 

Legislature very smugly with a know-it-all smirk on his face — you can see it every day. He refused to 

accept my amendment last year which would have allowed the negotiation of items other than salary 

grid at the area level. This amendment would have removed the number one stumbling block to date and 

made area bargaining workable, assisting friendly negotiations between teachers and boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — And this Minister goes around about his constituency saying, ―I am not a Thatcher 

man, so take it easy on me.‖ If he is not a Thatcher man, what is he doing in the Liberal party? He stood 

up and voted for deterrent fees. He brought in compulsory area bargaining. He has been short-changing 

education ever since he took the Education portfolio, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people of Wilkie 

constituency must do all of Saskatchewan a tremendous favor next election. They must defeat this anti-

education Minister at the polls and send a New Democrat to Regina. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Why don‘t you run against him? 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — The ratepayers of Saskatchewan will be grateful. The teachers of Saskatchewan will 

be delighted. The students at all levels at the University will be grateful. And even the cows in Wilkie 

constituency will be more contented because then Mr. McIsaac could return to his veterinary practice in 

Unity and look after their needs there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — You run against him. 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, one of the more glaring examples of neglect and short-changing in 

education and of a callous disregard for the needs of education can best be taken from the Kerrobert unit 

and the town of Macklin in the Minister‘s own constituency. And I know Macklin because I taught there 

some time ago. In this unit, little or no provision has been made for anything but an academic education 

and even that has been a disgraceful effort. There were 12 unqualified and five under-qualified teachers 

in this unit last year. And Macklin has 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

632 

about 26 per cent of the student population in the unit. There is no place for the high school students to 

study except on lavatory and shower room floors which they frequently do. The present grade three 

room and the home economics room were condemned four years ago. Two additional old school houses 

were moved into Macklin to make a total of five old fire-traps to act as temporary classrooms for junior 

high school students. In January of 1968 students at the junior high level did not attend school for 3½ 

days because working conditions were intolerable. This winter they have already lost five days. The 

floor temperature of their outdoor classrooms was measured at 45 degrees while their heads swam in 

stifling hot air. None of these classrooms have been fire inspected; none have a second exit, and none 

have an outside porch. Mr. Speaker, welcome to the New Saskatchewan! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — And all of this is a direct result of the present policies pursued by the present 

Minister of Education. Do we want more of this? Well, I am afraid there is little choice for the people of 

Macklin until 1971, the next Provincial election at least. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Homecoming. 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Homecoming 1971. 

 

Hon. A. R. Guy (Minister of Public Works): — 1973. 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Then of course there is that little bit of political patronage that teachers across the 

province often call ―Keesey capers.‖ Many teachers across the province are concerned that the man 

hired for teacher recruitment in Britain did not have the necessary background or qualifications for the 

job. This position I suggest was given solely on a political patronage basis with two main qualifications: 

1. He was a personal friend of the Minister‘s; 2. He was past president of the Wilkie Liberal 

Association. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — And I would like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that this shows that the Minister was 

unable to find one single teacher friend among the 12,000 in the province that he could hire for this job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, turning to the University for a 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

633 

minute, we find the situation there quite revealing when we examine the record of this Government. 

According to the Dominion Bureau of Statistics figures, Saskatchewan ranks third in Canada in per 

capita personal income, but seventh in Canada in per capita spending for university operating costs in 

the year 1967-68. Also under the guidance of our present Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) that same 

year, our province ranked eighth in the country in per capita expenditures for all education. Is this a 

record to be proud of, Mr. Speaker? 

 

In the last year, 1968, the Dominion Bureau of Statistics also point out that, while Saskatchewan is sixth 

in Canada in the proportion of the Provincial Budget devoted to all education and tied for fourth place in 

the nation in proportion devoted to university education, it is first in the nation in the proportion of the 

Budget it devotes to highways and communications. Let‘s just review that record, Mr. Speaker. Third in 

Canada in per capita income, that is good; seventh in Canada in per capita spending for university 

operating grants; eighth, that‘s second from the bottom, in Canada in per capita spending for all 

education. But first in highway spending. It is obvious that this Government is against quality education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, judging this Budget in the light of today‘s educational needs, it has 

failed miserably; it has failed our teachers, it has failed our school boards, it has failed our ratepayers 

because taxes will go up again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot in the best interests of education support this Budget, but I will support the 

amendment as moved by my colleague for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in the Budget Debate, my first 

reference must be to the citizens of Regina North West whom I am proud to represent in this 

Legislature. It is an honor which I accept with the utmost humility. The constituency is a progressive 

part of Regina made up of working people, senior citizens, young executives and farmers who live in 

Regina and farm north and west of the city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we begin to assess the value of this Budget, perhaps the first question we must ask is: 

what does the Budget do for the vast majority of the people of our province? Can we find out by asking 

some more questions, Mr. Speaker? For instance, does this help the unemployed construction worker? 

There are hundreds of them in Regina City without work, skilled tradesmen, laborers, machine 

operators, people who have the know-how, people who are idle, because of lack of leadership on the part 

of the Government. For them, this Budget 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

634 

holds forth no promise. The Saskatchewan Construction Association held its annual meeting in Regina. 

The Leader Post, February 15, 1969, on page 5 ran a story under the heading: ―Regina construction 

outlook said dim.‖ I quote from that story: 

 

The outgoing president of the Saskatchewan Construction Association said Friday it appears that the 

physical volume of construction in Saskatchewan in 1968 will be about $30 million less than 1967. 

 

And he continued: 

 

John Lord said the Regina area was probably most severely affected by cutbacks in spending. Only 

half as many projects were tendered in Regina in 1968 as in 1967. The 1968 Regina building permits, 

excluding residential construction, showed a decrease of about $6 million and ‗the prospects for 1969 

seem to be less encouraging.‘ He said he believed the industry was worthy of specific representation at 

cabinet level of the Provincial Government. Possibly a cabinet committee could be appointed to deal 

with the industry‘s over-all problems of growth, efficiency and welfare and to assist in planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are looking to the Provincial Government for assistance. Mr. Speaker, this 

Government, these hesitators, this group fumbling for leadership have cut back on their own 

expenditures, giving no leadership, no incentive to others. There is nothing in this Budget that suggests 

that they now or in the foreseeable future are able to supply any significant portion of the 80,000 jobs 

they promised the people of this province in 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — A good Budget, they say, but the construction worker in my constituency, the 

unemployed citizen who lives in Regina, those on fixed incomes, those who look to the Government for 

assistance in order to survive, in order to pay their taxes, in order to pay their electric light bill, they 

must look at this Budget with despair. They can be sure of only one thing. They can be sure there will be 

no 80,000 jobs. They can be sure there are no long-term plans for pumping life into the construction 

industry. There is no imagination here in this Budget and there is no leadership in this Budget. This 

Budget, Mr. Speaker, does nothing for the construction worker, nothing to offset unemployment, does 

nothing to solve the problem of those in the low-income bracket. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another question. What does it do for senior citizens? Senior citizens who have given their 

lives working for our province and are justified in seeking assistance, must have looked hopefully to the 

day when this Budget would be brought down. If they are well off and pensioners, they get the 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

635 

cost of living bonus. But if they are on assistance from this Government, they don‘t get it. If you are in a 

geriatric home, and if you are able to breathe, by every verbal method, this Government tries to transfer 

you from public care to a private home and place you there at the expense of your relatives. There is a 

shortage of space, they say. Time and again relatives of some person who has given most of his or her 

life to this province, who pioneered and built Saskatchewan, are being harassed verbally and the family 

is being persuaded — and I use the word ‗persuaded‘ with quotation marks — to move them out of the 

geriatric centre into a private home or out of hospital into a private home where the charge is frequently 

fantastic. There is nothing in this Budget to end this harassment. Oh, they will deny it. But I have 

interviewed too many of these people. I have talked to them and they know full well the method that is 

used. Nothing in writing, verbal persuasion, until in desperation the family takes on the responsibility of 

looking after someone who has for a long time been the responsibility of this province, a responsibility, I 

suggest, the people of Saskatchewan gladly accept. Mr. Speaker, elderly people come to the city of 

Regina because it is a centre of population. They are bound to come to be with their sons and daughters. 

In 1964 when this Government was elected, it promised the city a 600-bed geriatric centre. Five years 

later it has not been built. Five years later, it is not even mentioned in the Budget. In five years, Mr. 

Speaker, no attempt is made to solve the problem it claimed existed when it made its promise in 1964. 

Instead, it goes on insisting that the relatives assume the financial responsibility of looking after their 

parents and grandparents. This Budget, because it fails to explain or provide for publicly-owned and 

operated geriatric centres, fails to satisfy a desperate need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rising cost of living is all around us. Every day the price of something goes up. Every 

day consumer organizations point out that we are not getting our money‘s worth. Every day they say it is 

necessary to teach families how to manage their incomes, how to buy to combat the high cost of living. 

No one feels this more than the low-income and fixed-income groups. The high cost of living haunts 

them like a wild nightmare that is with them every waking minute. The high cost of living picks their 

pockets. The high cost of living caused by the profiteers tears great chunks out of their pay cheques and 

their pension cheques. The high cost of living denies children clothing and footwear, denies people 

insurance on their homes, forces taxes to go in arrears, because they must have money for food. But 

what does the Government opposite do about it? What is there in this Budget? Absolutely nothing. No 

money to be spent to protect the consumer, to put something in the school curriculum about handling 

purchasing power; not a word challenging the profiteers in the grocery business; no assistance to the 

harried people in the low-income group. The very opposite is true. They will pay more taxes on their 

homes this year. The Government is jumping on the band wagon of the high cost of living. It is in favor 

of high profits because, if 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

636 

the cost of living goes up, up goes the revenue from its sales tax. Just look at its Estimates if you don‘t 

believe me. Up goes the cost of schools, so does the cost of everything else. The Government is going 

along for the ride, an enjoyable ride they say. The Liberals have not raised their voice on behalf of the 

people who suffer the most. The high cost of living is the No. 1 problem in this Province today. For 

citizens purchasing farm machinery, citizens purchasing food and clothing, there is nothing in the 

Budget. They can look at it, but they look at it with despair for sure. 

 

Let‘s have a look at electricity. It took from Saskatchewan Power Corporation a fund of $4 million. In 

many instances it was a difficult task to pay the electric light bill for the rural constituent who has little 

or no cash. In a time of desperate need, at a time when a few dollars would help him to pay for his 

grocery bill so he would not have to charge it, at a time when he could have used a discount, instead of 

giving him some relief by lowering the rates, the Government took the entire amount and dumped it in 

the general fund to make the Budget look good. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, at whose expense? At the expense of the pensioner struggling to pay his 

electric light bill; at the expense of the low-income worker trying to pay for food and clothing for his 

children. They put up part of the $4 million; at the expense of the farmer without cash who had to look 

to the local merchant and say to him, ‗Please put it on the cuff.‘ He too put up part of the $4 million. No 

concession to these citizens, it had to make the Budget look good. The Liberals have yelled so loud and 

so long about the Power Corporation, that the people should own it but this Budget certainly suggests 

that the people have nothing to say about it, about the way it is operated. On this issue alone this 

Government neither deserves the support nor is there a chance it will receive support when it comes time 

to go to the people to ask for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, with so little judgment, with such complete failure to consider others, this 

Budget by the time it reaches the people of Kelvington will move the seat for Kelvington out of the 

washroom where it is and on to our side of the House where it belongs . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — . . . if the Government opposite with all its whistling in the dark ever gets up enough 

courage to call the by-election. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

637 

Mr. Speaker, why is the economy slowing down? Why is Saskatchewan‘s economy feeling the strain? 

That is simple because a large segment of our population hasn‘t any money, because they can‘t ship 

their grain. They haven‘t any cash, therefore they haven‘t any cash to buy goods. They cannot even pay 

the expense of drying the grain they have. It is like dropping a pebble in the water and watching the 

ripples develop. Failure to sell the farmer‘s grain, failure to give some cash to farmers, means no money 

to dry grain that is damp, no money to purchase machinery. The machine dealer is in trouble, no money 

to purchase automobile parts. The automobile dealer is in trouble; no money to pay municipal taxes, so 

taxes go unpaid. This Budget, Mr. Speaker, should offer to the farmer, through a work-and-wages 

program in areas where it is needed, a chance to get some cash, and to earn some money. The time is 

speeding by, the hour is late, the opportunity to do so is almost gone. But there is no plan, no attempt is 

made to put some cash in his hands. The whole economy suffers along with the group that is suffering, 

the group in the greatest need. But the Budget talks about grants to industry. Rumor has it that the 

Government blows millions on industry. We really never hear about it, it never reports to us about those 

mysterious millions. But no cash for the farmers. He isn‘t really important apparently. This Budget fails 

to place cash in the hands of the people who need it most, it fails to place cash in the hands of the rural 

population of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the working man of the province will look at the Budget in vain. What does this Budget do 

for him? He will search for some place to find some help or some assistance. A department that looked 

after his interests, that helped him for 20 years, is being cut to a frazzle, is being reduced at the present 

time. If an employer owes money, if he fails to pay the entire amount due an employee, the department 

may write a letter. The employee may even go to court, but the employer may declare ―Dixie‖ while the 

poor, unfortunate individual who actually works for nothing and therefore is a slave because the 

department fails to collect his wages. 

 

The Workmen‘s Compensation Board, Mr. Speaker, in my estimation, has annoyed more working men 

in the past five years than it has helped. I recall even a Government Member telling me it was unfair. 

Through the years, compensation to people has not been high enough, but to sit quietly and refuse to 

review the compensation with the rising cost of living is hard-hearted and indifferent. In my 

constituency there is a man who was on a low wage for years and who lost an eye in 1953. The 

compensation he receives is $27.40 a month. This is hard to believe. I raised this matter with the 

chairman of the Workmen‘s Compensation Board. I want to read his reply to the House and I read it in 

part: 

 

It was necessary to employ his earnings in the 12 months prior to his accident in the computation of his 

award 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

638 

which, of course, is not anywhere near today‘s standards, and provides the sum of $27.40 monthly. 

 

The Workmen‘s compensation (Accident Fund) Act as presently constituted, makes no provision for 

increases in the cost of living and, inasmuch as . . . 

 

and I omit the man‘s name 

 

. . . Mr . . . is receiving the maximum rating applicable for his vision loss, the Board is unfortunately 

without basis upon which to increase assistance to him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to know from every Member here what you would take for the loss of an eye if you 

were working as a laborer. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member I understand has read from a letter. I presume he is prepared to table it. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, I understand if you take full responsibility for a letter it is not necessary 

to table it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, the Member, if he chooses, can take full responsibility for what was in the letter. 

If there is a signature on the bottom and he wishes to do that, then the words which he has spoken in 

quotation will be the same as if they were made by himself. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Yes, I will take full responsibility and the signature on the letter is the chairman of the 

Board, J. Walter Erb. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What‘s he doing there? 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I want to know from every Member here what you would take for the loss of an eye if 

you were working as a laborer, a carpenter or a tradesman. The loss of an eye should be worth more than 

$27.40, but this man‘s case is not going to be reviewed. Mr. Speaker, this is my complaint. I ask every 

Member of this House to put himself in this man‘s shoes. He lives in the country where he is working 

and loses an eye. He gets $27.40 and they won‘t review it. This Budget does nothing to enhance the 

prestige, the security and the comfort of the working man, nothing whatsoever. True to their 

enunciations, true to the policies talked of and the often repeated phrases of Members opposite, this 

Government is not only anti-labor, but it is hard-hearted and different to the needs of others. One would 

have thought that in financial matters on the straits 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

639 

in which this Government finds itself that it would have complained bitterly about the interest rates for 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all of the palaver and all the loquacious nonsense, in all pages of rhetoric it calls the 

Budget, there is not one protest, not one line objecting to high interest rates. No one in their group would 

dare to say to the banks and mortgage companies: ―Too much, too high. They can‘t pay it.‖ Not a peep, 

not a sound, not a protest. In other words I guess they are in favor of it. On behalf of the people of this 

province if there was going to be a voice raised against the outrageous interest rates, it should have been 

raised here. And why wasn‘t it? Just look what it does to the price of housing. The Hellyer report 

recommends raising the maximum NHA loan to $30,000 and extending the term of mortgages to 40 

years. At the present going interest rate of approximately 10 per cent, a $30,000 mortgage over 40 years 

when paid back in full will total $120,000. In other words, at the end of 40 years the homeowner will 

have paid $90,000 in interest: he pays for his mortgage four times over. 

 

Members opposite would save the people of this province from decent citizens whom they label as 

waterfront gangsters, from the nephew of one of the Hon. Member‘s opposite whom they label as a 

Communist. They would save us from these people. I want to know from Members opposite who is 

going to save the people of Saskatchewan from these robber barons, these buccaneers, who charge 9½ 

and 10 per cent interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Try a finance company. It is worse, it is higher, it is fantastic. But they don‘t even raise 

their voice. The reason they can‘t is because the Federal Liberals at Ottawa took the ceiling off the bank 

rate, when they amended The Bank Act. They know it and obviously they are in favor of it. They can‘t 

raise their voice at the banks and mortgage companies who are loaning money to build motels and 

apartment blocks, and they are loaning it at 12 per cent interest. Down at the end of the line who is 

paying 12 per cent, yes, and a lot more? The newly married couple who must have a place to live, the 

married couple who I hope will always remember the party that protected and promoted and aided and 

abetted the high interest rate barons. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in the Bible there is the story of the righteous wrath exhibited by the Lord 

when He chased the money changers out of the temple. I think it is about time the people of this country 

exhibited some righteous wrath. It is about time we upset the tables and it is about time the money 

changers were chased out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, nothing, not 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

640 

a word is raised in this Budget. In my estimation Members opposite are prepared to lie down with the 

money changers. In my estimation, Mr. Speaker, it will be the people of this province who will exhibit 

their righteous wrath when an election comes, for the Government opposite does not represent the 

people. It does not represent those who are being exploited. I think the facts prove beyond the shadow of 

a doubt that this party opposite is a high interest rate party and it is a money changers party. 

 

In summary, this Budget does nothing to solve the problems of the unemployed, of government 

administration for the working man, of assistance for senior citizens, does nothing to provide ready cash 

for the farmer. It does nothing to stop the rising cost of living which is the main threat to the economy 

which, affects all of us and particularly the low-income groups, and more than anything else, makes no 

attempt to stand up against the outrageous interest rates which confront those who want to build homes 

or enlarge small businesses. 

 

Look at this Budget! One should ask the question: who does it represent? Who does it really represent? 

Those who have money to loan, those who make profits when the cost of living goes up, those who run 

private nursing homes, those who sell shoddy goods at exorbitant prices. Who does it take to task? Mr. 

Speaker, it takes to task the professional people, it criticizes the professional people involved in health 

and education. A Government which has allowed the price of highways to rise out of all reason and 

stands idly by without so much as raising a voice. It has a lot of nerve even if it has no judgement, to 

raise its voice against professional people. Here is a group which has watched the price of highways 

skyrocket. Here is a group whose priority is double-lane highways rather than technical education. I say, 

Mr. Speaker, it is these people who need to be lectured, whose judgement should be questioned, because 

it is the Government opposite which has allowed to run rampant the fantastic increase in the cost of 

highways. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in this House each time the government of Regina is mentioned 

there is some raucous laughter from the benches opposite, and the loudest laughter comes from the 

Members from Saskatoon who sit on those benches. All I can say to them is that ignorance is bliss. They 

must be ignorant of the financial discrimination that is being worked against both cities. If one reviews 

the policies of the present Government, it is my feeling that Regina is hard done by. Regina taxpayers 

are even fortunate that their taxes are not 20 or 30 mills higher than they are. Of course, you could 

expect taxes in Saskatoon to be a bit lower if you can get along without a sewage disposal plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if Saskatoon is so happy with their situation, 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

641 

and if their Members are happy with the situation that exists regarding the Provincial allocation of funds, 

people from Regina are not. 

 

In 1969-70, working from the Government‘s Estimates, Regina residents will pay over $7 million in the 

gasoline tax. This amounts to $50 per capita for all citizens of Regina. Based on the usual performance, 

they will get back about $5 per capita, under Urban Assistance. The Government takes away $50, it 

gives us back $5 and then it has the nerve to criticize the city‘s mill rate. It has the nerve to criticize! 

 

Citizens of Regina are asked to construct Provincial highways within the city limits, and they are asked 

to maintain the city streets that are part of the Provincial highway system. We readily admit that the bulk 

of the gasoline tax should go for Provincial highways, but we think that $2.5 million of the money 

should be made available to the city for capital construction of streets, for maintenance of these streets. 

The Province contends that it pays 50 per cent of the cost of arterial roads. This is not so, because 

arterial roads are lighted and the Government pays no share for street lighting. 

 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — I‘ll run against you anytime. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I am going to run down in Gravelbourg. You said that you would resign if they shut the 

Hodgeville hospital and I expect you to resign if they close it. If you resign I am going to run down in 

Gravelbourg, that is what I am going to do. 

 

Cities such as Prince Albert, because they are in a health region, receive grants as high as $2.56 per 

capita for health services, while the cities of Saskatoon and Regina receive 75 cents per capita. Because 

its conscience was gnawing away at them, the Government has increased this amount to $1 per capita, in 

spite of the fact that many of the duties that the City Health Department must carry out are specified in 

Provincial legislation. Because of this Government‘s new psychiatric program, the city‘s work includes 

psychiatric follow-up. A recent survey of 56 patients shows 34 of them were from outside the city. An 

Ontario study of this problem suggests that 50 per cent of municipal health budgets should be covered 

by a Provincial grant. Even this from a Conservative Government would raise our grant to $1.40 per 

capita. When you compare $1 with the rate for health services received by places like Prince Albert, $1 

is low and should be adjusted to meet the need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although the Province pays magistrates for the city of Regina, necessary staff for their 

work and facilities are provided by the city. In approximately one year the Province received $70,000 in 

fines from the city of Regina. This sum is far in excess of the payment made by the Attorney General‘s 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

642 

Department for services by the magistrates to the city of Regina. With the Attorney General‘s 

Department, this is a money-making proposition at the expense of the Regina taxpayers. That‘s exactly 

what it is. 

 

The cost of police services in the city of Regina has become a larger portion of the city budget, rising 

from 10 per cent in 1962 to 11.6 per cent in 1968. Many of the functions performed by the city police 

department are in the best interests of the Provincial Government. We support the position that assist 

smaller centres with police services, but we also suggest there is full justification for adequate financial 

assistance for the police work done by the Regina Police Force. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Why didn‘t you change . . . 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they are in charge of the Government and leaders look ahead, you 

know. They have their heads and their eyes looking ahead. They don‘t look back all the time. I know 

that you people don‘t want to look ahead and I understand that. You are trying to put your heads in the 

sand all the time. 

 

The cost of assessment in this province is a matter that certainly the four larger centres of over 15,000 

should raise. At the present time the Department of Municipal Affairs is responsible for the assessment 

of all rural areas and all urban areas having a population of less than 15,000. Urban centres with a 

population over 15,000 can secure a grant of 35 cents per capita for reassessment. Reassessment in 

Regina would cost approximately $250,000. This means that urban centres with a population in excess 

of 15,000 are put to the expense of paying $1.40 per capita for reassessment. The other people don‘t pay 

it, but the people in the four large urban centres do. This is an expense that the four larger centres should 

not be asked to carry. 

 

The Library Inquiry Committee in 1967 recommended that grants be increased annually beginning in 

1968-69 until they reach a level of $2 per capita. Mr. Speaker, the rate of 15 cents last year has been 

raised to 20 cents per capita. At an annual increase of 5 cents it is certainly going to take a good many 

annual increases to get the rate to the amount of $2 per capita as recommended by their Royal 

Commission. It is going to take about 36 years. Regina citizens pay $5 per capita to support their 

libraries. The Budget increased the grant by 5 cents. The Government ignored its own Library 

Committee. 

 

Industry on the borders of the city of Regina is not within the city limits for tax purposes and yet the 

citizens of Regina provide them with services. This financial burden borne by the taxpayers of Regina 

goes unrecognized in this Budget and unrecognized by this Government. In other provinces 

unconditional 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

643 

grants are made to combat this type of problem. Mr. Speaker, representations to the Provincial 

Government by the city of Regina have gone unheeded. 

 

After looking at the money that this Province exacts from the city of Regina and after looking at the 

services the city of Regina has been asked to pay for and after looking at the Government‘s refusal to 

help to bear its fair share of the cost of educating our children, looking after the health needs, libraries, 

police protection, reassessment of property and street construction, one must conclude that the Mayor of 

the city and his civic administration know how to stretch a dollar. 

 

Just look at education alone and the gap between operation costs and Government grants. In 1963 the 

gap was $6.7 million. In 1967 it rose to $11.2 million. The gap was wider in 1968 and it will be wider 

still in 1969. Under these circumstances could anyone wonder that there will be a mill rate increase in 

the city of Regina. When you look at the burden the taxpayers of Regina are carrying regarding the cost 

of education, the building of urban streets, health services, magistrates‘ services, police services, cost of 

reassessment, libraries and the services to industries outside city limits, why is it that any Member of the 

Government opposite could point at the administration of any city in this province and accuse it of 

wasting money. 

 

The Government opposite never gives them the money they should receive. Its treatment of cities, and 

that includes the city of Saskatoon, it is not to be fair with them but to penalize them. It is unbelievable 

to me how the Hon. Members for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) and Regina South (Mr. Grant) 

could sit on a platform and could run on a platform, and speak from a platform, talking about reducing 

taxes to homeowners and then vote for this Budget, that they could look at the amount allocated to 

education and then vote for this Budget,. Imagine voting for this Budget after what they have promised 

when they were elected! It is unbelievable, just fantastic! 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget does not solve the problems of the day. It does not solve the farmer‘s 

problems. It does not solve the worker‘s problems. It does not solve the problems of the aged, the 

problems of the ratepayers, the problems of the farmer who is without cash. Mr. Speaker, I just cannot 

support the main motion and I must support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L. P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak on this debate I can 

assure you that this Budget delivered by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) the other day shows one 

of responsibility, a personal responsibility as Provincial Treasurer and a responsibility of the 

Government. I can assure you, Sir, that I will support the motion without hesitation and I will not 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

644 

support the amendment. 

 

It is customary at this time to congratulate the mover and the seconder and all those who have spoken 

thus far in the Debate. While we are on the subject matter of the Budget, I challenge the Members 

opposite to vote against it because it is a balanced Budget; the only province in Canada that has a 

balanced Budget. It is a responsible Budget, not a irresponsible promise like the guys across the way 

make. 

 

I would like to throw a few challenges to my friends across the way, the preachers of gloom and doom 

That is what they preach. I will never let the Members opposite forget what happened when the Young 

NDP called for the farm nationalization in Moose Jaw, not one single Member across that floor, the 

capitalist Member like the Member for Kelsey (Mr. Messer) . . . 

 

Mr. W. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — How do you know he is a capitalist? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . these farm Members, not one had the guts to get up and say that they will not 

nationalize the farms. That indicates, Mr. Speaker, that they believe in this. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — You boys are going to get rid of the Queen. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I suppose that our Socialist Members from Moose Jaw were at that convention and I 

suppose that they were the ones that promoted this resolution because the Hon. Member from Moose 

Jaw is a well known Socialist and did try to promote that, so that it was made to appear to come from the 

Young NDP forum. But what concerns me, what amuses me, is that not one, not one single farmer 

Member refuted or said that they would disassociate themselves with it. 

 

And then the Hon. Member from Cut Knife (Mr. Kwasnica) said that we were not interested in 

education. Mr. Speaker, how stupid can a person be . . . 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cut Knife): — Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . to make such a statement. Some of my children are in the gallery and I have some 

at home. Do you mean to say that I would stand here and let education go by the wayside? We are just 

as interested in education as you are, each and everyone of you. It takes a childish mind to make such a 

statement. And then, of course the Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan). You know he was 

misnamed when he was born. They called him Ed and they should have called him Clancy. You know 

the quotation from when Clancy lowers the boom, his preaching 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

645 

of gloom. You know he hasn‘t done his homework. He was mentioning something about 

unemployment, something about business and everything else, but he hasn‘t read the Department of 

Labour Annual Reports. The lowest average unemployment rate anywhere in the North American 

continent, the lowest, lower than the United States. One small province, one small sector of the North 

American Continent with the lowest average unemployment rate. 

 

Then he criticizes actions regarding the wet grain and what the farmers can‘t do. In my constituency I 

have enterprising farmers. Some of them have wet grain, probably not as much as in other places, but 

they are enterprising. They think for themselves. And what do they do? They will put a pipe into their 

grain bin, put in a blower and let it run for hours and it will dry the wheat with hardly any cost. Have 

you suggested that? No! You preach gloom. 

 

Then the Hon. Member from Regina — the most audacious, I think the most brazen thing that any 

Member can do — writes letters to members of my staff and raises Cain. He hasn‘t got the courtesy to 

write to the Minister as a Member of the Legislature, tries to take it out on the staff. 

 

The Department of Labour has a good staff and I am proud of them. You should be ashamed of yourself 

to write these types of letters to them. Imagine an MLA of this Legislature taking his ire out on 

employees, ordering them to take every step possible to collect, and if they cannot, they might as well 

shut up shop. Imagine an MLA of this Legislature writing to a staff member who is not responsible for 

the policies. Aren‘t you ashamed of yourself? You should bow your head in shame. You should 

apologize to this gentleman. The letter was written to the Department of Labour and any letter that 

comes addressed to the Department of Labour comes to my desk and then directed to a member of my 

staff. What a despicable thing to do. 

 

I want to tell you something insofar as this type of labor legislation is concerned. Last year we made 

changes in the legislation that brought in the third party demand, something that should have been 

brought in 20 years ago. If you would do your homework and take The Labour Standards Act — which I 

don‘t want to discuss — there are still more provisions to assist greater and better in every respect. You 

had 20 years to do something about helping these poor people. You didn‘t do it. There are less 

uncollected wages now than ever in the history of this province and a heck of a lot less than when the 

CCF or Socialists were in power. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, of course, there have been many arguments given from 

across the floor against the Budget. They have been ably handled by this side of this House. I don‘t think 

there is very much need of rehashing the trivia that have emanated from that side of the 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

646 

House. 

 

To start with, Mr. Speaker, I would like to compliment my deputies of both Departments, that is Mr. 

Ron Parrot and Mr. Wilf Gardiner of the Department of Co-operation and the chairman of the 

Workmen‘s Compensation Board, for the good work that they are doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take some time this afternoon to touch on the question of labor-

management relations. This is a topic which is under pretty close scrutiny across Canada these days and 

rightly so. Canada is entering her second century as one of the leading industrial nations of the world. In 

this setting, the importance of harmonious labor-management relations can hardly be exaggerated. We 

are all aware that strikes can seriously weaken our economy. In this sense, the problems associated with 

labor-management friction affect the well-being of every citizen of this country. And I, Mr. Speaker, as 

Minister of Labour, will not stand idly by and see people, the working people, used as a pawn in a game 

between labor and management. 

 

The growing incidence of strikes and lockouts in recent years is causing a great deal of concern in 

Canada and provides a significant indication of the sensitive state of labor relations today. The total 

number of man-working days lost in strikes in Canada in 1966 and 1967 was 9.2 million man days. You 

multiply that by about $20 roughly average and probably much higher and you can well imagine the 

tremendous loss to the economy. This would provide many of the services that my good friends opposite 

so often say that are not being provided. This is greater than the combined total of the previous six years, 

Mr. Speaker. And time losses during the first nine months of 1968 exceeded the record during the same 

period of 1967 by 40 per cent. 

 

It is quite true that the situation is not as serious in Saskatchewan as it is elsewhere. As a matter of fact, 

over the period of 1963 to 1967, average annual working time lost in Saskatchewan in strikes under our 

Provincial jurisdiction amounted to only 29 minutes per non-agricultural wage-earner. The 

corresponding loss for Canada as a whole was 362 minutes per wage worker, or 12 times greater than 

the Saskatchewan figure. However, every individual strike which takes place, regardless of its size, is 

wasteful and harmful to our economy. The employees involved and their families suffer a loss of income 

which seriously reduces their standard of living for as long as the strike lasts. It takes months and in 

some cases years before a pay increase which follows the strike makes up for this loss. The employer, of 

course, must forego his profits for the duration of the strike. To a growing extent, the public suffers 

inconvenience and even hardship. The economy as a whole suffers in terms of decreased production. 

 

There are less obvious effects of labor-management disputes 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

647 

as well. A strike very often generates bitterness between the parties involved which continues long after 

the dispute has been settled. Union members sometimes institute slowdown, work-to-rule policies, 

which result in the operation of the enterprise at half speed. As a result of the strains and tensions which 

exist, efficiency suffers. Staff morale is lowered. There are absenteeisms, tardiness and a high staff 

turnover. The employer and his employees come to regard each other as enemies rather than as partners 

working towards a common goal. 

 

So much, Mr. Speaker, has been said about labor, about disputes, but I, as Minister of Labour, have 

naturally been very concerned about labor relations in this province and the causes of labor disputes. 

Having been involved indirectly or directly in about 350 disputes since assuming office, I now feel that I 

should express my thoughts on this matter in the bluntest of terms. A great many of these disputes and 

the actual strikes, which some of them have resulted in, have been caused by stupidity, ignorance, 

dishonesty, political manoeuvring and bungling, on the part of some individuals representing both labor 

unions and even management. 

 

Mr. R. H. Wooff (Turtleford): — And Government. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — You will notice, Mr. Speaker . . . I was going to give an answer there, Mr. Speaker, to 

that casual remark but I didn‘t think it was worth the time to even answer it. 

 

You will notice, Mr. Speaker, that I have said individuals, and those to whom I refer comprise a very 

small fraction of the persons who represent labor unions and employers in this province. But it has now 

reached the point that I can anticipate where our disputes are going to crop up in advance, because in 

most cases they originate with one or more individuals that I have in mind. 

 

The back-stabbing actions of these persons, Mr. Speaker, are hamstringing me as Minister of Labour in 

my attempts to further improve the industrial relations climate in Saskatchewan. They are making it 

extremely difficult for me and my staff to do an honest and effective job in promoting labor-

management harmony. The Department of Labour should, by definition, be impartial and non-political, 

if the Department is going to do a good job in the area of industrial relations. I can state without 

reservation that the Department has an excellent staff for this purpose. They are highly skilled, 

competent and loyal and they do a first-class job in carrying on the functions of the Department. The 

effectiveness of their work is widely recognized. I have letters from both labor and management 

complimenting these individuals who do the relations in this area. Our Industrial Relations Officers 

travel all over the province on any day of the week, as required, under all kinds of roads and weather 

conditions, at all hours of the day or night, and I am not exaggerating. Indeed, I often think that 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

648 

as many settlements are effected after midnight as before. The success of our voluntary conciliation 

program is demonstrated by the fact that of the total number of disputes in which conciliation is 

provided by the Department of Labour, for example, four out of five are settled before reaching the 

strike stage. The conciliation staff, the Deputy Minister and I are always willing to take whatever steps 

may be necessary to speed up and bring about settlements and resolve disputes. My door is open to 

management, to labor, to individuals at any time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — But our efforts are severely hampered by the actions of the type of persons that I have 

mentioned. 

 

Let‘s talk about some of these individuals, Mr. Speaker, and I am not bluffing. I know many of them and 

at this stage, let‘s talk about the employers and management representatives in this category. I tell you 

quite frankly that I wouldn‘t want to work for some of them. I am not the least bit surprised that they 

have labor difficulties. They run their business as modern-day tyrants and they attempt to operate in a 

manner which suggests that they want to be modern in 1969 but operate under 1869 conditions. These 

people are very good businessmen when it comes to the question of their dollars and cents in handling 

their business, but they are totally naïve and immature when it comes to the operation of a sound and 

stable labor-relations policy. It appears to me that their employees are mere chattels, faceless 

instruments of production from whom to derive the maximum amount of work. These employers would 

do well, Mr. Speaker, to consider the story of the great discovery which a chairman of the board of 

directors of a large corporation made known to his board of directors, and I quote: 

 

Gentlemen, he said to his board, I have before me a report of the greatest significance. Some months 

ago we appropriated $200,000 for a nation-wide survey to find out through hundreds of personal 

interviews the reply to the question which must be answered, if we are to survive and prosper, both as 

individuals and as a free enterprise. The question we wanted answered, the question we paid heavily to 

have solved, is: what makes this country tick? This question has been answered by the experts we 

hired. The answer is on this single sheet of paper, he said. It consists of one powerful word. The 

answer, and I warn you never to forget it, is PEOPLE. 

 

It evidently simply doesn‘t occur to these employers that they will achieve more stability, a greater 

degree of permanency, and a more satisfactory return for their investment in the long run, if they ensure 

that they have the services of loyal, contented, long-service employees. I might add that I am not 

thinking only of employers who deal with unions. What is more, Mr. Speaker, the employers and 

managers within the group of 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

649 

individuals I have made reference to, are sometimes — and I sometimes hate to use this word — two 

faced and sometimes less than honest in their dealings with me and my Department. They will come to 

my office in the midst of a labour crisis in their establishment and expect me to solve their difficulties at 

the snap of the finger. In my presence, or in the presence of the officials of the Department, they will 

agree to a certain procedure. Then they will go out and publicly repudiate what they have accepted. Or, 

if they do not get their own way completely in my office, oh, they will go to a personal acquaintance that 

they know, who is prominent in his community and have him put pressure on me to follow the policy of 

their liking. They will even approach some of my colleagues and attempt to persuade them to exert their 

influence in the matter in question. My colleagues have been very good in this regard but they have not 

exerted any pressure. 

 

When it comes to the settlement of labor-management disputes, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this, that I 

don‘t give a damn about the politics of any individual groups. My responsibility to the people of 

Saskatchewan is to attempt, in a fair and impartial manner, to arrange for a speedy settlement which 

both parties will accept, which will permit the employees concerned to continue to earn a fair living, 

which will permit the employer to resume making the profits which he is entitled to, for his investment, 

etc., and which will permit the economy to return to normal. The activities of these so-called business 

leaders are hindering the attempts of my Department to do a proper job in this regard. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it quite clear that the employers I am referring to represent a very 

extremely small fraction of the total number of employers in the province. Many thousands of 

Saskatchewan employers have a progressive and responsible policy toward their employees and have 

never been involved in labor disputes. I also want to make it plain that only a few of those employers 

affected by strike action are in the category mentioned. But just as a few bad apples spoil the barrel, so a 

few individuals are making it difficult to maintain peaceful industrial relations in Saskatchewan and are 

spoiling the image amongst the labor people of employers generally. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what about the actions of the representatives of labor unions? The majority of these 

persons are dedicated, they are sincere and hard-working. The welfare of their members is consistently 

uppermost in their minds. Some of them I don‘t agree with them politically, it is true, and I probably 

never will, but most of them are honest. They are square shooters. They put their cards on the table, we 

understand each other. Unfortunately, however, there are a few representatives and agents whom I can 

only describe as sneaky, unscrupulous double-dealers. They choose to regard their union position as a 

political office. We have seen it in this House, Mr. Speaker. Their words and actions in this capacity do 

little to protect the working interest of the working man, to promote 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

650 

labor-management harmony or safeguard the welfare of citizens of Saskatchewan. In many ways these 

individuals are social parasites, feeding on the trust of their members to expand their own personal 

ambitions. Some of these men will go to no end to bring about the destruction of the Government, even 

at the expense of the well-being of the union members that support them. To these men a strike is a 

political victory and not the serious failure on their part to avoid a costly work stoppage which it actually 

represents. This is how they establish their reputation. They push their members into a strike to assert 

their own authority. They like to feel that they are dictating things. They strut up and down in a roost-

like fashion and make known their demands in the most arrogant ways. And I‘ve seen it. I have been in 

those places. If management doesn‘t immediately capitulate, they pull a strike just to show who‘s boss. I 

submit that this is one reason we have so many strikes over relatively minor issues. I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that any union business agent who allows three picketers or a handful to prevent 1,000 

employees from performing their normal duties should bow his head in shame. 

 

It doesn‘t matter to the union representative, of course, that the income of his members stops the 

moment the strike commences. It doesn‘t matter to him because his salary continues as before, at the 

expense of his members. Never mind that there‘s no bread on the tables of the employees. Never mind 

that the house payment may have stopped and their furniture may have to be repossessed. It doesn‘t 

matter that the company may lose its markets. It doesn‘t matter that the wage increase he eventually 

wangles may drive the company into bankruptcy, or force it to cut staff, and that has happened. No, it 

doesn‘t matter. The representative has won a victory, his victory and now he exercises his real power 

over management. 

 

In the same way, a 25 or 30 per cent wage increase boosts the reputation of these representatives and this 

is their aim. They collect large wage settlements and then display them as a cannibal who carries 

shrunken heads on his belt. Years after such an agreement, reference will be made to Joe Blow and who 

got such and such a union a whopping big increase. This is how they get ahead. They are in constant 

competition with their counterparts across Canada to see who can come up with the biggest settlement. 

They might amongst themselves instead of trying to work at a common cause. 

 

With regard to the relationship between the Department of Labour and representatives I‘m talking about, 

I‘m sorry to say that my departmental officials have been stabbed in the back by these people a number 

of times. They come to the Department and say one thing to us in my office and then they go out and 

take precisely the opposite action. They will make commitments to avoid strike action, which they will 

promptly break within a few hours. They will undermine the attempts of conciliation officers to avert 

walkouts. One cannot help but feel that these 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

651 

people will go to any lengths to prevent the labor relations climate in this province from being 

completely healthy. This is what concerns me, Mr. Speaker, and not only concerns the men but the 

welfare of this province. We are on the threshold of great, great, great developments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — But our Socialist friends opposite, their agitators, are constantly trying to destroy this. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame, shame on you. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — And what about the membership? What about the membership of the labor unions? 

What about the rank and file members in these unions? I am in a position to ask because I know, I‘ve 

had calls upon calls at all hours of the day or night from them. I am in a position to say that the 

overwhelming majority of the employees of this province are loyal, conscientious and hard-working 

employees and are anxious to make a worthwhile contribution to the company which employs them. 

However, they are sometimes misled by their representatives into taking unwarranted, unwise strike 

action which they subsequently regret. They are sometimes duped into believing that they work for the 

union and not the employer. I have had men come into my office and say, ―Why do I have to work for 

that union to get a job unless I take orders from the union representatives?‖ Accordingly, they will 

dutifully follow their representatives into a sea of labor problems like so many lemmings rushing to self-

destruction. And you have heard about it at La Guardia Airport in New York. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We haven‘t heard about that. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — It‘s time, Mr. Speaker, and it‘s your duty, everyone of you in this House, it is the duty 

of every citizen in this province, it‘s time to ask union members to stop just going along. It is time that 

every member realizes that, along with the rights and freedoms inherent in a democratic society, there 

are certain obligations, one of which is to actively participate. And this is what I urge in this House that 

every member actively participate in the affairs of their organization. It is time that every union member 

starts paying attention to what is going on and starts thinking in a rational and responsible way, and acts 

in accordance with those thoughts. 

 

I would like to say a few words about the role of the press and other news media. They have had a rough 

time this session — in the creation and preservation of an appropriate labor relations atmosphere. It 

cannot be denied that the media exert a considerable influence over the thoughts of the public. My gripe 

here is that too often one only hears of the negative 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

652 

aspects of labor relations, the contract difficulties, the strikes, the violence. You know, when I look at 

this pamphlet here that came to my desk some time ago: 

 

Without a strike, without a lockout, without disruption of production, family life or community, the 

potash workers at Duval have signed their first collective agreement. 

 

I am not naming the unions because I don‘t think it would be quite right . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — . . . but it goes to show that it is possible to do that. Too often one or both parties 

involved in a dispute rush into print to put their case forward, presumably to win public opinion on their 

side. To me, this is like a young couple, you know, who dash to their in-laws every time they have a 

quarrel. They rush to the press, they rush to somebody. A permanent solution is achieved, not by 

outsiders but by the two parties themselves who put their heads together and by making an effort to 

understand the other party‘s point of view can arrive at a mature and practical settlement. 

 

Each year in Saskatchewan approximately 500 collective bargaining agreements are signed. Contrast 

this with the average number of strikes over each of the past four years – 17, which works out to only 

three strikes for every 100 agreements. This does indicate there are many responsible business agents, 

many responsible employers, employees, etc. 

 

We should give credit at this point to the employers, to the employees who year after year sit down in a 

spirit of trust and co-operation and negotiate a new agreement without recourse to threats, counter-

threats and ultimately to strike action. I will readily admit, Mr. Speaker, that I have put my case this 

afternoon in very strong terms, I feel, however, that strong terms are necessary to rouse some people out 

of their lethargic state of mind and perhaps motivate them to change some of the attitudes which are 

causing a good deal of labor-management problems. Unless there are improvements in the near future, 

Government action may have to be taken. 

 

There is a growing feeling on the part of the Canadian people that the strike is an obsolescent instrument 

in the settlement of labor-management disputes. You can go over, look at the White Paper of Barbara 

Castle in England, a Minister of the Labor Government, who is absolutely concerned at what is 

happening in England. It is going to take some definite and positive action. Every government 

throughout this world is concerned with the tremendous loss of productivity, and governments are 

presently facing increased pressures to impose compulsory arbitration as the solution. We, in the 

Government 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

653 

may not want this type of solution. We are looking at it. Labor and management do not want this kind of 

solution. This I know. The history of our country provides persuasive evidence that the orderly, 

progressive development of the Canadian economy depends on the unimpeded operation of the 

collective bargaining. However, as I said, governments at all levels of political stripes are going to be 

forced to take a closer look at some form of compulsory arbitration, if our labor-management difficulties 

continue. If this becomes necessary, the motions of a few will have had the effect of penalizing the 

majority. And here in Saskatchewan, as well as elsewhere, we will be ready to act if we have to. 

 

Let me hasten to add at this point that I am not about to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that strikes should be 

abolished altogether. Under our democratic system an employee is entitled to withdraw services to an 

employer, if he so chooses. This is not a police state. The right of the employees to strike or withdraw 

services, subject to certain restrictions, is necessary to guarantee the freedom of the collective bargaining 

process. The threat of a strike represents a powerful economic weapon and possibly a legitimate one. I 

might even go so far as to suggest that sometimes when an employer is known to be making conditions 

so deplorable, probably making greater and greater profits, maybe the employee is entitled to part of the 

productivity. But if he refuses to grant his employees a legitimate wage increase, maybe a strike is 

justified. I do suggest, however, that the strike weapon is becoming over-utilized and there lies the 

danger. In many instances it would almost appear that a strike is called as an opening manoeuvre in the 

labor-management dispute rather than as a last resort. 

 

And then some of my colleagues across the way in this Legislature may get up and say, ―Oh, this dirty 

old Government is anti-labor.‖ Evidence shows that the Government of Saskatchewan is not anti-labor 

union. It is proved by the fact that union membership increased by 4,103 between ‘67 and ‘68, which 

represents the largest annual increase since 1946. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — In addition to compulsory arbitration, a number of additional solutions to our 

industrial relations problems have been suggested from time to time. We have, of course, our famous 

right to work advocates who say that an employee doesn‘t have to join a union if he doesn‘t want to. As 

you know, in this Province and across the country the Rand formula applies. There is merit on both 

sides. You have to look at it objectively. However, these people would have a situation in which a non-

union member reaps all the benefits won by the union while the whole membership pays the shots. 

Union security contracts are clearly in line with our democratic tradition. Majority rule is the very basis 

of our society and civilization. The union shop operates where a majority of workers have decided in its 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

654 

favor. Unions represent all employees. This is not always the case. Sometimes the union reps will not 

work for grievances of an individual which they should look at because of his political disagreements 

with the union. It is only fair that all employees support them I would say. When a vote is held in a 

Saskatchewan municipality, for example, on a money bylaw and the result of the vote is in the 

affirmative, every taxpayer contributes his share towards the project agreed to, not just those who voted 

in favor of it. This is how our form of democracy operates in practice. 

 

We, in the Government, have no intention of attempting to destroy labor unions. I believe that unions 

play a positive and constructive role in the development of our industrialized economy, providing they 

are responsible. Since their earliest years, unions have been responsible in large measure for increasing 

levels of income, improving working conditions, raising living standards, not only for their own 

members but in a more indirect way for all the working people in all of society. Members of labor 

unions are making a significant contribution to the improvement of industrial efficiency, and I say I am 

speaking now of those I have indicated who are not being involved politically or otherwise. For this 

reason, Mr. Speaker, it simply does not make sense to blame unions generally for labor difficulties 

which we are experiencing. As a matter of fact, 23 unions out of well over 1,200 unions in 

Saskatchewan have been involved in strikes since 1960. 

 

I do not suggest that the Government does not have a role to play in the field of industrial relations. The 

Government is most anxious to reduce the areas of conflict between parties to collective bargaining 

agreements and considers that it has a duty and a responsibility to take action to improve effectively 

labor-management relations. To this end, as a result of the recommendations of the Labor-Management 

Legislative Review Committee, The Trade Union Act was amended in 1966 to produce the ground rules 

to make the processes of collective bargaining more systematic. In taking action in this area, the 

Government has no desire to arbitrarily interfere with the operation of the bargaining process — and this 

we have not done — but rather wishes to provide an opportunity for representatives of labor and 

management, nominated by the parties themselves, to sit down together to examine the many 

ramifications of labor relations policy and attempt to devise mutually acceptable solutions to the 

problems which exist. This is what motivated the Government to establish the Labor-Management 

Construction Committee in July of last year, to study all aspects of labor relations in the construction 

industry, in which a good many of our labor disputes arise. The membership of the Committee 

represents a high level of expertise and experience in the field of labor relations and industry, from both 

management and union points of view. They are doing an excellent job. As suggested in the Speech 

from the Throne, an amendment to further improve The Trade Union Act would be introduced during 

this session or has been introduced I should rather say. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

655 

Some people would think, Mr. Speaker, that The Trade Union Act is like a sacred cow — it should 

never be milked. It should never be reviewed with changing conditions and times are changing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — However, we will have more to say on that when we get to that point. 

 

I would like to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by pointing out that whatever committees may 

recommend and whatever legislative action may be indicated, peaceful and productive labor relations 

can only be achieved in a genuine and lasting way through more and better labor-management co-

operation. Both parties, Mr. Speaker, must recognize that they share a common interest in the continuing 

welfare of the enterprise in which they work or from which they both earn their living and that they both 

have a responsibility for what happens to the economy as a whole. This implies that the establishment of 

a process of regular communication and consultation between labor and management, which, if it is to 

be fruitful, must be carried out in an atmosphere of mutual trust and understanding, and not with a 

feeling of downgrading the working man or looking at the employer as a slave driver. 

 

Co-operation, like motherhood, is something which everyone is in favor of. Like motherhood, however, 

some action is required to produce it. Oliver Wendell Holmes used to tell about the time all the people of 

the world decided to shout, boo, at the same time so that the great shout could be heard on the moon. 

When the time came for the great shout, there was nothing but spectacular silence. And I hope that there 

is not spectacular silence after today. I hope that everyone, unions, employers, the community as a 

whole make that effort so that everyone gets actively involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — As I said a moment ago, co-operation is something which must be practised and 

worked on, not merely talked about, whether we are employers, labor union members, politicians, or 

citizens. And I say to my Hon. Members who are very active in the labor-union movement, let‘s leave 

politics out of labor unions. Let‘s leave politics out of labor relations. Let‘s stop thinking in narrow 

partisan terms. Let‘s start thinking of our most important commodity, people. 

 

We have the best labor force in the country, Mr. Speaker, and I am speaking of both employers and 

employees. Providence has endowed us with tremendous resources, which are now being developed by 

the resourcefulness of the free enterprise system, the policies of this Administration, the willingness of 

the employers to invest into our province, the willingness of our 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

656 

employees to work in our province. This is the best commodity we have, people. Let‘s all put our 

shoulders together to the wheel in the spirit of co-operation for which our pioneers were renowned and 

let‘s build a better Saskatchewan together. I am confident that with a renewed and concentrated effort on 

the part of everyone, industrial unrest can be effectively reduced. In this way, the present system of free 

collective bargaining can be adapted to the new demands of our technologically-oriented society and 

will continue to play a vital role in the industrial development of Saskatchewan and in the attainment of 

our economic goals of full employment, a continuously rising standard of living and an equitable 

distribution of income. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that you‘ve noticed that Members on this side of the House are unlike the 

Members on the other side of the House who are ready to promise the moon to make it a possibility to 

put additional burdens on our young people in years to come, and would like to see the Government go 

into deficit budgeting. I think, Mr. Speaker, it is quite evident that I am going to support the motion, I 

cannot support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, before the Member takes his chair, would 

he permit a question? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — The Member for Regina North East, anytime, Mr. Speaker. I will answer a question, I 

will not get into a debate. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Minister made a number of allegations about certain 

individuals. He didn‘t name them and he may not want to name them. But, if he chooses, I would like to 

ask him whether he would name those individuals within a trade union movement who he said are 

double dealers and are sneaky and other words that he used. However, if he chooses not to name them, 

would he name the unions that they represent or, failing that, the industries that they operate in? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I was just going to say that. There is a couple that I could name but, however, I have 

no intention of mentioning the names of any unions, any business agent, or any employers. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You are losing your argument. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I am not losing my argument, I was only trying to bring to this House the opportunity 

of realizing that somewhere in 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

657 

business, or in management and somewhere along the line with the business agents, that there must be 

something lacking. It has become evident across this world that year after year, as I have indicated, that 

as contracts are signed without strikes or lockout, why not across the board . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — He has asked the question, I‘m answering the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, on the point of order, the hon. gentleman asked me, ―May I ask him a 

question before he sits down?‖ This gives me the prerogative to remain in my seat to speak for another 

two hours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Coderre: — Am I right, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Member for Regina North East asked a long-winded question, he‘s getting a long-

winded answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — These questions should be short, clear-cut, to the point and the answer should be the 

same. Now, let him finish the answer. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — I consider the answer concluded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. H. Woof (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, one evident fact for the House is that the Budget has 

been brought down. And true to form it has been a tricky Liberal budget, claiming to be balanced. The 

Budget proclaimed as a balanced Budget is true to my forecast, that I have made for months, that once 

again the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) would dip his sticky fingers into the funds of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation, and this time to the tune of $4 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Just imagine the cry, Mr. Speaker, that would have gone up from the Liberal rank had an 

NDP Government been caught taking funds from the Power Corporation to carry on the day to day 

affairs of the Province. What a laugh, Mr. Speaker, what a 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

658 

laugh! Last spring when Members from both sides of the House visited the Saskatchewan Power dam, 

the Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) asked a question of the Premier of all people, ―When 

could we expect a reduction in power rates?‖ I don‘t think I have to remind the gentlemen to your right, 

Mr. Speaker, of the answer they got. If labor keeps on asking for higher and higher wages, we will not 

only have to hold the line but increase the rates. What an unmanly, what a deceitful slur on labor, 

knowing full well what the Government has done in the past and what it intended to do again. The 

Premier as exponent of free enterprise stoops to filching a public utility for money to make a sham of 

balancing a budget which neither he as ex-Treasurer nor the present Provincial Treasurer could balance 

by a reasonably planned fiscal policy. The alarming sleight of hand that is going on, Mr. Speaker, is the 

plundering of a sound public utility like Saskatchewan Power Corporation to guarantee the free 

enterprisers of our Saskatchewan Pulp Mill their pound of flesh is frightening. This, Mr. Speaker, robs 

the best single enterprise of the province and prostitutes it for an illegitimate end. This robs the 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation of its viability in paying off its loan capital and reducing power rates 

to the consumer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — It reduces the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to a taxing medium. It robs the Province 

of a means of inducing industry to our prairie province by lowering the power rates. This Budget, Mr. 

Speaker, proves the myth of our expanding economy in Saskatchewan. During the 1968 session and I 

am sorry the Premier is not in his seat . . . 

 

Mr. M. Breker (Humboldt): — It is too much for him. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — . . . the Premier went off on his usual tirade on Socialism and he referred, I believe, no 

less than three times in my memory, to Socialist Sweden, that they were going to hold an election in the 

fall of 1968 and the Socialists would be wiped out. Well, Mr. Speaker, this just didn‘t happen. I have not 

heard a squeak out of the Premier about Sweden this session. The Socialist Democrats went back with a 

landslide majority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — I had the privilege of taking my Swedish wife back to Sweden last summer and of 

visiting that fair land. I am too modest to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that I had anything to do with Socialist 

victory, but I did warn them that our Prairie Premier was endeavoring to breathe down their political 

neck all the way from Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, the Premier‘s forecasting was never further out. 

As I said a moment ago, the Swedish Government went back with the largest majority in its history. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

659 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — While discussing Liberal leadership, let me just say a word about our Prime Minister 

who went over to Britain for a Commonwealth Conference and according to Canadian press, made such 

an impression on Britain. Well, I had a letter from a cousin of mine — he doesn‘t happen to share all my 

political views — but he told me that, ‗your Mr. Trudeau made very little, if any, impression unless it 

was unfavorable.‘ 

 

Because of much that has been said about Socialism, I am going to spend just a few minutes on Sweden, 

as I said before, much as my hon. friends dislike the hard, cold facts. It was not until the Social 

Democrats became the dominant force in Swedish Government and politics over a 35-year period and 

have guided that country in a planned economy, not until that time, Mr. Speaker, did the Swedish people 

in all walks of life enjoy a decent and a good standard of living. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — It was under the Social Democrats that the tide of emigration, about the turn of the 

century when it was so heavy, finally stopped and gradually became another problem, a tide of 

immigration. 

 

I am sorry that the Minister who just spoke (Mr. Coderre) left the House, after all the sound and fury that 

he produced. Strikes are unknown in Sweden on account of the policy developed and encouraged by this 

Socialist Democratic Government whereby labor, management and government sit down together and 

work out wage schedules on the level of the general economy of the nation. There is no waiting till 

contracts have expired, nerves have become frayed and tempers have become hot, before new 

agreements are signed. Just in case you think that I am not telling you the whole story, I have here the 

July 30th copy of Co-op Consumer, 1968, and I am going to read you just a short passage from what Mr. 

Boyes, President of Federated Co-op, had to say after his visit to Sweden. 

 

Speaking of strikes and the anxieties confronting farmers, Mr. Boyes said he felt: 

 

That in Sweden labor and management had discovered, with the aid of government, the means of 

recognizing they were partners in the nation‘s economy. They had recognized the goals of each 

segment could be reached only if they worked together to build an economy that could yield to both 

labor and management the economic returns they desired. It was an example of co-operation applied 

on a master scale. 

 

As I said a moment ago, strikes are unknown in Sweden. 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

660 

Compare this, Mr. Speaker, to the mailed fist approach demonstrated here in Saskatchewan with labor, 

teachers and students. Sweden is the only country in the world that guarantees everyone employment. 

The only country that does not believe any percentage of unemployment is acceptable. Naturally, full 

employment is a goal, a focal point to which they are constantly working and to which they aim. But it is 

worth noting that when the Social Democrats took over in the 1930s, unemployment was as high as 10 

per cent and had been even through the better years prior to the Social Democrats. Since that time, it has 

been as low as one per cent and for short periods of time, even lower than that. 

 

For some years Sweden has been increasing its accommodation for her senior citizens at the rate of 

some 3,000 beds per year. Just think of the Provincial Treasurer‘s (Mr. Steuart) cry of alarm if he had a 

comparable plan. 

 

Housing is still a major problem but the Social Democratic Government has assisted in building 

apartments at the rate of 11.6 per 1,000 population. This, Mr. Speaker, is the highest rate in the world, 

105,000 complete apartments per year. 

 

Norway has a housing policy which says all investors must put 5 per cent of their annual investment into 

housing at a 5 per cent rate of interest. 

 

Think again of the Provincial Treasurer‘s (Mr. Steuart) panic if he had the level of health services, 

hospital services, medical and dental, plus pensions, plus free education in the universities, to finance. 

He would certainly be both alarmed and unable to smile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be less than fair if I did not say a word about the cost of living. The cost of living 

is on much the same level as Canada‘s. Food is abundant, meals and hotel accommodation are on about 

the same level as in our own province. 

 

I might point out that working people in Sweden can deduct the cost of working clothes and property 

taxes from their income taxes, but not in Canada. However, Mr. Speaker, there is one very real factor 

which leaves us far behind Socialist Sweden, and that is the value of service the Swedes get for their tax 

dollar. Not just that health services, wage adjustments, welfare assistance, and pensions as a whole are 

kept on a reasonable level with the cost of living, but these factors added together distribute the buying 

power of the nation throughout the population, giving the highest per capita income of any nation in 

Europe. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, my time is up and I will have to close. I assure you that neither from a monetary 

standpoint nor from a moral standpoint, can I support the Budget but will be supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

661 

Mr. J. E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in the Budget 

Debate, I am just wiping away the tears from my eyes after having listened to that speech from the heart 

from the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre). He has left me speechless. What I am trying to say is that 

he‘s just about crowded me off the timetable. His comments about labor were a collection of cliches that 

we have all heard time and time again, and I am sure we were really not impressed by his use of them, 

not impressed by the cliches but impressed by the very fact that the Minister of Labour would try to use 

them in this House to further the weak message he had for us. 

 

The Member from Pelly (Mr. Barrie) this afternoon neglected to mention the cutbacks in park 

development. He neglected to mention the increase in park fees, double in some cases. 

 

The Member for Watrous (Mr. Schmeiser) this afternoon, it seems a pity that such a young, young man 

gave such an old, old speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the time urges me to conclude my remarks at this point and since I 

have something else to say on this particular debate, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

QUESTIONS 

 

BILLS 36, 37 AND 38 NOT RECEIVED 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Just before I put the adjournment motion, I want to say a word or two in connection 

with a situation which I refrained from saying anything about at the time (when I possibly should have 

done) because I did not wish to interrupt any Member‘s air time, in connection with the point of order 

then raised by the Member for Wadena. I am reliably informed that Bills Nos. 36, 37 and 38 were tabled 

on Friday last, and indeed they were certainly on my file on Friday last. I have investigated the matter as 

thoroughly as possible, and I am satisfied that the correct number of these bills left the Legislative 

Assembly office at the correct time. May I suggest to Members that they look at their Order Paper. All 

of the Bills which are marked ‗printed‘ have, I am informed, been tabled, if any Member is short a Bill, 

then if he will check at the Legislative Assembly office he will have no trouble in picking up a copy of 

whichever Bill he requires. 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, since I raised that at noon today 



 
February 25, 1969 

 

 

662 

I have personally made a survey of every desk on this side of the House except for the Member from 

Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis) who was not here today. Not one of us has either 36, 37, 38 or 44. We have 

the explanatory notes but not one of them, and I haven‘t checked Mr. Willis‘s desk because he isn‘t 

here, but I checked all the rest personally. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now that is 36, 37, 38 and 44. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — On 44, 44 wasn‘t marked printed so I didn‘t raise that at noon. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well never mind. Are there any others? 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — No, those are the four. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well all right. By tomorrow noon everyone on that side of the House will have a copy. 

If he has one already he will then have two of 36, 37, 38 and 44. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We don‘t have them now! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you will look through your files and check to see if you have any further Bills 

missing, I am sure that the office will make up the deficiency promptly and on time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o‘clock p.m. 


