




















































Hansard: March 24, 1969


1470 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

35th Day 

 

Monday, March 24, 1969 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o'clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO VISITORS 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before we resume proceedings, I would like to 

introduce to you Sir and to this Assembly, a distinguished parliamentarian from our sister Province of 

Quebec, Monsieur Paul Gerin-Lajoie, and Madame Gerin-Lajoie. 

 

Mons. Gerin-Lajoie has been a Member of the National Assembly of Quebec, as it is presently called, 

since 1960. He held the portfolio of Minister of Youth beginning in that year, until his appointment as 

Minister of Education in 1964. He presently sits on the Opposition side. I think it is particularly 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that Mons. Gerin-Lajoie was the Province of Quebec’s first Minister of 

Education. He undertook that portfolio in 1964 and established the Department of Education in his home 

province. Seated with the honourable gentleman from Quebec is his charming wife and his host in the 

province, Professor André Lalonde, Assistant Professor of History, Regina campus. 

 

My understanding, Sir, is that Mr. Blakeney went to university with Mons. Gerin-Lajoie. They were 

both Rhodes scholars. I hope he will find his Saskatchewan visit interesting. I am sure you, Sir, and all 

Hon. Members of this House will join with me in welcoming this distinguished gentleman to our 

Legislature and our Province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Chairman, on behalf of Members on this side of the House 

I want to extend to Mr. Paul Gerin-Lajoie our welcome to this Legislature and our welcome to the city 

of Regina, where he is going to address a university-sponsored meeting tonight, as I understand it. As 

the Premier has indicated, I knew Paul when we were together at university, and I have maintained some 

contacts with him since that time. It was my pleasure to be Minister of Education in 1960 and to attend 

conferences of the Ministers of Education at that time at which Mr. Gerin-Lajoie was present, at that 

time as Minister of Youth, but none the less responsible for the educational activities of the Government 

of Quebec. We attended also some of the Constitutional Conferences under the chairmanship of Mr. 

Fulton and Mr. Favreau. I have seen him on occasion at Bar Conventions. I think the last time was in 

1967 when I was torn away from a Bar Convention in Quebec by the untimely announcement of a 

Provincial election in Saskatchewan. 



 

March 24, 1969 

 

1471 

I want to extend to him the warmest good wishes from all those on this side of the House and to hope 

that his stay with us will be as interesting for him as I know it will be for us. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Chairman, in order to make the welcome complete, I will say a few 

words in the French language. 

 

Monsieur l’orateur, au nom de mes collègues et moi-même, je voudrais joindre les honorables Messieurs 

Thatcher et Blakeney vous donner la bienvenue à Monsieur Paul Gerin-Lajoie. 

 

C’est un honneur et un plaisir pour moi d’avoir parmi nous un de nos confrères de la Province de 

Quebec. Cela me fait toujours plaisir de recevoir un Canadien Français de Quebec; car je retiens un lien 

profond envers la belle province, puisque mes parents en étaient originaires. Nous esperons que votre 

séjour ici sera du plus agréable. Merci. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Monsieur le président, mes chèrs collègues, mois aussi j’aimerais 

m’associer avec notre premier ministre a l’occasion de votre visite à la Chambre Legislature dans la 

Province de Saskatchewan. J’aimerais donner la bienvenue à un compatriote de la Province de Quebec, 

comme membre Franco-Canadien et aussi comme membre de l’A.C.F.C. A bienvenue, Monsieur et 

Madame Gerin-Lajoie et professeur Lalonde. Merci. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Monsieur le président, la langue française n’est pas encore officielle dans cette 

Chambre, mais peut-être ce sera possible après cette après-midi. 

 

I also want to introduce three other gentlemen in our gallery. Today we have three officers of the new 

SRC at the University of Saskatchewan, the Student Representative Council. Mr. Rob Gardiner, the 

president; Mr. Tim Barry, the internal vice-president; and Dick Lovett the external vice-president. 

Would you three gentlemen mind standing for a moment. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Chairman, along with our honoured guests from La 

Belle Province, we have some honoured guests from the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair. They are 

situated in the east 



 

March 24, 1969 

 

1472 

gallery and they are from the public school of St. Gerard, in Saskatoon. I understand they accompanied 

by their teacher, Mr. Melnick. I am sure it is the wish of all Members here that they have an informative 

and interesting day in the Legislative Chamber and a safe journey back to Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Chairman, it is a pleasure for me to 

introduce to the Members of this Assembly a group of 25 students who are in the Speaker’s gallery. 

They are from Brunskill school, one of the fine schools in the constituency of Saskatoon City 

Park-University. These students are here under the supervision of Mrs. Carol Debert. Certainly we hope 

that they enjoy their stay here and that they have a very safe journey and a pleasant journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:04 o’ clock p.m. 


