



















































Hansard: February 04, 1969


 

81 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

4th Day 

 

Tuesday, February 4, 1969 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. D.M. McPherson (Regina South West): — It gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and the 

Members of this Assembly a group of students from Argyle school which is located in the Regina South 

West area. They are here with their teacher Mrs. Hagen and they are situated in the Speaker’s gallery. It 

is my hope and wish of this Assembly that their visit here will be educational today and also entertaining 

and that they may return to their homes having seen democracy in action. 

 

It is also my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you a group of new Canadians who are seated in the 

west gallery. Nine new Canadians who just received their citizenship and are here fore the first time to 

see the Assembly in action. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 

to the House, a group of students sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, some 70 or so students from the 

Wascana school in Regina Centre constituency. They are three grade eight classes attending the 

Legislature here today as part of their social studies class. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. 

Peever, Mr. Renwick and Mr. Kuhns. I know that you and all Members of the House will join with me 

in wishing them an afternoon which is, hopefully, entertaining and possibly instructive. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

RADIO BROADCASTS 
 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a question to the 

House Leader. Is the Hon. Member aware that 97 per cent of the homes in Saskatchewan have radios but 

approximately only 10 per cent have FM receivers, therefore by having the Legislature broadcasts aired 

from the FM station, about 90 per cent of the radio listeners in Saskatoon are unable to hear the 

broadcasts? In addition is the House Leader aware that the bulk of the FM receivers are in the City of 

Saskatoon and not in the rural area surrounding Saskatoon and that the effective radius of the FM station 

is about 70 miles from Saskatoon? I was wondering when the Minister rises whether he could give the 

reasons why the Government thought that it would be desirable to exclude the 90 per cent of the 

Saskatoon people from 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

82 

access to the Legislature broadcasts. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Hon. Member for that very valuable 

and useful information which he gave us in his speech. The matter of radio time was raised by the Hon. 

Leader of the Opposition the other day and the Premier provided the information to the Leader of the 

Opposition. I will look into the matter. I would remind the Hon. Member from Saskatoon that the matter 

of radio time of course can be referred by the Legislature to the Committee on Radio Broadcasting or 

perhaps that is the route that he might want to consider following. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

PREMIER THATCHER HOSPITALIZED 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, it is with regret that I inform the House 

that Premier Ross Thatcher has been admitted to the hospital today with what the doctors have 

confirmed is a serious case of pneumonia. He will be there, I am afraid, for some time. It is highly 

unlikely that he will be able to attend the constitutional Conference in Ottawa, but we are still hoping 

that he may have recovered sufficiently in time to do that. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on the point raised by the Deputy 

Premier, we too hear the news with regret and we would ask him to convey to the Premier our best 

wishes for a speedy recovery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

ARDA ASSISTANCE GRANT 
 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a 

question to the Minister of agriculture (Mr. McFarlane). In view of the fact that there have been some 

suggestions that the 75 per cent assistance through ARDA for drainage projects may be discontinued, 

could the Hon. Minister give assurance that this assistance grant though ARDA for the construction of 

drainage works by area authorities will be continued? 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, if I may. This probability has been 

discussed on different occasions at the conference of the Federal Minister of Agriculture with the 

Provincial Ministers of Agriculture. The concern of the Provincial Ministers has been conveyed to the 

Federal Minister on different occasions, and we will, as far as Saskatchewan is concerned, keep pressing 

for some of these Federal-Provincial Government shared programs. It would be our hope that the 

Federal Government will see fit to continue on with another ARDA agreement, thereby making funds 

available to the Province of Saskatchewan where we can institute programs and policies for the 

betterment of agricul— 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

83 

ture and other aspects of our Provincial economy. 

 

STATEMENT RE FUEL USED TO DRY GRAIN 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Before the Orders of the Day, it has come to my attention – and it may be just a rumor 

– that some outlets are charging the 2-cent tax on propane gas or diesel fuel used to dry grain. This fuel 

so used is not subject to tax and the suppliers will be informed. If anyone has any knowledge of this I 

wish they would bring it to my attention so we could check into it immediately. 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — Are you saying that gas purchased toward grain drying is not eligible to 

tax? Am I correct on that? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The gas used for drying grain is not taxable for the 2-cent tax. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Does this mean that the gas that was purchased up to this date and the tax if put on 

would be refundable to the farmers who bought it for the purpose of drying grain? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now you may be posing a question that is administratively impossible. I don’t know. If 

you would bring any case to my attention, we would certainly look into it. I don’t want to make a 

general statement. It may pose all kinds of problems for the administration. If you are aware of any case, 

will you get together with me and we will go into it, because it is not taxable and it should not be taxed. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Yes, I would suggest there is a considerable amount in the province that has already 

been purchased and I certainly will get in touch with you. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Could the Minister tell us if the various dealers have been 

advised, and if so, how have they been advised if this is not a taxable fuel. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, I’m not aware that any of them have been advised. We checked with the two main 

supplies of propane gas, Canadian Propane and Prairie Gas, who confirmed that no tax has been 

collected by them for this purpose. Now we haven’t informed or I’m not aware that we have so informed 

any firms but we may have. If they had read the Act, then they would know that any fuel used for the 

purpose of heating, and this is what this is used for, is not taxable. But again if you have any instances, 

please bring them to my attention and I’ll look into it. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): —Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question please. I was wondering, 

Mr. Minister, if you said diesel fuel? You will appreciate of course that these dryers are powered by 

diesel tractors, farm diesel tractors and of course they burn somewhere in the neighbourhood of four or 

five gallons an hour. Is this non-taxable? 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

84 

Mr. Steuart: — Any fuel used for heating is non-taxable. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Charlebois (Saskatoon City 

Park-University) and the amendment thereto by Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition). 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): —Mr. Speaker, I had not contemplated coming into the 

debate until later on, but with the unexpected illness of the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) I am now going to 

enter the debate. I just happen to have brought my music. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, this Legislature has convened in a time of profound crisis at home and in 

many parts of the world. There are numerous reasons for this fact and I shall mention only one. 

 

Many governments have hesitated to solve problems by making politically unpopular decisions. All too 

often financial responsibility has been ignored. Thus, as we begin this critical year of 1969, economic 

chaos frequently threatens in many parts of our own country and elsewhere. This situation seems to have 

developed with alarming speed. Some of it has arisen to the surface only since this House last met. 

However, the seeds were sown over a much longer period of time. They were usually sown when the art 

of politics was allowed to become the mere pursuit of popularity. They were sown when legislatures and 

parliaments and national assemblies were allowed to become mere settings for partisan political 

jockeying and endless bickering, instead of centres for decision and action. The consequences are all too 

evident. Wage earners and heads of family watched the values of their hard-earned dollars gradually 

depreciate. They wonder for how long they can adequately continue to provide. The elderly watch the 

same process and fear for the peace and tranquillity which they seek in their remaining years. Farmers, 

month by month, find their economic position steadily worsened by the cost-price squeeze. Home 

owners find it more difficult every year to finance new housing. Many young people have grave doubts 

about our entire society. Very often these situations, Mr. Speaker, have developed because too many 

governments have yielded to popular pressures, rolled up enormous deficits, borrowed with reckless 

abandon, forced interest rates up almost out of sight, have helped to create inflation and pretend to have 

some kind of miracle solution for all our problems. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this is one Government 

which has flatly and consistently refused to participate in this kind of wild merry-go-round chase which 

goes nowhere. The Saskatchewan Liberal party promised not miracles, but sound, progressive, good 

government and that is what we have tried to give the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And I can tell you it is what he shall endeavour to provide in the future. We shall 

continue in good times to balance 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

85 

the Budget. We shall continue to exercise the utmost restraint in the spending of other people’s money, 

the taxpayer’s money. We shall continue to eliminate abuses in welfare spending. And we shall continue 

to offer no apology for this kind of responsible attitude. Despite the economic difficulties in many other 

parts of the world, Mr. Speaker, our Government looks at the future of Saskatchewan with boundless 

optimism. Our program for 1969 is of course designed to establish an economic atmosphere, which will 

help to provide full employment at good wages, a healthy agricultural industry, maximum living 

standards for the needy, the unfortunate, and the aged. The Throne Speech outlined some of the 

proposals which we have for the period immediately ahead. 

 

We will look for a moment at agricultural problems. In 1968 the people of Saskatchewan were 

confronted with certain economic problems, particularly in the field of agriculture. Climatic conditions 

in the autumn were most unfavourable. Our farmers had many difficulties in taking off their crop. 

Ultimately, however, due to their own hard work and to modern machinery and technology, about 98 per 

cent of the crop was harvested. The yield was better than average. Unfortunately in the process, a very 

large percentage of our grain was combined in a damp or tough condition. Major efforts will be needed 

before spring if there is not to be substantial spoilage. Our Minister and our Department of Agriculture 

have worked diligently with the Federal Government, with farmers and their associations in seeking 

solutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wheat farmers also face very serious marketing problems. Our carry-over of grain is the 

heaviest in history. Export sales have fallen off sharply, and there is every prospect that wheat quotas 

will be sharply curtailed in the coming year. In addition, it seems likely that the final wheat payment will 

be the lowest in a decade. Now it is still true that when Saskatchewan farmers are in economic 

difficulties, everyone in the province experiences the same economic difficulties. There can be little 

doubt that farm purchasing power will be diminished during 1069. Nevertheless, I do not think these 

problems should cause too much pessimism. If a farmer has to have problems, surely one of the least 

unpleasant is to have his granaries filled. Undoubtedly, there will be short-term hardship. But in the long 

run, the world population explosion can only mean that our farmers have a promising future. Meanwhile 

again I urge a maximum diversification into livestock. Huge quantities of low grade and damp grain 

could be profitably consumed in this manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite the clouds on the agricultural horizon, I suggest to you today that there is a new 

feeling of optimism and buoyancy in Saskatchewan. Industrialization and diversification are proceeding 

at a pace undreamed of five years ago. Mineral development appears to be on the verge of a major 

breakthrough. There is relatively full employment in our province at good wages. Month after month 

during 1968 we had the smallest per capita unemployment of any province in Canada. Indeed we 

continue to have in some areas a major labor shortage. 

 

During the past year, Mr. Speaker, the Economic Council of Canada made a rather shocking report in 

Ottawa. In essence, the report said that though Canada is enjoying the world’s second highest standard 

of living, there are staggering pockets of poverty in some parts of our society. The report indicated 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

86 

That, while many Canadians are riding comfortably on the crest of national prosperity, their opulence 

merely emphasizes the plight of thousands who pass their poverty from generation to generation. 

Anyone who has travelled through Saskatchewan knows that our province has had its share of human 

beings living under substandard conditions. This is particularly true insofar as our native population is 

concerned. It must be the duty of Members of both sides of the House to find answers which will help 

our poor burst from their entrapment and hopelessness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as for the Liberal party, let me make it very clear that we shall seek to build a better 

Saskatchewan by using private enterprise methods. We know that private enterprise has given people in 

Canada one of the highest living standards anywhere in the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We are convinced that this system can provide a maximum of good jobs in our 

province. We know that new industries, which private enterprise can bring to our province, will widen 

the overall tax base and ease the tax burden which must be assumed by the average citizen. The private 

enterprise system, like any other mechanism devised by man, is not perfect. But surely history indicates 

that the system, coupled as it is with social legislation which puts a floor under the living standards of all 

without jeopardizing individual initiative, offers the best promise of maximizing the befits both of 

security and freedom. 

 

Our friends the Socialists disagree with this philosophy. They claim that Socialism, state ownership of 

industries and resources could do more for Saskatchewan. I remind the Legislature that in their twenty 

years of office my hon. Friends opposite certainly failed to produce the results that would justify such a 

claim. During those two decades while the rest of Canada prospered, this province stagnated in 

comparison. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, if any additional proof is needed, I would invite the people of 

Saskatchewan to look at the fiasco which has taken place in Great Britain recently under that Socialist 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In recent years the British have watched their country going from one crisis to another, 

always growing weaker economically. Under the Socialists, Britain has fallen further and further behind 

Western Europe in almost every economic field. The British gross national product has had the smallest 

growth rate of any of the great industrial nations. Unemployment has increased sharply. Taxes have 

increased year after year until in many fields they are almost to the point of confiscation. Only a few 

weeks ago, yet another round of increases was introduced. Today the rate in Britain on luxury goods is 

50-55 per cent. The rate on cars and durable goods is 36 per cent. The tax on furniture and clothing 

recently went up to over 13 per cent. The whole economy under Socialism reeks of decay, incompetence 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

87 

and failure. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): —Try Russia! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You try Russia if you like it, I think you might be more at home there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that any one who thinks that Socialism might be the 

answer should look at the mess in Great Britain since the Labour party took office, You know, Mr. 

Speaker, Napoleon couldn’t bring down the British. The Kaiser couldn’t defeat the British. Even Hitler 

couldn’t bring the Commonwealth to her knees. But Wilson and his Socialists accomplished in a few 

years what those leaders failed to do in the last half of the century. And yet, Mr. Speaker, this is the kind 

of system that the NDP advocate for Saskatchewan. No wonder the Canadians are not interested. Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest today that wherever Socialism has been tried, it has been found wanting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let’s look at East Germany. To keep a Socialist regime in power there they had to 

build a cement fence miles long to keep their people in. Soldiers and tanks and guns still keep their 

people from finding freedom. 

 

Several months ago we watched Czechoslovakia invaded again because her citizens wanted a restoration 

of certain basic liberties and freedoms. Socialism is only maintained there by brute force. 

 

Let’s take a look at Asia. Japan, under private enterprise is literally booming, going from one economic 

record to another. In China today under the Socialists it is in a state of decay. Mr. Speaker, I have seen 

many definitions of Socialism. Perhaps the most apt is: a Socialist is an individual who has given up any 

hope of becoming a capitalist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You know according to the Commonwealth, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) 

last December made a speech in Kyle. According to him and I quote the Commonwealth headline: 

―Same poverty pattern after 100 years of corporate enterprise.‖ Of course there is some poverty in 

Canada. There may always be. But, Mr. Speaker, I invite you to compare conditions in this province 

with the poverty in India under the Socialists, with the poverty in China under the Socialists and with the 

poverty of Russia under the Socialists. Indeed, compare conditions in Saskatchewan to the living 

standards of any people under a Socialist government anywhere in the world. If our people look around 

in the world today and make comparisons, they will thank God that they live in a country like Canada 

under a private and free enterprise system. 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

88 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as this Legislature meets it is self-evident that every government in Canada faces 

major financial problems. Last year the Federal Government had a deficit alone of about $1 billion. This 

year, even with huge tax increases, Mr. Benson estimates a deficit of over $700 million. Premier Robarts 

of Ontario has warned that his Province faces a financial nightmare in the immediate future. His 

Government this year will have a deficit of about $250 million. Mr. Dozois, the Provincial Treasurer of 

Quebec, has also forecast a huge provincial deficit. He recently talked at the Federal-Provincial 

Conference almost as though his Province face bankruptcy. He indicated that no further provincial taxes 

are possible in Quebec. You know even in oil-rich Alberta the Social Credit Government is expecting a 

deficit or more that $100 million in 1969. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Private enterprise! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, not private enterprise, Mr. Speaker, the trouble with these government they started 

to aid the Socialists then they got themselves in trouble. Except for British Columbia. I think 

Saskatchewan is the only province that will balance its budget in the current year. Surely this is no mean 

achievement when you consider other provinces are not obliged to finance a full medical care program, 

also because all our capital expenditures including highways and university buildings will again be 

financed from current revenue, and because we are also watching a $35 million equalization payment 

from Ottawa being phased out. However, I have no hesitation in saying that Saskatchewan also faces 

massive financial difficulties in the future. Most of the provinces are in financial trouble because of 

growth in magnitude and importance of the responsibilities assigned to them under the Constitution 

almost beyond their fiscal capacity. Provincial revenues for the most part come from rather 

slow-growing sources such as consumer taxes. Yet the cost of education, health, highways, and social 

welfare are escalating in an unbelievable manner. Most provincial governments had hoped that they 

would be granted more tax room by the Federal Government during 1969. But these aspirations have 

been chilled by recent speeches of the Finance Minister at Federal-Provincial Conferences. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1956, the Canadian tax system absorbed 28 per cent of the gross national product. In 

1967 the figure had increased to 34.5 per cent. And the recent Federal tax increases announced in the 

Budget Speech will bring the total tax budget to more than 35 per cent of the gross national product of 

this nation. These increases cannot continue. The average citizen today is simply paying all the taxes 

which he can afford. Indeed, I believe that limit has long since been exceeded. This Government then, 

Mr. Speaker, is determined that there cannot be any additional major tax increases in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thus, for months the Government has been endeavouring to restrain expenditures and it has not been an 

easy task. Repeatedly it has meant saying No when it would have been much easier to say Yes. It has 

meant exercising the most rigid control on the spending of the public’s money. It has meant on occasion 

turning down programs which might have been desirable, even in the so-called sacred cow fields. It will 

mean that in the coming year that we shall be obliged to ask civil 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

89 

servants, teachers, hospital employees, in fact the entire public to show restraint in their raise demands. 

However, I tell the people of Saskatchewan that the alternatives to restraint must be further tax 

increases. Mr. Speaker, there have been many times when this approach has meant difficult decisions. 

There have been many times when it would have been much easier and far more expedient politically to 

forget our economic principles. Had we done this, perhaps we would not so frequently hear the rather 

plaintive statement, ―The Saskatchewan Liberals do the tight things, but they do them in the wrong 

way.‖ Mr. Speaker, as far as I am concerned, there is only one way to do things and that is to face the 

problem, honestly make decisions and base them on principles and not expediency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I can tell the Socialists what happened to them, if they don’t know. Obviously 

Woodrow doesn’t know. They did the wrong thing the wrong way for 20 years and will be out of office 

for the next 40. Mr. Speaker, there is only one way to handle these problems and that is to face them 

fairly, honestly and make the decisions and base them on principle and not expediency. For refusing to 

engage in deficit financing, for refusing to fool the public, for declining to play politics with the public’s 

money, the Liberal Government has had no apology to make in the past and we make none now. Mr. 

Speaker, the people f Saskatchewan did not elect us to be merely Socialists in Liberal clothing. They 

elected us because we held out a set of private enterprise principles and we offered them something 

definite and something better than Socialism. I said earlier that there were three or four spending fields 

which were causing the provincial governments their major problems. 

 

The first has been all aspects of health. Over the years, costs of our health programs have escalated in an 

almost frightening manner. The year we took office total health costs amounted to $62 million. This year 

health expenditures gross will exceed $137 million. Of even greater concern is the fact that each year 

these costs have been increasing by 10 to 12 per cent. A year ago the Government realized that 

something had to be done to keep the costs of our health plans from going completely out of sight. At 

the same time we had to deal firmly with abuses and with over-utilization. We were well aware of the 

political delicacy involved in the problem. But we were elected to solve such difficulties in a 

straight-forward and business-like fashion. No government can print money. Everyone in Saskatchewan 

knows that health services must be paid for in the same manner as any other government service. And 

for the ills of our health plans, as we saw it, there was only one medicine which would provide a realistic 

cure and that was utilization fees. We applied that cure knowing full well that it would be anything but 

popular. OF course the Socialists raised a political storm. We think that utilization fees have worked. In 

the first nine months these fees have relieved the Provincial Government from the necessity of finding 

very substantial sums of money elsewhere. They have slowed down over-utilization, they have sharply 

lessened the waiting period in our major city hospitals. Even though we have had to face political 

difficulties with these fees we are still convinced that the course we followed was the responsible course 

and the correct one. And let me say that faced with the same circumstances today I feel we would make 

the same decision today. The alter- 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

90 

native, Mr. Speaker, was to see our fine health plan lying in financial ruin at our feet in the not too 

distant future. The alternative likewise was to see other programs such as Education, University, 

Highways, and Welfare suffer from lack of funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, make no mistake, government from all over Canada are facing the same dilemma. There is 

a growing awareness everywhere that open-ended programs lacking limits on spending can only result in 

economic chaos and financial disaster. You know in this particular matter our Government is accused of 

not putting sufficient emphasis on the human side of things. It is said that it is too concerned about 

dollars and cents, about factories and mines, and not concerned enough about the needs of people. This, 

of course, is standard Socialist propaganda. Emotional fields seldom based on facts have always been 

their stock-in-trade. 

 

But let’s face the question. Are we too concerned about dollars and cents? Mr. Speaker, these dollars 

and cents are the hard-earned dollars and cents of the Saskatchewan taxpayer, the farmer and the 

working man. For that reason let me assure you we shall continue to be concerned about them. We will 

take a backseat to no one in our genuine concern about the interests and the best interests of our health 

plan and other welfare programs. We realize there has been some hardship involved in the plan. If one 

individual suffers from chronic illness such as cancer, the charges in any one year may become 

excessive, or on occasions several members of a family may become ill for long periods the same year. 

The Throne Speech announced the Government will shortly institute a family ceiling on utilization fees. 

We believe such a measure will permit patient participation without working undue financial hardship 

on any wage earner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second field where expenditures are increasing with monotonous regularity is at our 

University. I turn to this subject, Mr. Speaker, for there is no area in which the Government has done 

more for the advancement of Saskatchewan and its young people than in this particular area. Since 

taking office this Government has given top priority to the University of Saskatchewan, and that priority 

has been in the form of hard cash. 

 

The Socialists, of course, downgrade our efforts, so perhaps for a moment we should examine the record 

for purposes of comparison. In order to be fair and reasonable, suppose we look at the last three years 

the NDP held office. In 1961, the Socialists gave the University for both operating and capital costs the 

princely sum of $5 million. In 1962, they managed to provide the University with a total of $7 million. 

In 1963, Mr. Speaker, faced with an election, they really made an effort but still the best they could do 

was a total of $11 million for both operating and capital. In the current year, the year just ending, Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberal Government will provide assistance to the University totalling some $34 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And yet, Mr. Speaker, our Socialist friends still have the gall to go about the province 

picturing themselves as the only great and only friends of higher education. The session had only been 

open for a few hours, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) complained that 

university tuition 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

91 

fees were too high. Therefore, may I remind the people of Saskatchewan that our tuition fees are among 

the lowest in Canada. They account for only about 20 per cent of the cost for educating a student. I think 

an 80 per cent subsidy by the taxpayers is surely generous. Perhaps I should also point out, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Hon. Members opposite had 20 years in which to address themselves to the problem of free 

tuition fees. What did they do about it? They did nothing, nothing that is except create conditions which 

repeatedly forced the University to increase the fees, which these same gentlemen now profess to find so 

repugnant. 

 

In the past the University of Saskatchewan had approximately last year 14,000 students. It is interesting 

to note, Mr. Speaker, that approximately 8,000 of these or 60 per cent attend university with the help and 

aid of interest-free student loans. Surely we have reached the point where any student of the required 

ability need not be deprived of a university education because of the lack of funds. In the coming year 

we expect the campus population to increase by approximately another 1,200. This year the Government 

will provide approximately $12½ million of capital program: on the Regina campus for example, the 

Education Building; the Saskatoon campus, the Veterinary College, the Education College and the 

Medical-Dental addition (phase 1). As a party, we are pledged to spend $5½ million over the current 

four-year period on capital construction at the University. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during 1968 I think it is fair to say that cordial relations have existed between the 

Government, the Board of Governors, and the University administration. Our taxpayers must realize, 

however, that the demand for university dollars over the next decade to say the least will be awesome. 

We shall probably never be able to give the University officials all the money they want, but we shall do 

our best within the capacity of the taxpayer to find the required sums. An investment in the University of 

Saskatchewan is an investment in the future of our young people and in the future of our nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before leaving the subject of the University I would like to refer briefly to what has been 

generally described as student unrest. During 1968, in many parts of the world, such student unrest 

became a rather terrifying phenomenon. In France student riots almost brought down the government. In 

Mexico student revolution resulted in several hundred deaths. On many campuses people were sickened 

by the spectacle of angry students milling about, shouting other people down, brawling with the police, 

obstructing other people in their normal pursuits. All this ostensibly to achieve some objective or 

another, not by persuasion, but through the devices of intimidation or blackmail. Nor has Canada been 

immune from these disturbances. We have seen student sit-ins repeatedly in our eastern provinces. At 

Simon Fraser University in British Columbia we saw virtual chaos. A university president was forced to 

resign by unruly student agitators and property was actually destroyed. Now fortunately these excesses 

have not so far at least come to the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m convinced that 98 per cent of the student body on the Regina and Saskatoon campuses 

are attending university for one purpose, that is to secure a good education which will equip them for 

later life. It is natural that any genuine sincere student should want reforms and new methods. The 

student who feels no eagerness for change, no desire to participate, no 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

92 

ambition to work for a better world, is not a normal student at all. The Government of Saskatchewan 

will do everything in its power to protect the rights and the aspirations of all these students but on most 

campuses there is another small minority – and I see the Hon. representative of Labour grinning over 

there and saying the Liberals, well, if he wants to associate himself with the kind of people I’m going to 

talk about now, that’s his privilege but I don’t want to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — These people, Mr. Speaker, that he associates himself with, go under the name of 

protesters, agitators, activists, hippies, malcontents, and so on. I believe the president of our University 

described some of them as anarchists and a few as professional agitators. Mr. Speaker, every citizen of 

this country, student or otherwise, has the right to dissent and our Government will always fight for the 

right for anyone, student or anyone else to dissent. Let me point out, that’s a better record than most of 

you can stand up and say – you haven’t fought for anything in your lives – 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Let me point out that higher education is not an absolute right nor is its enjoyment 

devoid of responsibility. The student in this country of today enjoys the finest educational facilities ever 

offered to any students at any time, at any place in world history. Those facilities have been given to the 

student – or a least 80 per cent of them are given to him – by Canadian society or, if you will, the 

Canadian Establishment for which the campus activist profess such contempt. Today in many parts of 

Canada there are far more applicants for enrolment in our universities than these institutions can handle. 

There is no reason why an individual should be tolerated as a student whose presence and activity there 

are disruptive of the education progress of other students. The University of Saskatchewan is not, nor 

will we allow it to become, a practice ground for anarchists or agitators. The University of 

Saskatchewan does not belong to them. The University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, belongs to the 

people of Saskatchewan. It belongs to the taxpaying public whose sacrifices have put it there for the 

benefit of all our young people. This Government believes that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, having 

built so fine a two-campus University at such enormous costs, and having sacrificed so much to keep it 

going, do not want to see that institution turned into a refuge for hippies, hotheads or agitators. Believe 

me, Mr. Speaker, no such thing is going to happen in Saskatchewan. I think students at the University 

should realize that a small minority of students and faculty members have already harmed the University 

of Saskatchewan in a fairly major way. For example, the obscenity of the Carillon, the Regina campus 

paper, has caused keen public resentment. Inflammatory speeches by certain students and even the odd 

faculty member have lowered the prestige of the University. 

 

More than a year ago, University officials announced that they were going to commence a campaign to 

raise some $10 million from citizens and industry by voluntary subscription. Many donors who have 

been generous to the University in the past withheld assistance. One canvasser in Regina said his 

prospects 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

93 

told him bluntly that they would not give financial aid until the situation on the campus was settled. This 

small minority of troublemakers should realize that their tactics have actually slowed down construction 

of some much needed facilities at the University. The University administration has indicated that it is 

always willing to listen to responsible student opinion. So also is this Government. We will promote and 

support any useful change put forward by reasonable students in an atmosphere of decency and 

decorum. But let me make it perfectly clear, let there be no misunderstanding whatever, our Government 

will not tolerate any attempts by anyone to disrupt, damage or take over our University. I say once again 

that any act of violence, or intimidation, any seizure or damage of University property, any attempt to 

disrupt the normal operation of the University, will be met by a firm hand. We have every confidence in 

the ability of our University officials to run our campus in the interests of all our people. This 

Government for its part will back them to the limit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, the third field where every field is experiencing rapidly escalating costs is 

in general education. We all fully recognize that our province’s future is determined to a large extent by 

the quality of education which we provide. In a world that grows ever more complex, the young person 

who does not obtain the very best education of which he or she is capable will be handicapped for life. 

Invariably our unemployed are those with a grade eight education or less. Thus, there is probably no 

better investment that a country can make, than an investment in the education of its youth. I suggest 

that no unbiased person can say that this Government has shirked its responsibility in this field. May I 

remind the House that during their last years in office, our friends the Socialists, spent $57 million in 

total on education. In 1969, four years later, our Liberal Government is spending on education over $112 

million, almost double. Under this Government in every field spending has sharply increased, in the 

field of education for salaries, school construction and new programs. Text books have been provided 

free to students in grades 9, 10, and 11. They will soon be also provided for those in grade 12. 

 

Technical school education so vital in this day of modern technology is rapidly expanding. When we 

took office there were only 3,000 students in Saskatchewan taking vocational and technical training. 

Five years later more than 8,000 students are taking these courses annually. I am pleased to report that 

significant progress is also being made in upgrading our adult education. For a number of reasons, other 

new programs have also been introduced into the school curriculum. This year, for example, some 9,000 

high school students are enrolled in driver education courses, a program instituted by our Government in 

1967. I think . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — That brought a little . . . I’m sorry I woke you up, Allan but that’s a fact and if the facts 

wake you up – I see they drove the Leader of the opposition (Mr. Lloyd) out – but if they wake you up 

that’s the benefit. 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

94 

We think this program is essential to the safety of our people on our highways and streets. In addition 

our Government initiated a school band program which has resulted in the formation of 55 new school 

bands throughout the province. 

 

As we outlined last year, we have proceeded with the establishment of two schools in the province in 

which French is the predominant language of instruction. We expect to proceed with setting up at least 

one more school in the coming year. 

 

Provincial cash grants for education year after year increase by millions of dollars. Nor does there 

appear to be any slowing down of the increases in sight. Yet even spending on education, Mr. Speaker, 

must be related to economic facts. During the past few months the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) 

and the departmental officials have made major efforts to restrain unnecessary frills and expenditures. 

 

The Government is concerned also at the level of spending by local government on education. In spite of 

increasingly generous Provincial support, Mr. Speaker, local mill rates keep rising ever higher. The local 

taxpayer is groaning under the burden. The main cause, of course, of escalating education costs has to be 

teachers’ salaries. We want our teachers to have the highest possible salaries consistent with the ability 

of the taxpayer to finance them. If we are to keep good teachers, we must be competitive with other 

provinces. But as in other fields, there is a limit to the capacity of those who must pay the bills. In the 

current round of salary negotiations, some teacher associations have made demands of from 20 to 30 per 

cent. Surely in this day of inflationary pressures, such demands are unfair and unrealistic. Our 

Government expects the teachers to keep their demands on a reasonable basis. 

 

So I repeat, greater efforts must be made to control over-all school costs. If these costs are to be 

controlled, local school boards must show more restraint in the future. Perhaps some expenditures will 

have to be temporarily postponed. Some desirable programs may have to wait. Close scrutiny of school 

construction demands will have to be continued particularly in view of current interest rates. In all cases 

school building projects must be carefully examined in the light of long-term needs. So we call on 

school trustees, on all school boards to try and restrain expenditures this year as they never have before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the day has come, I believe, when the burden of ever-increasing costs of education must be 

borne, in part at least for all education that is, by the Federal Government. Surely this makes sense at a 

time when the Economic Council of Canada and other bodies tell us that Canada’s prosperity will 

depend inevitably on the success we achieve in educating our people. Gone are the days when a 

province educated it people only for its own provincial working force. Canadians in every part of 

Canada are more mobile today than at any other time in our history. Therefore, in our view, it makes 

eminently good sense for the Federal Government to concern itself financially with the education of a 

work force for Canada, and not leave this responsibility primarily to individual provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these three fields then, Health, the University, and Education are the three Provincial 

departments where costs are escalating most rapidly. The Government will continue 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

95 

to give these fields a top priority in our budgetary spending. But even these departments, important as 

they are, cannot be treated as sacred cows. In the overall interest of our people, we must weed out 

abuses, waste, or extravagance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other areas where the interest of the province will also require major spending. 

The Throne Speech indicated that new and vigorous action will be taken in the coming year to integrate 

out Indian and Metis citizens into the mainstream of Saskatchewan society. It goes without saying that 

this problem is a major challenge to the Legislature. Proportionately we have the largest native 

population of any province in Canada. We have about 35,000 Indians on reserves, and about 35,000 

Indians and Metis people off reserves. I believe that in the year 1968 we made worthwhile progress as 

anything but little more than a beginning. A more urgent problem could scarcely be imagined. In 

Saskatchewan we are finding employment for more and more native people. The birth rate continues so 

high that the overall problem is steadily worsening. As Hon. Members know, we have stepped up 

educational opportunities and we are moving modestly into the field of better housing. We have set up a 

Task Force Comprising representatives of business, labor, the co-ops, the hospital association, the 

trustees, the Teachers’ Federation, the University, the churches, and other groups. This Task Force is 

designed to help the Government solve the hard care unemployment situation among our native people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are all determined that our Indian and Metis people will no longer be the 

forgotten people of this land. We must take further vigorous and aggressively action and take it as 

quickly as possible. Let me emphasize that we contemplate no new measures in connection with social 

aid. Our programs, almost entirely, will be designed to find jobs and employment. They will be designed 

to help the native people help themselves. To further that end we will establish a new Department of 

Indian and Metis Affairs. It will be a full-fledged department in every respect, with a Minister, a Deputy 

Minister, and adequate personnel to carry out the necessary responsibilities. In attacking a problem so 

complex, it is imperative that there is maximum co-ordination, and that will be the main role of the new 

department. The Minister in charge of the department will be the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. 

Estey), the Deputy Minister will be Mr. James Sinclair, a long-time civil servant who up to now has 

been the Director of Northern Affairs. We can only hope that this approach may prove most effective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me turn for a moment to our Highway Program. There can be no question that this year, 

and in the years to come, highways must continue to occupy a high place in our priorities. The most 

modern highway system within our means is vital to continued industrial development, economic 

diversification, the tourist trade, and to the opening up of our North. It seems hardly necessary to remind 

this House of the accomplishments of the last few years. However, since the Socialists have memories 

which are sometimes short, they will perhaps be pleased of I mentioned just a few statistics. 

 

On their last year of government they spent on highways $27 million. In our second year of office we 

doubled that and spent $54 million. In each of the last two years we have spent close to $60 million. 

This does not take into account the $12½ million annually spent on municipal roads by the Province. 

An- 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

96 

other program of similar magnitude will be proposed for the coming year. 

 

From time to time our opponents claim that we are spending too much on highways. In this connection I 

make just two points. First, a significant part of this enormous expenditure would not have been 

necessary if the Socialists had done the job properly when they were in office. Secondly, not only are we 

dealing with a transportation system that is the life-blood of our economy, we are dealing with human 

lives. We are all horrified by the terrible toll in lives, injuries and property loss in highway accidents. 

Surely it is a fundamental responsibility of any government to do all in its power to keep these tragic 

losses down. It is a proven fact that four-lane, divided highways have about half as many accidents as 

occur on single lane surfaces. Much the same is true when paved or oiled highways are compared with 

gravel surfaces. The Government is convinced that our people want modern, dust-free, and safe 

highways, and our Government intends to build them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, during 1969 we will also build more resource roads into Northern 

Saskatchewan. The unprecedented mineral development which is now taking place in our North without 

a doubt will need new and costly transportation facilities. We also intend to continue our four-lane 

program. Substantially more work will be done on the Trans-Canada Highway and the 

Saskatoon-Regina Project. We intend, as our finances permit, to gradually bring more grid roads into the 

highway system. We shall increase again financial assistance to municipalities who wish to expand the 

feeder road program. We shall continue providing financial assistance to towns and villages in paving 

their main streets. We intend to step up assistance to urban centres in improving streets and bridges 

which are part of the highway system, and arterial streets connecting the highway route. In short, despite 

the huge costs involved, this Government intends ultimately to give Saskatchewan one of the best 

highway systems in al of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I turn now to another subject in which the Government has maintained a 

keen and continuing interest, namely, the pensions of retired civil servants. No one will argue, I am sure, 

when it is pointed out that many civil servants who are retired some years ago did so on pensions which 

were pitifully inadequate. Upon assuming office this Government took immediate steps to gradually 

rectify this situation. Our program has involved raising annual pensions for those receiving less than 

$2,400 per year by $10 for each year in service to a maximum of $2,400. The Throne Speech indicated 

further action in this regard during the current Session. This policy has been put into effect in stages by 

the Liberal Administration. For example, in 1965, all public servants who retired before 1951 were 

brought into the program. In 1966 we brought those who retired between 1951 and 1954. In 1967 

increases were granted to civil servants who went on superannuation between 1954 and 1958. We now 

propose to extend the same benefits to those who retired between 1958 and 1963. 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

97 

The Throne Speech indicated that the Government is proposing another adjustment to civil service 

pensions. As salaries have increased and as the cost of living has gone up, the Government now believed 

that the ceiling on civil servants pensions is unrealistic. Thus, as indicated in the throne Speech, we 

intend to gradually adjust the ceiling upward over the next three years. The maximum will be increased 

now to $8,050 per year. 

 

I believe that Saskatchewan has an excellent Civil Service. We have dedicated and hard working public 

servants who frequently work under difficult circumstances. I am sure this legislation will be welcome 

on both sides of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — For many years the Government has been assisting local governments in meeting their 

capital requirements through a policy of purchasing a portion of their debentures. Through this policy 

the Government purchased up to 50 per cent of the local government’s debenture issue where genuine 

difficulties were experienced in marketing those bonds. This policy, though, excluded the debentures for 

the purpose of financing surface works, recreational facilities and office building. 

 

In the last two or three years the financial requirements of local governments have sharply increased. At 

the same time and because of tight money and high interest rates, many municipalities have found 

themselves in an impossible situation. Frequently small administrative units have had to pay 8½ or even 

9 per cent interest to borrow money on the present markets. There have been some who have been 

unable to borrow money at any price. And even the borrowing capacity of our large cities has been 

strained. For this reason, as mentioned in the Throne Speech, the Government proposes to set up a 

Municipal Finance Corporation which will loan money to local governments. The main purpose would 

be to provide a source of funds to help meet the capital requirements of local governments, and to 

reduce the cost of money. The Government will not attempt to provide all the capital which is needed 

for these purposes. Indeed with the current tight money situation, we shall be obliged to proceed 

cautiously. Initially the amount of funds which can be supplied by this Corporation will probably only 

be a portion of the total demand. However, we shall increase the amount made available year by year. At 

the same time the Government will expect local units to take full advantage on any markets which may 

exist elsewhere. 

 

The Corporation will be financed by the issue and sale of Province of Saskatchewan debentures. The 

cost of money chargeable to all local governments, and these will include the major cities and the 

smaller cities as well, will be the cost of money to the Government plus a small administrative charge. 

The new Corporation will be placed under the very able administration of the Treasury Department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I now turn to agricultural matters. It is not likely that anyone in Saskatchewan has any 

illusions about what our climate can do to the agricultural industry. These hazards and dangers were 

certainly emphasized during the past two years. 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

98 

Those conditions again demonstrate the absolute necessity of further diversification on the farm. They 

also point out the necessity of expanding as rapidly as possible our crop insurance program. Five years 

ago there were only 2,350 farms insured, a coverage totalling about $4.1 million. During the past year 

the coverage was increased to include 12,500 farms and about $35 million total coverage. This year we 

hope to insure at least 15,000 farmers, and the total will be around $30 million. Of course, Mr. Speaker, 

we will not be satisfied until the Crop Insurance Program has been extended to every farm and every 

area where it is at all economically feasible. However, the risks involved oblige us to proceed with a 

reasonable degree of caution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan today is one of the few provinces that remains without a distinctive 

Provincial flag. At the last session of the Legislature it was decided that an Inter-sessional Committee 

would be set up to bring in recommendations. Our understanding is that they have been working and 

they have examined over 4,000 designs. Now there are a large number of people who think, who are of 

the opinion that the colourful flag chosen for the Province’s Jubilee should be the logical choice. Other 

people think that some of the other 4,000 exhibits naturally should be the one. In any event I would 

express the hope that the matter may be concluded this year and be settled by a free vote of this 

Legislature. Once the flag has been chosen I hope that it will be given the respect that it will deserve as 

our official Saskatchewan flag. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, during the last four or five years the Government has been reasonably 

successful in creating an atmosphere which would attract new industries. Naturally, if a plant is to be 

established in our province, we must be competitive. As we all know, Alberta has no sales tax yet. 

Manitoba has a 5 per cent sales tax, but machinery and equipment for manufacturing are exempt. As the 

Throne Speech indicated we shall be proposing legislation which will permit us to meet this kind of 

competition, particularly from Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

The Bill, of course, will be permissive only. The legislation will not apply to mines except where 

smelting or processing is concerned. I suggest to the Hon. Members that this legislation will be 

necessary and vital in our continuing drive to obtain new industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question of rehabilitation at our Correctional Institutions was also mentioned in the 

Throne Speech. This Government believes that rehabilitation should play a major role at our correctional 

institutions. Because of that belief, in the past several years two new programs were developed – both of 

them firsts in Canada. Several years ago at the Correctional Centre in Regina, we introduced a family 

therapy program. Accommodation for overnight visiting between the inmate and his family was 

provided. As Hon. Members know a duplex home was built using inmate labor at a very economical 

price. Our Department of Social Welfare feels that the program has been most successful. And so it will 

be in the coming year expanded and brought into effect at the Prince Albert Correctional Centre during 

1969. During the past year our Department has been experimenting with an educational and work 

program which 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

99 

permits certain inmates to leave the institution during the day time and in doing this, to take employment 

or to take vocational and academic training in the community while still serving their sentence. 

Naturally the participants must be very carefully selected. Again our Department of Welfare feels that 

this program has been successful and under the circumstances the Government will increase and expand 

the number of inmates participating during the coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, water pollution is one of the most serious problems being faced by any nations and cities 

today. Because this Government is aware of the major role which water plays in the lives of the people, 

it established a pollution control branch of the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission at the 1968 

session of this Legislature. As we outlined in the Speech from the Throne, we now plan to set up a 

program offering financial help to Saskatchewan cities which are making additions or improvements to 

their sewage systems. This assistance will be provided under The Water Pollution Control Act and will 

provide up to 10 per cent of the total capital cost of such a project, up to a maximum of $500,000 for any 

one city. 

 

The new Act will not apply to towns or villages because there is existing legislation which can help such 

units with their pollution problems. Two cities that will find this of immediate help will be Saskatoon 

and Prince Albert because they were ordered to stop polluting the South and North Saskatchewan Rivers 

within the next year or two. Thus the Water Commission has ordered both these cities to erect proper 

sewage disposal systems and the legislation will help them with this financing. 

 

Last autumn, the city of Yorkton also began improvements on their secondary sewage system and this 

city will also benefit immediately from this new Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne indicated that the Government will propose a setting-up of two 

Inter-sessional Committees. The first will have to do with an examination of present house rules. It has 

been many years since the rules of this House have been reviewed. The government believes that the 

Legislature could operate more efficiently and with greater despatch if our present rules were modified 

and up-dated. The Throne Speech also indicated that the Government would recommend the setting-up 

of a second Legislative Committee for the purpose of reviewing The Election Act. Despite the changes 

made several years ago, I think Members on both sides of the House would agree there are still 

shortcomings on our present Act. Among other things I would hope that the Committee might study the 

rules for voting of university students and single persons to allow them more flexibility; define for 

voting purposes geriatric centres, hospitals and nursing homes; update the sections of the Act with 

reference to transportation and the providing of meals and so on; decide if it is desirable to allow 

returning officers to appoint enumerators and other poll officials prior to the issue of the writ; review the 

period between the issuing of the writ and election day to see if the official election campaign should be 

shortened. These are only a few of the matters which might be considered. 

 

The Government has in mind a committee of nine for this purpose. It is our hope that this committee, 

made up of Members from both sides of the House, will be able to make constructive suggestions that 

will help to streamline out Province’s 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

100 

election procedures. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that this matter can be handled in a non-partisan, 

co-operative manner, to the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have today outlined a few of the Government’s programs for 1969. I suggest that the 

Throne Speech has outlined a legislative program which is imaginative, progressive and still within the 

means of the taxpaying public. It envisions no grandiose schemes. It makes no impractical suggestions. 

In essence the Throne Speech proposed steady, sound progress toward a better future for all our people. 

 

I began this address, Mr. Speaker, with a warning of crises on all sides and of difficulties which must be 

met with decision. I close it, Sir, with a challenge. The Challenge is directed in frank but friendly 

fashion to all Hon. Members on both sides. 

 

I have suggested that too many legislatures and parliaments have become something less than centres of 

decision and action, that this is the source to which can be traced too many of our world’s troubles 

today. All of us, I think, who sit in this House hold views that are strong and sincere. If there is an 

Assembly anywhere in which the views of the two sides are decidedly different it is this one in 

Saskatchewan. We all know how wide the gulf that separates us in our political philosophies. So be it. 

We can still make this House an example of action and achievement instead of a bear-pit of bitterness. If 

we do not make this Legislature a centre for action, then we will have failed to face up to what is 

demanded of us in these times of crisis. Mr. Speaker, let us make 1969 a banner year of achievement for 

the people of Saskatchewan. I will, of course, support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.G. MacLennan (Last Mountain): —Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition yesterday went 

on at great length on matters concerning the grain situation in Western Canada. He blamed the existing 

situation on the Provincial Government here in Saskatchewan and on the Federal Government in 

Ottawa. In making his address he slanted, contorted, twisted and deliberately attempted to be misleading 

in presenting the facts on this situation. He made no reference to the fact that it is extremely difficult 

because of the extreme weather to move box cars with any efficiency whatsoever from the prairies 

through the mountains to the west coast. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — He made no mention of the fact that in 20 or 30 degrees below zero, blizzards, 

blocked roads, that it is difficult to dry grain here on the prairies. He made no mention of the fact that 

the weather conditions on the West Coast were also sever, the worst in years, causing untold grief to the 

loading out there. The Premier in his opening remarks yesterday pointed out only too well the insincerity 

and hypocrisy of the NDP when they tempt to come to the side of the farmer. He asked them what did 

they say. What objections did they raise when various unions went out on strike and tied up the 

shipment of millions of bushels of grain? Did they come rushing to the 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

101 

side of the farmers then? Did they advocate immediate government action to burst the strike and get 

grain moving again? The answer, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier pointed out, is that the NDP said nothing 

and did not attempt to use their relationship with the union movement to intervene on the farmers’ 

behalf. 

 

The next Speaker in this debate as I am informed, is the Member from Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder). 

He, Mr. Speaker, is a trade unionist. He is a railway man. He knows, Mr. Speaker, the difficulties that 

the railways have faced this winter in moving trains from the prairies to the West Coast. He will, I am 

sure, assume the same hypocritical pose as did the Leader of the Opposition. He is, of course, the master 

of hypocrisy. He will say anything on any situation to attempt to gain some political advantage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): —. . . To call another Member a hypocrite I think that it 

contravenes the rules of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He hasn’t got his full degree yet. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — He will say anything on any situation to attempt to gain . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Let me think about this for a minute. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Mr. Speaker, if you rule against it I will withdraw later on but I would now like to 

go on. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): —. . . And with this idea in mind I think he should withdraw 

any reference to remarks that I might make in this debate. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Mr. Speaker, I am not referring to remarks that he might make this afternoon, but I 

can refer to some of the remarks he made in the last session of this legislature. We all remember last 

year when he made a speech in opposition to indemnity increases for MLAs. He felt according to his 

speech that the conditions, that existed in the province last year and because of some of the legislation 

brought down by the Government last year, made it impossible for him to see fit to support these 

indemnity increases. And did he take his raise, Mr. Speaker? Well of course, Mr. Speaker! He was the 

first one there. There he was taking home every red cent of his increase with a smile on his face. His 

hypocritical speech fooled no one, Mr. Speaker, as did the Leader of the opposition ―friends of the 

farmers‖ speech yesterday fool anyone. The people, Mr. Speaker, know these birds opposite by their 

true colors and they will continue to remember them for what they are and they will continue to reject 

them at the polls. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — The Throne Speech that was read to us Thursday 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

102 

last indicates once again that this present Government is concerned with all phases of Saskatchewan life. 

It spells out the Government’s objectives for the coming year. 

 

The mover and seconder of this Speech have to be congratulated for the able manner in which they have 

pointed out the many obvious benefits derived from programs mentioned in this and former speeches 

from the Throne brought down by this Government. We have already heard some preliminary comments 

made by two Members opposite. The Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) referred to it in the 

press as a ―so sorry speech‖. I am sure the Member opposite meant exactly what he said. He is sorry, 

Mr. Speaker, and a more sorry man has probably never taken a seat in this House. He is sorry because 

we are in the position to forma government. He is sorry that he was a member of a government and a 

party that has been rejected by the people of Saskatchewan twice in the last five years. He is sorry that 

the policies of the former Government, policies that for over generations have been common to all 

Socialist organizations and movements and thought to be perfect by all Socialists across the world, 

proved to be disastrous in some cases and far more than imperfect in other cases. He must be sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, when he realizes that the Socialists not only in Saskatchewan but all over the world are having 

a rough go of it come election time in their various countries, provinces or states. He must be sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, to see the dismal failures of the Socialist Government in Great Britain and how the people over 

there are giving less and less support to Socialist candidates in each and every by-election, defeating 

them one after another in former Socialist strongholds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — He will, Mr. Speaker, be even more sorry when he realizes tat the Socialist 

philosophy is out of date, old-fashioned, impractical, unnecessary, unwarranted and rejected. The 

Members opposite, all NDP Members, are sorry to see a Speech from the Throne brought down by a 

liberal Government, because they know it is another nail in the coffin that will eventually bury the 

Socialist movement in the pages of history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — In this movement’s dying days, Mr. Speaker, we will see many frantic death gasps 

for continued life. This movement, the NDP, will become even more irresponsible. They will become 

more bitter. They will become more militant. They will have less respect for our institutions, less respect 

for our achievements. They will become completely intolerant toward the opinions of other groups and 

even more intolerant to the opinion of the individual. 

 

They will ally themselves with many strange groups of radicals and disgruntled. They will force the 

more moderate people in their ranks to desert them. They will become more nihilistic and more anti. 

They will totally involve themselves with their own survival and not the growth and well-being of 

society as a whole. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

103 

Mr. MacLennan: — This trend of conduct has already begun to set into the actions and determinations 

of the NDP. We see many of their more radical supporters involve themselves in causes of ferment in 

our society. We have witnessed the approval by the NDP leadership of actions and statements attributed 

to the more radical and irresponsible segments but nevertheless important and influential members of 

their party. This shows that they are desperate for support from any quarter. 

 

The NDP have lost sight of their original goals and objectives and seem to be content to stir up 

dissension in society. Groups in society that are out to destroy our institutions by almost any means 

receive no condemnation by the NDP leadership. We have seen the national vice-president of the NDP 

and an announced candidate for their party’s national leadership participate in a rally in the Province of 

Quebec a few months ago with avowed anarchists. Many people in attendance at this conference have 

dedicated their lives to bring about change through violence. Many were racists, violent Black Power 

supporters, violent student power supporters, Communist and Red Front supporters. These nuts that I 

have just referred to were in the majority at this meeting. The proof was shown when the meeting turned 

into a gathering of unorganized chaos. 

 

This man that participated in this conference was brought out to Saskatchewan by the NDP to attend 

NDP functions and to attempt to bolster their support. He was touted here as one of the new hopes for 

the NDP nationally. This man is well educated and is a professor at one of our universities. He by 

participating at such a conference shows shockingly poor judgement but is typical of some of the rising 

members of the party opposite. The NDP have lost the respect of the people because of their desire to 

champion the causes of the malcontents, the semi-anarchists who are in existence in a minority way in 

almost every segment of our society. The NDP believe the political success of a Socialist party is 

dependent on the majority of the people to be suffering, to be in poverty, to be uneducated, to the 

progress made in our province, our country and our world. 

 

They know, however, that the standard of living in our province and in our nations is rapidly improving. 

They know also that there are still some people suffering from poverty and from the lack of education 

and other resources. They know also these people are a small minority. They are aware of the many 

actions the Governments of Saskatchewan and Canada are taking to correct these situations. They are 

constantly frustrating these government activities and actions by belittling them in speeches and by 

exploiting the areas of discontent for political purposes. Organizations that are in existence today with 

honest and legitimated objectives are subject to NDP infiltration and eventually NDP control and 

dominance. They then use these organizations to stir up unrest and agitation against government to 

further the political fortunes of their party. 

 

In moving the Speech from the Throne the Member from Saskatoon City Park University (Mr. 

Charlebois) mentioned one area of unrest and concern, that of our universities. In this area of concern 

the Regina campus seems to be the focal point. In examining the situation on the Regina campus one 

asks himself what makes the Regina campus different to the Saskatoon campus or any other campus in 

Canada. Generally speaking students all over are asking for more participation in university affairs. 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

104 

In Regina on the Regina campus some students are not asking but demanding. If students want more 

involvement in university affairs they must show they are mature enough to conduct themselves in a 

proper manner. So far they have not convinced the public of Saskatchewan that they are mature enough 

to do so. Categorizing all the students on the Regina campus as immature is grossly unfair and I do not 

do so. The majority of the students on this campus are mature, conscientious citizens, appreciative of 

what they are attending university for and appreciative to the citizens of Saskatchewan, past and present, 

for making university facilities available to them. The majority is not a vocal one. The so-called student 

activists are very vocal and very much a minority. This is an unfortunate situation but nevertheless a real 

one. This situation has damaged the prestige of this campus. The student power advocates have much to 

learn. The first thing is that the Board of Governors of the University is entrusted by the people of the 

Province of Saskatchewan with the responsibility of making university education in the best possible 

manner available to the citizens of Saskatchewan. The Board of Governors are aware of this 

responsibility and are conducting themselves in accordance with it. It is only natural that the Board must 

have authority in matters pertaining to their responsibility. If any individual or group is obstructing their 

trust the Board must have the authority to deal with this individual or group. 

 

Some students simply do not want to accept these principles. They have made it a practice to insult the 

Board, the Government and the people that have entrusted the Board and Government with their 

responsibilities. These students have managed to gain control of their university newspaper, The 

Carillon. Through this media of communication they have irresponsibly attacked members of the 

University administration, members of the Board of Governors and members of the Government. They 

have also supported the Viet Cong. They have attempted to immortalize one of Castro’s original 

henchman. In last week’s editorial page they suggest that Mr. Alan Tubby, Mr. Leslie and Mr. Stuart 

Nicks, all of them prominent Saskatchewan citizens dedicated for many years to the services of their 

province and country, they suggest that these men should not be members of the Board of Governors. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, the Government, and I am sure, the Board of Governors have not been in 

agreement with this newspaper when they have immortalized Cuban Communists, North Vietnamese 

Communists and have attacked Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — The people of Saskatchewan all realize that it is the right of a newspaper to have 

an editorial policy and print what they may within the laws of the land. The people of this province have 

tolerated this newspaper and its insults for several years. No one has told them they must cease 

publishing. They own their newspaper and they can publish it but they must pay for it. They cannot 

expect people, who must answer to the people of Saskatchewan, to collect the money to pay for such 

garbage as advocated in the Carillon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — The concept of a state-run university with financial 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

105 

support coming from the state, industry and individuals, run by a Board of Governors with faculty heads 

and professors hired by the university administration, with standards taking courses of study, is no 

longer accepted be certain student power leaders of today. 

 

The policies as advocated in The Carillon would have the university 100 per cent financed by the states 

with free tuition for the students, the students to have a major influence on who the professors shall be 

and what they shall teach. This is simply not acceptable to the people of this province. If this were to 

happen while this Government was in power I would have to re-examine my position as a supporter of 

this Government. The student power leaders must realize that the Saskatchewan taxpayer is paying for 

almost 80 per cent of the total cost of their education. As long as this remains so they must through their 

representatives on the Board remain in the dominant position of authority in matters related to the 

well-being to the University. 

 

The people of this province are watching with a great deal of concern the happenings in the Regina 

campus. They are shocked at the support that some of the left wing professors are giving the student 

power leaders. They are shocked at the direct tie-up between these left wing Viet Cong sympathizers 

and the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — They are shocked at the support given to these student radicals by the 

NDP-dominated Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. They are shocked at the tolerance and support of 

these student radicals given to them by the Saskatchewan NDP. They were shocked to see the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) rush to the press to condemn the University board on their decision to 

suspend the collection of university student fees for the student union. The people of Saskatchewan are 

not without the knowledge that the NDP were particularly dismayed to see a cutback in the printing of 

this student newspaper, The Carillon, for they know that it is printed by the Services Printing Company 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — . . . a company wholly owned by the NDP. In other words whatever profits made 

by the Service Printing Company in printing this rag of a newspaper go into the NDP political warchest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — This group of student power leaders, together with their NDP supporters march 

together in a clause that is alien to the basic beliefs of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan voter will examine the conduct and statements of Saskatchewan political 

leaders. They will remember and they will judge and they will vote. They will see the role the present 

Premier is playing in the affairs of our province and in our nations. They will recognize in him a 

no-nonsense, straight forward, business-like leader. They know that he is without fear in fighting causes, 

individuals or governments that are not acting for the well-being of the 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

106 

people of Saskatchewan. They appreciate knowing Saskatchewan’s position on any matter that affects 

the province or nation. If there are problems of any type facing the province the people have the right to 

know what they are, and the Premier of this province has always told them what they are and how his 

Government will attempt to solve them. This he does, Mr. Speaker, regardless of any political 

consequences. 

 

I am pleased to note, Mr. Speaker, that this Government intends to continue on with its program of 

providing housing and special care homes for our senior citizens. This program has brought many 

benefits to my constituency of Last Mountain. Since this Government took office in 1964 two fine 

homes have been built, one in Southey and one in Strasbourg. There is still need for a senior citizens’ 

home in Lanigan. I ask this Government to give top priority to the construction of a nursing home in 

Lanigan. This Government, Mr. Speaker, has a tremendous record of achievement in the construction of 

special care homes. In the five years we have been in power we have almost doubled the number of beds 

for our elderly. There were in April 1964, 2,583 beds and at the present there are 4,871. 

 

This Government, Mr. Speaker, has an outstanding record in the field of public health regardless what 

our Opposition friends say. There are more than twice the number of funds made available in the present 

year for public health than there were in the last year they were in power. 

 

There is mention in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, of the great mineral activity in the 

province. The exploration discoveries in northern Saskatchewan are so encouraging, Mr. Speaker, that it 

is mentioned in the Speech from the Throne that the northern mineral exploration program having 

fulfilled its purpose should be discontinued, and that this program will be terminated upon exploration of 

existing agreements. This program has been a qualified success. These incentives for exploration 

brought in companies that have the success we had hoped for. The NDP Opposition have attacked this 

Government for bringing in this particular program. NDP speakers condemn this program as a betrayal 

of the people of Saskatchewan. They called it a sellout. Mr. Speaker, the NDP, in opposing our incentive 

programs for exploration, for deep drilling and for mining, only displayed their inability to attract 

industry, their inability to compete with other provinces and one again, displayed their general 

incompetent and lack of imagination in conducting the business affairs of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Changing times and changing situations, Mr. Speaker, make it necessary to change 

policy. This Government, Mr. Speaker, is not tied down to any rigid Socialist dogma that prohibited it 

from doing so. Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, cannot idly stand by watching other provinces land industry 

after industry and find jobs for their people. Saskatchewan must do the same. This Government, this 

Premier is more conscious of this than any other Government in the history of this Province. The Throne 

Speech indicates that this Government realizes this and consequently will introduce cash incentives if 

needed to meet the competition we meet from other provinces. This program will be successful, it will 

bring in industry, it will provide new and more jobs for our people. It will inject new dollars into 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

107 

our economy, will broaden our tax base and further diversify our economy. It is next to impossible for 

me to believe that if we had a Socialist or an NDP Government here in Saskatchewan that such steps 

would be taken. The NDP after all adhere to Socialist dogma and there is no Socialist dogma to suggest 

cash incentives to private corporations to locate here. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is an item in the Throne Speech regarding enabling legislation to permit an 

increase in the remuneration paid to members of urban municipal councils. There are many urban 

council members who, because they are conscientious servants of the public, devote several days each 

week on civic business. They are doing this in some cases at great personal and financial cost to 

themselves and their families. The ability and initiative shown by some of these men have brought great 

benefits to their community and to their province. These men, Mr. Speaker, deserve an increase in 

remuneration and because of it it is likely that all urban municipal council members will receive 

increased remuneration. Supporting this item in the Throne Speech, however, does not mean for one 

minute that I believe that the majority of members of the Regina city council at the present time deserve 

any increase in remuneration whatsoever. A recent proposal of that council to move from its present 

quarters that they own into leased quarters at a cost of hundreds of thousands of dollars to city taxpayers 

is unnecessary, ridiculous, absurd and unwarranted. It is quite easy to understand that this costly and 

ridiculous move would come from a council that is dominated by supporters of the mayor who is NDP 

Member for Regina East. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that I think the proposed legislation mentioned in the 

Speech from the Throne will bring many benefits to the people of Saskatchewan. Accordingly I will 

vote against the amendment and support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): —Mr. Speaker, my first words must be to express the personal 

regret of Members on this side of the House with the news that the Premier is somewhat less than well, 

and at the same time I want to express the wish that his recovery will be rapid and he will return the this 

Chamber in the near future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased again as Member for the constituency of Moose Jaw North to contribute a 

few words to this 1969 Throne Speech debate. My first words must be to congratulate the mover and 

seconder of the Address-in-Reply who I thought devoted themselves to the job at hand with a degree of 

skill and valor at a time in history when it requires a good deal of courage to be a big ―L‖ liberal in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — My initial reaction to the remarks of the mover of the Address-in-Reply was to wonder 

what possible part he might have played in the Premiers’ Conference at Waskesiu last summer. I was 

holidaying in the Maritimes at that time, Mr. Speaker, and the only news of any consequence which 

leaked through to the 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

108 

eastern seaboard was the apparent eagerness of the Government of Saskatchewan to convince other 

Provincial Premiers that deterrent charges were a must with the introduction of a National Medicare 

Plan. I was reminded, Mr. Speaker, of the fable regarding the fox who lost his luxurious tail in a hunting 

accident. Quite embarrassed and forlorn, Mr. Speaker, the fox spent the remaining years of his life 

attempting to convince the other foxes how neat and streamlined he appeared under new circumstances 

and tried to convince them that they should have their tails bobbed too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Really, Mr. Speaker, misery enjoys company and the Saskatchewan Government would 

like to look more respectable with its lead being followed by other provincial jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I was disappointed with the Premier’s attempt yesterday to 

obscure the failing and the errors of omission of his Government with the reference to the damp grain 

problem. The Premier’s attempt involved pointing an accusing finger at organized labor, not for current 

problems, Mr. Speaker, but for some obscure problem of many months ago. There is no question, Mr. 

Speaker, about the embarrassment of the Government concerning the loss of a sale of some 740,000 

bushels of wheat to Japan; and Mr. Speaker, any convenient whipping boy will be used to divert 

attention from the failure of both the Federal and the Provincial Liberal Governments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) began his remarks today by suggesting that he 

had brought his music with him. Mr. Speaker, the music may have been Davey’s but there was no doubt 

about the words. It was the Premier from start to finish. The same refrain, the same dire warnings about 

the cost of health services. Mr. Speaker, every time the Premier opens his mouth we know that he 

mentions that nay money devoted to health services must be regarded as a financial calamity, indicating 

just how low on the Liberal priority list health services are in the Province of Saskatchewan. I was 

interested also, Mr. Speaker, in the remarks by the Provincial Treasurer, at least the Provincial Treasurer 

handled the script. He remarked once again, as was the case last year, attempting to draw Great Britain 

with some of the current difficulties that Great Britain faces into the Throne Speech Debate. Somehow 

he attempted to equate this with some giant Socialist conspiracy that caused all the difficulty in the 

mother country, Great Britain. I think the Provincial treasurer knows well, as does the Premier know, of 

the difficulties that have surrounded Great Britain. I would like to quote very briefly from the Monthly 

Review, from the Bank of Nova Scotia, February 1968, that throws some light on the matter, I believe, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Historically as a major industrial and trading nation, Britain has relied upon surpluses in its current 

external payments to support its role as an important exporter of capital. But cracks began to appear in 

this 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

109 

structure even before the First World War and erosive forces intensified after that war, when 

industrialization in other countries hit at the competitive position of British industry and the thirties 

brought a severe decline in world trade. The country’s net current earning potential was further 

undermined during the Second World War which wiped out over half of British’s pre-war merchant 

sipping, necessitating a massive liquidation of overseas assets and involved a substantial increase in 

overseas debts. Britain thus came out of the conflict with its aspirations as a major economic and 

financial power undimmed, but its abilities to sustain its historical role open to question. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Drove them out of the House. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, the article goes on a little further to say that the new Labour Government 

took office in 1964 when the magnitude of the payments problem was already fairly clear. 

 

I think this attempt, Mr. Speaker, to draw Great Britain into the Throne Speech Debate, I think, on the 

third consecutive year indicates just how weak and how morbid the argument is that Liberals across the 

way attempt to put forth. 

 

Dealing with education, Mr. Speaker – I was going to say the Premier once again – the Provincial 

Treasurer, once again repeating the words of the Premier one year ago, attempted to create another 

illusion with respect to the contribution made by his Government towards the cost of university 

operation. The Provincial Treasurer knows well, and I am sure the Premier knows, that prior to 1964 the 

Federal Government made payments directly to the University. He knows well that since last year the 

Federal Government has been making payments of roughly one-half of the operating costs of the 

University by way of the Provincial administration, not directly to the University, but to the 

Government. Once again the Provincial Treasurer by this political sleight of hand attempted to lay claim 

to the Federal contribution in order to make its contribution look respectable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had intended today to devote some time to an examination of remarks made by the 

Premier in recent months as official spokesman of the Government and the Liberal Party. By way of 

leading into this question, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw your attention to a newspaper publication that 

was sent to me anonymously some months ago by some unknown Saskatchewan person. I want to draw 

your attention to some of the unsavoury articles that it contains, Mr. Speaker. It is a publication that I 

felt sure had been sent to me as a result of some person protesting this kind of literature passing over the 

newsstands. Mr. Speaker, when you turn to page 5, I think we discover why it is that this piece of 

literature was sent to me and you can see, Mr. Speaker, it is filled with worded references to rape, 

abortion, prostitution, and murder. Mr. Speaker, when we turn to page 5 we discovered the real reason 

why it was sent to me because here is an article entitled, ―There is nothing wrong with Socialism, except 

it doesn’t work.‖ Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we need to speculate at all about the author of that particular 

article. In effect it is a reprint from the California Farm Bureau monthly which covered a speech given 

by the Premier south of the border. 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

110 

Mr. Speaker, I would be glad to table it for your edification and I’m moved to comment that on this 

occasion, the Premier’s speech is in very appropriate and suitable surroundings. Just in this connection, 

Mr. Speaker, it appears that while speeches for home consumption have been mellowed somewhat, 

speeches offered south of the 49th parallel still contain subject matter which does not stand up under 

examination. Furthermore it seems that the American speeches are no longer considered very 

newsworthy. 

 

Even the Leader Post in recent months, Mr. Speaker, has been able to find very little in the Premier’s 

speech of consequence to make it worthwhile reporting. On September 30th last, the Leader-Post 

reported one of his American outbursts in this way. I quote. 

 

Much of the Premier’s speech was the familiar outline of the 20 years of Socialism in Saskatchewan. 

 

This was how the speech in total was reported, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Quite clearly that often repeated story with its half-truths and very questionable statistics is no longer 

news either inside or outside Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Thatcher administration, Mr. Speaker, is being recognizes for what it is far beyond our provincial 

borders. For example, the Toronto Globe and Mail of September 12, 1967, stated and I quote the 

Toronto Globe and Mail. 

 

In Saskatchewan Premier Thatcher calls himself a Liberal, but he has managed to maintain just about 

the only corner of the continent that is forever true to Barry Goldwater. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, after slightly less than four years of so-called Liberalism in 

Saskatchewan, those 20 years of Socialism are looking better and better all the time to Saskatchewan 

voters. 

 

Just consider for a moment, Mr. Speaker, some of the quotations from that tired old American speech in 

the light of present day circumstances in our province. It matters very little, Mr. Speaker, whether the 

quotes are taken from a speech given to a group of businessmen in Minneapolis of the Association of 

American Physicians and Surgeons in New Orleans or the Christian Freedom Foundation in New York. 

For example, Mr. Speaker, ―20 years of Socialism gave my province industrial stagnation, retarded 

development, oppressive taxation, major depopulation.‖ Mr. Speaker, while the whole of that speech is 

badly in need of examination and de-contamination, I don’t propose to take the time of the House to do 

more than draw your attention to a few of the Pertinent comparisons with respect to this so-called 

―industrial stagnation,‖ ―retarded development,‖ ―oppressive taxation‖ and ―major depopulation.‖ I 

think this would be especially worthwhile in view of the attempt at optimism in the 1969 Throne Speech 

which is under discussion at the moment. This expression ―oppressive Socialist taxation,‖ Mr. Speaker, 

seems to have disappeared from the Liberal vocabulary since March 1, 1968, Black Friday. 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

111 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Since that day, Mr. Speaker, Liberals would rather talk about just about any other topic 

except taxes. Before the 1967 Provincial election when more that two Liberals got together the rafters 

just used to ring with happy talk about homeowner grants and a sales tax that was gradually 

disappearing. They spoke cheerfully about purple gas for farm trucks and tax exemptions for horses’ 

harness and turkey saddles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what a difference a new Budget and an election makes. Today, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

people almost cringe when it is suggested that the Liberals might possibly raise the homeowner grant by 

another $50 prior to the next election. Saskatchewan people, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, may be a little 

naïve sometimes, but they know their addition and subtraction and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — . . . the Saskatchewan voter remembers with pain how he got back $8 million in 

homeowner grants only to have Davey Steuart introduce $34 million worth of new taxes a the very next 

opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — The rural voter . . . 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — $35 million! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — The rural voter, Mr. Speaker, remembers dearly how he pays for the privilege of using 

purple gas in his farm truck every time he pumps taxable gas into his tractor and his combine. 

 

Municipal taxes in the Province of Saskatchewan under a Liberal Government, Mr. Speaker, is also a 

story in itself. The city of Moose Jaw, a portion of which I am pleased to represent, has been hit less 

hard than most, Mr. Speaker. However it is expected that we will experience a 10-mill increase almost 

immediately to approximately 119 or an increase of 25 mills since this Government was elected in 1964. 

Many other areas, Mr. Speaker, have been hit much harder than this. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Private enterprise! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — In many areas, Mr. Speaker, the mill rate has increased at a rate which has convinced 

most of the low and mid-income wage earners that they will never buy or never own a home of their 

own. The Saskatchewan taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, is being taxed in ways never before contemplated. 

Liberals, Mr. Speaker, have even placed a new tax on togetherness. According to a wry complaint from 

Provincial Treasurer Steuart, the new impost on restaurant meals has resulted in another family split 

with husband and wife going dutch treat for separate checks for restaurant meals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

112 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, I think the tax picture was detailed in a most precise manner by my 

colleague sitting in front of me, and slightly to the right, our financial critic, when he spoke on the 

Budget Address last March. It bears repeating today. ―Every major tax has been increased.‖ Let’s list 

them: sales tax increased 25 per cent, gasoline tax up 13 per cent, operator’s up 60 per cent, cigars 100 

percent, pari-mutuel tax 100 per cent, automobile insurance premiums under the automobile plan 26 per 

cent, sales tax on meals, motel hotel rooms, telephone, telegrams and the rest 5 per cent, tax on purple 

gas, not only for farm trucks, but for combines and tractors, 2 cents a gallon on diesel fuel for combines 

and tractors. It heaps these on top of a series of increases. Higher liquor prices, higher university tuition 

fees, higher local government board fees, higher liquor permit fees, higher liquor outlet fees, higher park 

fees, et cetera, et cetera. 

 

It is small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan Liberals are reluctant to talk about taxes to day, with 

a tax burden at the highest level in our history. Mr. Speaker, if taxes were a crushing burden in 1964 

under the then CCF it requires some eloquence to describe the situation today, with taxes not only 

climbing rapidly, but more significantly being foisted on to those who are least able to pay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — I expect to have something to say in this regard a little later in this debate, Mr. Speaker, 

with specific reference to utilization fees. 

 

Let me turn for only a moment to a matter which the Premier and his colleagues like to refer to as major 

depopulation under the Socialist. The Leader of the Opposition had something to say about this 

yesterday, but I think some of what I have to say will bear repeating also. For a number of years Liberals 

in Saskatchewan liked to use population figures as a measure of economic growth and development. For 

their own political purposes liberals ignored the fact that it was during those Socialist years, Mr. 

Speaker, that the population drain was brought to a halt and that, during the last decade under the CCF, 

Saskatchewan began to keep pace once again with the rest of Canada in terms of population growth. The 

Liberal record in this connection has been a sad and dismal one, Mr. Speaker. So bad in fact that 

Liberals decided that population figures are such an insignificant factor that they need not be included in 

the Government White Paper some time ago. Just not the trend. In the year ending June 1964, the last of 

those Socialist years the population rose by 10,000, the following year, ending June 1965, the first year 

under the Liberals our increase had dropped to 9,000. Well, Mr. Speaker, the following year during the 

year ending June 1966, the population increase was 4,000 and for the year ending June 1967 the increase 

was a mere 3,000. The last complete year ending June 1968, our increase, Mr. Speaker, was in the 

neighbourhood of 2,000 people. Quite clearly, Mr. Speaker, this meagre increase of recent Liberal years 

has not reached the level of our natural increase, which means in effect that during the Liberal years 

since 1964 well in excess of 30,000 have fled this Province. It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that talk 

about population figures is also taboo in Liberal speeches. Only when the Premier speaks at some 

distance from home he has 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

113 

the courage to even make passing references to this matter. Reference to population figures these days in 

the White Paper appears on a 16 rather than a 12-month basis, indicating that the meagre population 

increase is a continuing source of embarrassment to the Government which it attempts to obscure by 

questionable tactics. 

 

One further word if I may, Mr. Speaker, in connection with the Premier’s reference to industrial 

stagnation and retarded development during those years prior to 1964. Contrary to Liberal forecasts 

Saskatchewan’s growth has slowed to a very marked degree. The White Paper of December, 1968, Mr. 

Speaker, offers little reason for optimism. Equally significant is the fact that the Liberal propaganda 

organ, ―Saskatchewan Today,‖ has been finding it increasingly difficult to maintain a bold front in 

recent months. For some months prior to 1967 and the general election in that year, ―Saskatchewan 

Today,‖ Mr. Speaker, was virtually bristling with newly announced industries for our province. 

Saskatchewan people will recall the many potash mines which were announced but failed to appear, 

along with the heavy water plant, ammonia plant for Estevan, iron pellet plant, the Volkswagon centre, 

the asbestos pipe plant, the development of the Choiceland iron ore deposits, the steel wire plant for 

Moose Jaw, and so on. Truly, Mr. Speaker, if there was any relationship between the new industries 

announced in ―Saskatchewan Today‖ and those that actually appeared, the Saskatchewan would indeed 

be an industrial giant at this moment. For some reason or another, Mr. Speaker, I still receive three 

copies of that publication ―Saskatchewan Today.‖ One addressed to G.T. Snyder, one addressed to 

Gordon Snyder MLA and one to Gordon T. Snyder. I am inclined to question the need, Mr. Speaker, for 

providing me with three copies of this particular document, individually stamped and posted under 

separate cover, Mr. Speaker. This may be somehow indicative of the kind of government efficiency for 

which this Administration is becoming noted, Mr. Speaker, or it may be that in these days it requires 

three to do the job previously done by one in those pre-election days. 

 

We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, admit quite readily that the decline in farm income has had a 

detrimental effect on our economy generally. However, other factors, which are perhaps equally 

significant and possibly more permanent, have also caused some concern in a number of quarters. The 

sharp price drop in potash due to what has been described as a surplus on the world market does not 

present a favourable picture, nor does the prospect for expansion of this industry appear to be bright in 

the immediate future. 

 

Oil production in Saskatchewan dropped by one million barrels in 1967. A further drop in production is 

noted in the White Paper of December 1968, showing a further drop this year to 92 million barrels. This 

means, Mr. Speaker, that there has been a drop in oil production in each of the last two years; 1967 and 

1968 are the only years since 1949 that there has been a decline in oil production in Saskatchewan. The 

Government’s own figures show that only 350 oil wells were completed in 1968, which is the smallest 

number since 1960. Now while the White Paper shoes a modest increase in retail sales of about one 

percent, Mr. Speaker, it is reasonable to expect that an adjustment which recognizes the increase in the 

cost of consumer commodities will actually show that there has been a sharp decline in commodity 

consumption during 1968. In fact the resource and economic development highlights contained in the 

White Paper make the Premier’s American speech less and less believable 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

114 

with each passing day. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, it would have been more statesmanlike for the Premier to offer a glowing report of 

the accomplishments which have become a part of Saskatchewan’s history. Surely it would have 

required less imagination, when speaking to our American neighbors, to relate the story of how 

Saskatchewan raised herself by her boot straps in that post-war period, diversifying her economy and 

electrifying the most remote area of our province. The Premier could have described those post-war 

years, Mr. Speaker, as a period in our history which saw Saskatchewan’s dead-weight debt retired, a 

time during which a revolution in education took place with the evolution of the larger school units. He 

might have very properly told his American listeners how Saskatchewan took on the biggest highway 

project of any province in the Dominion of Canada in the building and the rebuilding of one-third of all 

highway miles in the whole of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — He might logically and honestly have pointed to the fact that his Province operates the 

best low-cost non-profit insurance company in North America, for how long I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, 

but a plan which since coming into force has paid out 86 per cent of net premiums in benefits to the 

public who own this company. 

 

When speaking to a group of American doctors in New Orleans, instead of apologising for having 

inherited a Medical Care and Hospitalization Plan, I believe the Premier could have told them with some 

pride how his Province set the pace for the whole of Canada with the introduction of two social 

measures predicated on the belief that all residents are entitled to a full range of health services 

regardless of their financial circumstances. In addressing these American doctors, Mr. Speaker, he might 

very well have gone to some length in telling them of the transformation that took place in the whole 

field of mental health during the two decades following World War II, and how Saskatchewan 

developed the finest plan in North America for the care and the treatment of the mentally ill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — The vast majority of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, have a deep sense of pride and 

accomplishment of the many things that have resulted from individual and co-operative effort in our 

Province. Instead of defaming and downgrading the place we call home, I think Saskatchewan people 

would take more kindly to an honest non-partisan commentary from our Premier when he is far from 

home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Mr. Speaker, this 1969 Throne Speech like the White Paper before it provides no real 

reason for optimism in the city of Moose Jaw which my colleague, Mr. Davies, and I represent in this 

House. In spite of the many difficulties which our city has experienced in recent years, we’ve been able 

to maintain a steady growth due in part to the wealthy trading 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

115 

area which surrounds the city. It may be of interest to some Members to note that the city of Moose Jaw 

has enjoyed a position among the leading Canadian citizens in terms of per capita retail sales. In 1967 

we led all other Canadian cities. This year, however, Moose Jaw has slipped into fifth place with 

Lethbridge assuming top spot. I fear, Mr. Speaker, without recognition of the special problems which 

our city faces, the city residents, wage-earners and the business community will suffer accordingly. I 

believe it is generally recognized that bigness begets bigness and that a withdrawal or a reduction of 

business in a given area often results in a subsequent reduction of business activity related to it. 

Forecasts from Moose Jaw in 1969 are less than good. Earlier this year, Gulf Oil, formerly British 

American Oil Company, a refinery of Moose jaw, announced a proposed expansion to the plant in 

Edmonton which is expected to supply the prairie market with a new 80,000 barrel a day plant to be 

completed in 1971. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear 

 

Mr. Snyder: — It’s expected that the Moose Jaw plant will know its fate by June of this year, but the 

most optimistic prognosis appears to be that the Moose Jaw operation will become perhaps an asphalt 

manufacturer, if it indeed remains in operation at all. Now this, Mr. Speaker, may mean the loss of as 

many as 160 employees, meaning in turn that the purchasing power that these jobs represent will be lost 

to the community. More than any other community in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the city of Moose 

Jaw has been dealt a series of staggering blows. During the years prior to 1964, the loss of Swift 

Canadian Company was compensated for at least in part by building of the Saskatchewan training 

School, which employs over 500 people. The employment created by Canadays and the Saskatchewan 

Technical School also helps to balance the loss in employment elsewhere. But if Saskatchewan in 1964, 

Mr. Speaker, has enjoyed an increase in job opportunities and industrial expansion it has happened 

without the knowledge of Moose Jaw people. It’s been suggested that political considerations, Mr. 

Speaker, may have influenced the Government in ignoring my home town, which is incidentally the 

Premier’s home town, the city of Moose Jaw. I certainly hope and trust that this is not true, Mr. Speaker, 

because, if it is the case, it represents a most serious indictment against the Government which has an 

obligation to all people of this province, not just to those who offered support to their political party. 

 

In the case of Gulf Oil and the alleged phasing out of the Moose Jaw operation, I hope the Premier, as 

Minister in charge of the Department of Industry and Commerce (Mr. Thatcher), will continue to use his 

influence to see that the operation is not allowed to ignore an obligation that this company has to its 

employees and the community. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the day is past, when in the name of 

efficiency and higher corporate earnings, companies such as this one may be allowed to abandon a 

community and their employees. There is little doubt with regard to the immediate effect if this closure 

takes place, Mr. Speaker. There is no doubt but that many employees will be obliged to move elsewhere 

to seek alternative employment, resulting in the sale of numerous workers’ homes at bargain prices with 

all the ramification involving relocation costs, retraining of employees and so on. It’s all very fine, Mr. 

Speaker, to say that these are matters which are negotiable through the 



 

February 4, 1969 

 

 

116 

due process of collective bargaining. I believe, however, that, in an age when men and women are being 

rendered obsolete by new industrial techniques, government shave an obligation to see to it that men and 

women who are uprooted by these new technologies are in receipt of some basic guarantees. 

 

It’s certain that more and more intensive training and retraining programs must be made available. 

Assistance must be made available by industry and by government in order that the labor force may 

become adaptable to new circumstances and more mobile in order that they may take advantage of job 

opportunities in other areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other matters that I would like to deal with and consequently I beg 

leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:36 o’clock p.m. 


