



















































Hansard: March 13, 1969


1238 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

28th Day 

 

Thursday, March 13, 1969 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you a 

group of 40 grade ten students from Kelliher high school who are situated in the east gallery. They came 

here today under the leadership of their teacher Mr. Ehman, and I am sure that all Members will join 

with me in wishing them a pleasant, instructive and educational afternoon and a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Qu’Appelle-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 

introduce to you and to the Members of the Legislative Assembly this afternoon, a group of students 

from the Indian Residential school at Lebret. They are accompanied by The Rev. Father Gerard and by 

their teachers Miss Stewardson and Mrs. Greyeyes. I point out to Members of this Assembly that the 

Indian Residential school at Lebret is one of the oldest established schools in Saskatchewan, having first 

begun operations in 1884. As a matter of history, the original principal of that school was The Rev. 

Hugonard. The school is conducted under the auspices of The Order of The Oblates of Mary 

Immaculate. I am sure that the students will enjoy themselves here this afternoon and we hope that they 

have a very safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I too want to offer a word of 

welcome to the school from Lebret. They are within the Melville constituency. I know that they are 

going to enjoy their visit here this afternoon and on behalf of all of us here I wish to extend a word of 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me today 

to introduce through you to the Members of this Assembly a group of 51 students that are here from the 

constituency of City Park-University in Saskatoon. Twenty-one of these students are 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1239 

attending Richmond high school and they are here with their teachers, Mr. Hill. And then we have 30 

students who are here from College Park school and they are accompanied by Mrs. Wallace. These are 

two of the newer schools in Saskatoon. It is certainly a pleasure to see them here and see the interests 

their teachers are taking in seeing that they enjoy this day in Regina. We wish them a very happy and 

safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the House 

through you a group of students from the Lorne Hazelton school located in Nutana South constituency. 

This is a very distinguished name in educational circles in Saskatoon. Dr. Lorne Hazelton after whom 

the school is named was for over 30 years very closely connected with the public school board in the 

city of Saskatoon. We are very proud of this school and we are very proud of the man after whom it was 

named. We certainly hope that the students from that school will enjoy their visit in Regina and enjoy 

their stay in the Legislature with us. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

SALE OF ESTEVAN BRICK PLANT 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Hon. Members know that the Government has been endeavoring 

for some time to sell the Estevan Brick Plant. In the past six months several concrete offers have been 

received. Today I am pleased to announce that a sale has been completed to the Peben Contractors 

Limited of Edmonton. 

 

I might say that the President of this company is a man called Mr. Peter Shipka. The takeover by the 

purchaser has been made effective January 1st last, or at the beginning of the fiscal current year. The 

purchase price will be $610,000 with a cash payment of $110,000 and the balance over ten years. 

 

Peben Contractors Limited have given assurances for continued operation of the plant, and they have 

indicated that modest expansions will take place. All present employees will be kept on the job. Prior to 

the date when the present Government took office, the Estevan Brick Plant had experienced a long series 

of financial difficulties. In the period 1961-64 inclusive, the company incurred losses which totalled 

$337,000. These of course had to be absorbed by the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

 

Sometime ago the Government reorganized management at the plant. As a result it began to show some 

very modest profits. In spite of a loss in 1967, due to a prolonged strike, the plant had total profits of 

about $75,000 in the period 1965-68 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1240 

inclusive. The Government has for some time been endeavoring to sell this enterprise, provided that it 

could be disposed of without serious loss to the people whose money is invested in it. It is not the kind 

of business, such as power and telephone, which are by nature somewhat monopolistic in the areas 

where they operate. 

 

The brick plant is engaged in the production of building materials in a competitive market. It is the kind 

of industry likely to operate more efficiently and economically under private ownership and 

management. Peben Contractors Limited will bring to the operation of this plant their very considerable 

amount of relevant experience. We welcome them and wish them well in this venture. 

 

I might say, Mr. Speaker, that in the past six months we, the Government, have had four concrete offers 

on this plant. We have accepted the highest of the four. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

GRAIN DRYERS 
 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure all Hon. Members will be 

glad to know of the significant progress being made in the Province of Saskatchewan as far as grain 

drying is concerned. I am sure that they will be interested to hear the results of the Wheat Board report 

that was compiled as of February 28th and issued March 11th. It shows the increase in the number of 

grain dryers in Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Alberta, the drying capacities of each province and the 

amount of grain that is being dried by each province. The figures for the end of February show that, as 

of January there were 1,330 grain dryers in Saskatchewan; as of March 1st this figure had increased to 

1,569 as compared to 721 in Manitoba and 1,016 in Alberta. The number of grain dryers in operation, 

even in spite of the inclement weather in February, showed 1,049 in Saskatchewan as against 456 the 

month before, compared to 375 in Manitoba and 501 in Alberta. More significant still is the total 

capacity of all dryers. In Saskatchewan as of March 1st the total capacity per day was 2½ million 

bushels up from 1½ million the month before. This compares with 908,000 bushels in Manitoba and 1½ 

million in Alberta. The quantity being dried in February as up to March 1st shows that there are 1½ 

million bushels being dried in Saskatchewan as against 570,000 in Manitoba and some 635,000 in 

Alberta. The number of bushels dried showed a total of 28,156,000 in our Province. The number of 

bushels left to be delivered on three-bushel quota in Saskatchewan was cut down quite substantially to 

17,175,000. So we started the month of March with a total of 83 million bushels left in the province to 

be dried or to be fed to livestock or to be turned over to prevent spoilage. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1241 

So even with the adverse weather in January and February, I suggest a tremendous record has been 

established by the farmers, the elevator companies and all those who have devoted their time and 

interest to the solving of this major problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

EMPLOYMENT OF STUDENTS 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to 

address a question to the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac). My question is whether the Government 

will undertake a program similar to the one announced in Ontario that will encourage and assist the 

employment of students in both the Public Service and the private industry this summer in view of the 

serious difficulties that have been forecast for student employment this year? 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure what program the Hon. 

Member is referring to that has been announced in Ontario. I have not heard of it. I can tell him that we 

are making every effort through the Public Service Commission and the Crown corporations to secure 

employment for our students and to make every possible job opportunity available that we have to the 

students who will be seeking summer employment. 

 

Mr. Davies — May I just ask a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. May I ask the Minister if he will 

study the program that was announced this morning and see if this will assist him and assist student 

employment? 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I will be glad to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

LETTER RE MOOSE JAW WATER SUPPLY 
 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day and with your 

permission I would like to share a communication with other Members of this House. I have with me a 

letter which was addressed to me but one that I think other Members will be interested in. And it says: 

 

Dear Mr. Snyder: 

 

I was sincerely concerned on reading of the plight of the Members of this Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan on Monday, in that they were unable to obtain drinking water fit to drink from the taps 

of the Capital City. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1242 

Moose Jaw has an abundant supply of clear, cool water and has had for some 17 years. I wish to supply 

you with a gallon of this pure, chlorinated, fluorinated, crystal-clear drinking water for you and your 

colleagues, both Government and Opposition Members. 

 

We would be prepared to assure you of a supply for the duration of your debates but would also 

suggest that a permanent solution would be to move the Capital of the Province to our city where we 

can assure you we have water of the highest quality and quantity. 

 

Signed: Yours sincerely, L.H. Lewry, Mayor 

 

Seriously, Mr. Speaker, and without attempting to sound like a toothpaste commercial, I would like to 

suggest to you that the additives which the Friendly City has been placing in our drinking water supply 

for many years has resulted in a marked decrease in cavities in our children’s teeth. You only have to 

ask any dentist in either of the two cities, either Moose Jaw or Regina and they will tell you that Moose 

Jaw youngsters have by far the superior record in this respect. While we lay claim to a solution to the 

problem of holes in our children’s teeth, we don’t maintain, however, that the superior grade of water 

will do anything for holes in other parts of the head, and I address this remark especially to the Minister 

of Public Works (Mr. Guy). 

 

I would like, Mr. Speaker, to table this sample of another superior Moose Jaw product. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, since my name was brought into this 

debate, I would only like to say that, as Minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Water Resources 

Commission, the city of Moose Jaw wouldn’t be having such fine water if it wasn’t for the efforts of the 

Government of Saskatchewan today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I can’t be outdone by the Minister of 

Public Works for fear that the Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker) might rise to his feet and take 

credit for Moose Jaw’s water. The letter from His Worship Mayor Lewry indicated that this event took 

place 17 years ago. I was Mayor of Regina at that time. Therefore it was through the foresight of the 

Mayor and city council of Regina 17 years ago that the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw is able to present 

this water today, and it is not solely through the efforts of the Mayor of Moose Jaw. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1243 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is a wonderful-looking bottle of water, but I draw your attention to the fact that 

water is awfully good stuff to wash in but not so good for carrying on a conversation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, could I just comment. We appreciate this 

water and of course the former Mayor the Hon. Minister of Public Health was in office at that time, but I 

can assure him that we had an awful lot of trouble with that water when I got into office and we had to 

do something about it. I had one gentleman say to me that when you turned on the tap everything came 

through except the hoofs and the horns. We do appreciate having this from the Member from Moose Jaw 

South, but I hope that it has been filtered of the sewage that goes down Moose Jaw Creek. I hope that 

that isn’t in it, Mr. Snyder, because we would accept it and with our well water here, we have the best in 

the West. We do appreciate that Moose Jaw is getting this good water through the efforts of Regina as 

well. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 12 — LONG DISTANCE TOLLS 
 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford) moved, seconded by Mr. Messer (Kelsey): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government that Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones assume responsibility for collection of long distance tolls on calls originating 

with Rural Telephone Companies, or alternatively pay to the said companies full collection costs. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, for some time and for several years there has been growing concern on the part of 

rural telephone companies regarding the increasing costs of collecting toll fees for Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones, I believe now known as Saskatchewan Telecommunications. Along with this 

concern there has arisen a vociferous criticism of Saskatchewan Telecommunication’s commission 

allowing rural telephone companies the collection of these long distance tolls. This concern, Mr. 

Speaker, and this criticism reached what you might speak of as a crescendo, at the last annual Rural 

Telephone Companies’ convention held in Saskatoon on November 8th. 

 

In order to give some credence to what I have just said, I would like to quote two resolutions, one from 

the 1967 Rural Telephone convention held in Regina and the other from the 1968 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1244 

Rural Telephone convention which was held in Saskatoon last November. The one from the 1967 

convention reads as follows: 

 

Whereas the cost to rural telephone companies in connection with collection of toll charges is 

continually rising and, whereas the present reimbursement by Saskatchewan Government Telephones 

of $1.25 per subscriber to rural telephone companies to defray the costs of such collections is totally 

inadequate. And, whereas the cost of this company in the process of making these collections which 

includes postage and maintenance of records, plus uncollectable accounts, has risen to $3 per 

subscriber. 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that the grant to rural telephone companies for collection of toll charges be 

increased from $1.25 to $3 per subscriber. 

 

That was at the 1967 convention held here in Regina. The resolution from Turtleford presented to last 

year’s convention on the very same subject reads as follows: 

 

Whereas the cost of rural telephone companies with collection of toll charges is continually rising and, 

whereas the present reimbursement by Saskatchewan Government Telephones of $1.25 per subscriber 

to the rural telephone companies to defray the cost of such collections is totally inadequate. 

 

Therefore, be it resolved that the Saskatchewan Government Telephones be responsible for the 

collection of long distance tolls or give a grant to the rural telephone companies of 10 per cent of long 

distance tolls. 

 

May I just remark, Mr. Speaker, that the resolution that finally passed the 1968 convention read 

essentially the same as the one that I have just read except that it requested a commission of 20 per cent 

instead of 10 per cent. May I point out that this resolution that passed last year’s convention was 

substantially the same as the one that I have just read with the change that I already noted that the 

reimbursement be raised from 10 to 20 per cent. 

 

Here, Mr. Speaker, are some figures from my own company in Turtleford. The allowance made to the 

rural company for the collection of long distance fees as has already been noted, is still $1.25 per 

subscriber. The Turtleford company consists of something like 251 rural subscribers, which means that 

there is a monthly bill for postage alone of about $15. The yearly cost for mailing comes to $180.72. The 

large number of these subscribers take more than one billing as anyone who has anything to do with 

rural telephone companies is aware. The real crunch comes that any bills that are not collected are the 

responsibility of the rural telephone company. That is that any subscriber who has left the area by one 

way or another selling 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1245 

out and leaving the area, the company must pick up the bill on their behalf. Any disputed bill of any 

subscriber, which for one reason or another is not sent in within a given term, again becomes the 

telephone company’s responsibility. 

 

I think that most of you are well aware, if you have had anything to do with some of the larger 

companies, that farmers living 25 miles away from the local company’s office and trading in some other 

town or centre, do not always pay their bills strictly on a monthly basis especially in the busy seasons of 

spring and harvest. Again, our local secretary receives the magnificent sum of $600 per annum for 

services as a secretary to the local board. He estimates that $400 of the $600, or two-thirds of his time is 

spent purely on collections. This means that $400 out of his salary is chargeable to the collection of long 

distance toll fees. 

 

The board’s estimate of last year is that it costs them $450 per year more than the $1.25 subscriber, 

allowed by Saskatchewan Telecommunications, to collect and remit the $12,569 sent in to 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications for the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just in case someone should jump up with the old bogey of inefficiency, I would like to 

point out that the Turtleford company’s costs are considerably below that of many other even larger 

companies within the province. Corporation officials at the convention did throw out a suggestion that 

they would look at the possibility of mailing bills from Regina. However, may I say, Mr. Speaker, this 

was not received with any enthusiasm by the convention. They didn’t consider that that was an answer 

to the problem that the local companies face at the present time. Just in case this whole matter is treated 

too lightly, may I emphatically state that some of the rural telephone companies are seriously 

considering a flat refusal to collect long distance telephone fees in the coming year or in the years that 

lie ahead. 

 

Before taking my seat may I urge the Government to look seriously at a change of policy in the 

commission now allowed rural telephone companies for the service of collecting long distance toll fees. 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, in the light of the 1968 profits of SaskTel, I see no reason why rural 

telephone boards should carry on at a yearly loss to their local company. 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 — TRAINING AND EDUCATION FOR MENTALLY HANDICAPPED 
 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cutknife) moved, seconded by Mr. Matsalla: 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1246 

That this Assembly reaffirms its belief that every child has the right to develop his potentials to the 

maximum and recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan that appropriate 

training and education be provided for mentally handicapped by: 

 

(1) further extending modern training and educational facilities at Moose Jaw or other centres 

elsewhere in the province. 

(2) passing legislation making it mandatory that educational and training facilities be provided for all 

students; and 

(3) co-ordinating and assisting all governmental programs and voluntary organizations working for the 

cause of mental retardation in Saskatchewan. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, all Members of this House by now will have seen the Resolution which I am 

presenting. Fellow Members, have you ever considered what it would be like to be the father of a 

mentally handicapped child? The happiness at first of hearing the good news when the newborn arrives; 

the happy hours spent playing with the baby in its first year; the hours spent discussing the child’s future 

educational plans with your wife; and then after a year when the child does not walk or talk as you 

expected he should, the creeping suspicion that your baby is not quite normal — but you brush that silly 

notion aside — and then one day it strikes you dumbfoundedly that you are the father of a retarded child. 

And now the anguish stabs you, the fear, the guilt and you feel that you must cover up to save face in 

front of your friends and neighbors. You must now give up going out for entertainment because your 

child needs constant affection and watching and anyway, what young girl wants the responsibility of 

looking after a retarded six-year old? You make many trips into town Monday mornings to take your 

child to the folks in town who have agreed to board him, while he attends a special school if he is lucky 

enough to have one in his area. Then one day you hear a vicious rumor that the nice people who agreed 

to board your child had a party one night, and as a highlight to their evening of fun, woke up your child 

at 2 a.m. to bring him into the living room to tease and badger him to see how he reacts, getting a big 

charge of it all. Then, in desperation you as the parent of this child try to get accommodation for your 

child at the Moose Jaw Training Centre. You are told the waiting list is 558 and that you would have to 

wait your turn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this is what it could be like to be parents of a retarded child. Having a retarded child 

does something to parents. What is this something? First, it seems to be an air of constantly being on the 

defensive; secondly it seems to be a never-ending search to find out why and where to put the blame, his 

family, her family, the doctor, the teacher, the psychologist, the social worker, digging, digging always 

digging for an answer. Having a retarded child in the 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1247 

family almost inevitably creates confusion, perplexity, horror and fear. All of these often disrupt the 

family unit and the parent’s physical and mental health, not to mention their finances. Many parents of 

handicapped children feel like colossal failures. They are scolded directly or indirectly by members of 

their family, by neighbors, by physicians, by teachers, by psychologists and by politicians. The point is, 

Mr. Speaker, that it is terrible enough to be burdened with the emotional and the psychological 

side-effects of having a retarded child, let alone not having the necessary facilities to help them develop 

to their fullest potential. We as politicians owe it to our fellowman to provide the means and finances to 

alleviate the suffering and humiliation of thousands in our province and in our country. 

 

In 1966, Dr. S.A. Perkins of the University of Lethbridge estimated that there were some 9,000 people in 

Canada with profound retardation, that is, an I.Q. of 20 or less; some 21,000 people with severe 

retardation, an I.Q. of 20-35; another 36,000 with moderate retardation, an I.Q. of 36—52 

approximately; and another 534,000 mild retardates, an I.Q. of 53—68, making a total of some 600,000 

retarded in our country, 240,000 of whom are below the age of 20. Dr. Perkins also estimated that two in 

every 1,000 children born will be of profound or severe retardation, that three in every 1,000 will be of 

moderate retardation and that 26 out of every 1,000 born will be of mild retardation. 

 

In Saskatchewan, in a recent survey conducted by the Saskatchewan Commission for Emotional and 

Learning Disorders in Children, it was estimated that some 25,000 children need special help to offset 

their handicaps. This figure has since been criticized as being too conservative, perhaps a more accurate 

number would be 28,000. Only about 1,600 of them or 5.7 per cent of them are actually in institutions. 

As I understand it, less than 20 per cent of the total number in the province are receiving the type of 

education that they would benefit from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when talking about the handicapped in our province we must congratulate the many 

voluntary organizations who have worked and presently are working for the cause of mental retardation. 

Also, some excellent ground work has been done by past Provincial Governments in setting up five 

training and experimental centres such as the ones at Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, and the Alvin Buchwald 

Unit in Saskatoon, plus several sheltered workshops throughout the province and many classrooms as 

well. The work-training project at Prince Albert and the unit in Saskatoon were the direct results of a 

$20 million national crusade launched in 1967, Centennial Year. The Federal Government is providing 

annual grants for work and research in the field, but it too must do more. Grants to aid classrooms in 

Saskatchewan were started by the Provincial Government as early as 1930. These grants were increased 

in 1952, in 1959 and 1965, when grants to special classes ranged anywhere 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1248 

from $2,500 to $4,000 a year. All of this, Mr. Speaker, shows a rather slow pace of increased assistance 

for mental retardation in our province. 

 

However, as my Resolution states it, a greater co-ordinated effort is needed across the province to get 

the most out of all the existing organizations. I am not asking for preferential treatment for the retarded. 

At present the rights of the retarded are practically ignored and care is proving costly. Everybody knows 

that to keep a trainable child untrained costs money, but train him and he can become at least partially 

self-sufficient. The retarded child should be given a service equal to others, the right to family life, to 

remain at home, the right to parents, to remain in the community if he wishes, and the right to training 

and employment. 

 

There are so many things that need to be done and can be done, Mr. Speaker. Now that we are fully 

aware of the magnitude of the problem, 28,000 people who need help in Saskatchewan, we must 

immediately find out who they are and where they are and get in touch with their families. An all-out 

program of diagnosis is needed now to find out specifically the degree of retardation in order to assess 

fully the needs of each individual. It is hoped that in some cases simple physical deficiencies will be 

found to be the cause of retardation and these will be cleared up quickly and easily. To this end, Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest a mobile diagnostic clinic, a sort of mobile health clinic should be set up to travel 

around the province. 

 

We must next work out our aims and objectives of our programs. If our general aim is to ensure that 

every child get an opportunity to receive the type of education and training that he can benefit from, then 

our next job is to set priorities. Perhaps we would gain the most by tackling the problem of preschool 

retardates and we could follow the Quebec plan of using volunteer Home Care Workers. A committee 

could be set up composed of a cross-section of those involved to establish aims and objectives of our 

whole program. I am sure that one of the aims would be to integrate as many handicapped into society as 

possible. Therefore, I would recommend that all trainable handicapped should be taught in regular 

school buildings, sharing possible activities and facilities with others and having whatever benefits there 

are from family and community association. We should invite these children to join us in ordinary 

living. There is legislation governing the education of children, there are school facilities designated for 

children, there are school boards who have responsibilities for the education of children. Retarded 

children are children. 

 

I believe also that the Provincial Government should pass legislation, taking the initiative in urging 

mandatory educational and training services for all mentally handicapped in the province. The State of 

Connecticut saw little real action until a mandatory law was passed in 1959. In that state the number of 

classrooms for the retarded jumped from 70 to around 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1249 

400 in about four years’ time. This caused a tremendous demand for teachers. This in turn put greater 

pressure on the university to train people and the universities in turn came to the training schools to get 

some help. 

 

The legislation, if passed here, should be helpful, not restrictive. It should not lay down explicit 

admission criteria for special classes; it should not state minimum or maximum enrolment requirements. 

It should keep in mind that regulations suitable for urban centres may not be appropriate in rural areas. 

At present, school districts are not obliged by law to provide for the education of retarded children. 

However, most districts pay the tuition when children are able to attend special classes outside their own 

school system. Some may also pay for transportation costs. Legislation placing more responsibility on 

local school districts would have to be accompanied by a considerable increase in grants for this specific 

purpose. I feel that Section 122 of The School Act should simply be amended by changing the word 

“may” to “must” in two places so that the Section would read, “A board must establish special classes of 

instruction for children who are from any physical or mental cause unable to take proper advantage of 

the regular public school courses of study or must provide financial assistance to any person or 

organization conducting such special classes.” 

 

However, if mandatory legislation is not passed in the near future, the Government should then give 

direct aid to parents keeping handicapped children under 18 years at home. This would make it possible 

to keep these children in the community where they are less expensive to care for and are happier and 

likely to be more useful citizens. At the same time, special provision in school grants should be made for 

bussing to schools for urban handicapped children. 

 

Another pressing need is that of greater co-ordination of the many rehabilitation and voluntary agencies 

working in the field of mental retardation in the province. We must get them to work together to avoid 

duplication and overlapping of services — a mammoth task, I admit. The office of the Provincial 

Co-ordinator of Rehabilitation must reassess its progress to date. If it feels it is unable to do the 

necessary job, perhaps the Department of Public Health could act as the co-ordinating agency. Since the 

Department of Public Health already shows a good deal of interest in the problem, and since it is better 

for one agency to assume continuity of responsibility for the retarded from birth to old age, this 

Department is the most logical co-ordinator. The problem here lies with the job of co-ordinating all the 

volunteer organizations, all the various departments of government such as Labor, Manpower, Welfare, 

and Health and the various facilities provided for the handicapped by the different government 

departments. The whole picture needs to be assessed, and following that, co-ordination, delineation of 

tasks and suggested modes of action to the various agencies must be given. We have the basis for easy 

co-ordinated action in the 11 Health Regions of the province which 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1250 

are already set up. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, that must be looked at is the question of guardianship. Guardianship should 

be arranged for persons whose parents are unable to assume this responsibility. Parents worry a great 

deal about the future of their children when they are gone, but at the same time they do not wish to lose 

control during their lifetime. Legislation could be passed to enable the province to assume guardianship 

in such cases. There is no reason why retarded persons could not become wards of the Minister of Public 

Health, just as children can at present become wards of the Minister of Welfare. Guardianship could be 

assumed after a court hearing. It would not mean that the person would be institutionalized, but simply 

that he was in need of protective services and that there would be some person in the community holding 

legal responsibility to supervise the care, management, education and general well-being of the mentally 

retarded. Child Welfare Officers exercise this responsibility without too much trouble and I feel the 

retarded have a right to similar services. The guardianship plan would have to be very carefully worked 

out so that individual rights or rights of parents and legal guardians are not infringed upon. 

 

There is also a need for some person to oversee the actual classroom instruction given to the 

handicapped. For lack of a better name, he could be called a superintendent or a chief consultant to 

parents and teachers within a health region. This advisor could help set up a flexible curriculum to be 

used as a guide of instruction and training for the different levels of achievers. This consultant could be 

the chief idea man for teachers and the main advisor to parents. He could also carry out a public 

education and information campaign through the press, radio, television and films. This same consultant 

might also help to plan a unit of study on the mentally handicapped and their problems to be taught at 

the various grade levels in the public school system. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, much more support must be given for research. There are at least 70 known 

and suspected causes of retardation. Some occur before birth, others during birth and still others in early 

infancy. Much more research is needed into the causes of retardation, into the methods of diagnosing, 

into the methods of teaching and training, and into levels of achievement. Much more stress must be 

placed on research that stresses prevention. Existing research is seriously lacking in long-term financial 

support and many research projects are funded on a very short-term project basis. It is an established fact 

that money spent on prevention is really the most effective technique against retardation or any other 

deficiency for that matter. 

 

In the debate following this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, I hope I don’t hear long-winded speeches from the 

Government side of the House with long lists of comparative figures from year 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1251 

to year covering the past program of 30 years of various governments. I have all the past history of 

government action in my files, and I am sure all Members will agree with me that a rehash of the past 

will serve no constructive purpose in discussing this Resolution. The people of Saskatchewan are aware 

that a start has been made, that progress is being made at a slow pace, and that hundreds of handicapped 

children in Saskatchewan and their families are not getting the advice, training and help they require to 

lift them out of the despairs of mental anguish and suffering. Therefore, I am asking this Government to 

take a forward step to cope with this demanding problem and to plan for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — Mr. Speaker, let me just review the problem for a moment. There are some 28,000 

handicapped in our province today with extreme varying mental capacities. Only about 1,600 of them or 

5.7 per cent of the severe cases are actually in institutions. As I understand it, less than 20 per cent of the 

total number in the province are receiving the type of education and training that they would benefit 

from. This means 80 per cent receiving no training. This in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, is the number one 

problem. The severely handicapped must be the number one priority for this Government, and the 

Moose Jaw Centre — bless the people and the superintendent who work there — is doing a tremendous 

job within its capabilities. The Moose Jaw school deals with mentally handicapped at all ages and levels, 

the children’s ward for the chronically multiple handicapped. It has wards and cottages for active 

children of varying ages, and an infirm unit for the multiple handicapped adults. It has wards for 

children of school age and for adults with varying degrees of retardation and handicaps. The school 

programs offered there must be geared to the different levels of capacity; walking, training, and 

self-feeding have to be taught to the very young. School programs have to be organized for the school 

children and work training with return to the community in mind for the adults. One could go on and on 

about the programs, the problems and the needs of this institution. The waiting list as of February 24th 

this year 1969 was 558, 558 helpless children or adults with their parents waiting in despair, humiliation 

and frustration. Can we as Legislators sit back and continue this man’s inhumanity to man? Certainly 

not, if we want to be proud of our Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, parents and relatives of handicapped, school boards, teachers and others that are interested 

in this problem, have only one main avenue of approach for help, and that is the Government. Therefore, 

I appeal to all Members in this Assembly to support my Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kwasnica: — As the late Governor General 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1252 

George P. Vanier once pleaded and I quote: 

 

I throw out this challenge to all those who believe in the value of the human being. There are hundreds 

of thousands of inadequately cared-for persons who need you scientific knowledge, who have need for 

your heart, your affection and your love . . . They have already been waiting too long. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first that the speech from the Hon. Member 

who just took his seat, has struck a responsive chord in every Member of this House. I think that no one 

can . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — . . . find fault with the statistics he quoted, no one can find fault with the sentiments he 

expressed. For my part, I agree almost completely with what he said, I agree certainly that we ought to 

look at extending modern training and educational facilities at Moose Jaw or other centres. I think that 

the Hon. Member knows that the Government has this under consideration now. I agree that not enough 

co-ordination exists between the three branches of Government that are concerned with mentally 

retarded people. I think the Hon. Member does know, however, there is now an inter-departmental 

committee, which was set up two or three years ago and the deputy from each of the three departments, 

Health, Education and Welfare, with other people sit on that committee and they do try to co-ordinate 

the work of Government branches and voluntary organizations. I am not prepared yet to say that they are 

doing all that can be done. For this reason I must congratulate the Hon. Member for what he has said. 

 

The second part of the Resolution, however, does not get my approval, and will not get my support. To 

pass legislation making it mandatory that educational and training facilities be provided for all students 

may be ideal, may be something that we should work toward, but at this time I think it would be 

extremely bad business to tell every unit board that somewhere in the school unit they have to provide 

an opportunity classroom. I have mentioned it before in this House, but I want to point to the experience 

in the west central part of the province where I come from. There is no opportunity classroom in the 

Eston-Elrose school unit. I don’t know how many mentally retarded children there are in there, but I 

would guess, well, less than 50, more than 20. Some of them are trainable, some of them are not, some 

of them are in the Moose Jaw Training School, some of them are at home. I do know that Rosetown 

School Unit does operate a very fine opportunity classroom. I do know that the Eston-Elrose School 

Unit pays the tuition fee for children from the Eston-Elrose unit to attend 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1253 

that classroom. I do know that they make it possible for the parents of these students to either move into 

Rosetown in the winter time, or to board their children there, or to convey them to that school. This is 

the way it has to be in rural areas. It would be wildly impractical to have a second opportunity classroom 

somewhere in the Eston-Elrose unit. I agree that we must in all conscience provide the training facilities 

that are needed. But to make it mandatory at this stage in our development, I think is wrong. Mr. 

Speaker, I intend to have more to say about this, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 4 — SPECIAL TASK FORCE ON EDUCATIONAL AIMS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the Proposed Resolution by Mr. R. Romanow 

(Saskatoon Riversdale): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the constitution of a Special 

Task Force on Educational Aims for the 1970s, to be composed of citizens representative of our 

province, to examine into all aspects of education and its present relevancy to the future needs of our 

society, the organization and administration of our education system, the method of financing thereof, 

the Provincial Department of Education and its organization, and to make recommendations thereon to 

the Government for immediate action. 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this motion moved by the Hon. Member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale is one that urges the Government to establish a Special Task Force on 

education aims. As I listened to his remarks in proposing this motion I couldn’t help but think that, with 

a little more time on researching some of the questions he raised, he would not need to propose a Royal 

Commission. Now I shall deal later on with some of the remarks made by the hon. gentleman from 

Riversdale and try to demonstrate more clearly what I mean by that. I certainly don’t wish to deny the 

usefulness of a Royal Commission, I do disagree however with the assumption that he seemed to make, 

the mere establishment of a Royal Commission as such is all that will be needed to solve our problems 

in the field of education. I would agree that there are areas of concern in this whole broad field of 

education, as I have said before in this House and in previous debates, that I believe our aims, our 

objectives, our methods, curricular content, structure of the schools, and many other aspects of education 

should be and must be subjected to continual scrutiny and examination and be prepared to stand up to 

that scrutiny at any time. Now I agree also that the views of the public and of interested and 

knowledgeable groups must be consulted and I want to suggest that his has already been 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1254 

done more expeditiously by different techniques than he has suggested. 

 

In recent years this Government has employed a wide variety of committees, some with province-wide 

representation, others with specialized capabilities depending upon the problem of the study or the issue 

to be looked at. To cite a few of them I could refer to the General Steering Committee and other 

committees relating to the general reorganization of the curriculum as it relates to the implementation of 

the division programs; the School Facilities Council, several meetings of which have resulted in some 

changes that will be implemented very shortly into the Department with respect to the handling of 

school building requests, locations and so on; the Nicks-Gathercole Committee, the Joint Committee on 

Higher Education, the Committee on Nursing Education, the Library Inquiry Report, and, as I said, a 

host of other advisory committees and boards pertaining to technical and vocational education in the 

more specific areas. It is true that the terms of reference of such committees are narrower than those of a 

Royal Commission. They are more precise I suggest and more to the point in dealing with and in 

arriving at specific conclusions and decisions on the real problems as they present themselves. 

Moreover, I think they function within the basic philosophy of the province regarding overall 

educational objections which can best at a given point of time, I think, be stated only in general and 

broad terms. For in changing times certainly I think there can be no rigidity of objectives as such. Now I 

had hoped, Mr. Speaker, to have received sometime ago the final report of the Nicks-Gathercole 

Committee. This was a committee established over a year ago, Members may recall, briefly to look into 

curricular, financial and other aspects of the division three and four programs. However, within the last 

few days I have received a letter from this Committee and I should like to take the time to read a few 

excerpts from that letter at this time and I am quoting from a letter from Doctor Gathercole and Mr. 

Stewart Nicks. And I quote: 

 

Your Advisory Committee in division three and four is now writing the final report for study. 

Unfortunately this report will not likely be ready for you before the present session of the Legislature 

is prorogued. However, we are submitting this memorandum to indicate some of the things you may 

expect from the final report. 

 

Recently we have heard that what Saskatchewan needs is a Royal Commission on aims and objectives 

of education, a study which will get down to the bedrock on which our educational program is based. 

Your Advisory Committee does not believe that a Royal Commission as such is necessary. It should 

not be forgotten that in 1958 and in 1963 Canadian conferences on education were held and at both of 

these the aims of education were given quite thorough study. In 1958 Manitoba got a Royal 

Commission, 1959 Alberta had a Royal Commission, in 1960 British 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1255 

Columbia followed suit with a Royal Commission, and all of these reports dealt with the aims of 

education among other things. In 1963 the Province of Quebec established a Royal Commission to 

make a very thorough study of education in that province, and more recently the British Columbia 

Teachers’ Federation has conducted a very comprehensive study of education and has published its 

report in a volume entitled “Involvement.” 

 

I think the biggest study of course, Mr. Speaker, in recent years has been the so-called Hall-Dennis 

Inquiry in the Province of Ontario, carried on by the Committee on Aims and Objectives of Education in 

the schools of Ontario. So certainly there is no dearth of material available on the question of the 

philosophy of education and the purposes of our schools. In its interim report the Advisory Committee 

the Nicks-Gathercole Committee recommended as follows: 

 

That the Department of Education set up a Committee to develop a statement of aims and objectives on 

education that will reflect the expectations of the people of Saskatchewan for their schools and it will 

set guidelines for developing an educational program appropriate for our age. 

 

This letter goes on to state that the Committee will reaffirm this recommendation in the final report. 

They will go further, however, and include in the final report a number of statements concerning aims 

and objectives of education drawn from these various reports that I have referred to above. 

 

This letter goes on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

It would seem a waste of time to have any Royal Commission in Saskatchewan to go over the same 

ground that other commissions and committees have worked upon in very recent years, especially in 

view of the fact the Nicks-Gathercole Committee itself is giving a good deals of thought to this 

question. 

 

However, they go on to state: 

 

We think there is a place for a Committee to be established that will assume some responsibility for 

channelling back to trustees’ meetings, Teachers’ Federation meetings and meetings of a variety of 

community groups a proposed statement of educational aims for this province with a view to getting 

reaction from these various groups. 

 

And with these reactions the Committee suggests they could then put together a statement of aims which 

would be directed to the Department of Education for its adoption. 

 

And with these reactions the Committee suggests they could 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1256 

then put together a statement of aims which would be directed to the Department of Education for its 

adoption. 

 

Further, reading from the letter from Dr. Gathercole and Mr. Nicks, Mr. Speaker, dealing with the 

division system: 

 

In its final report your Advisory Committee will reaffirm its support of the division system. Actually it 

is not the term division system itself that is important. The name could well be changed without any 

loss in education practice. What is important is the concept of non-gradedness that underlies the 

division system and the idea of flexibility that is part and parcel of the division system. 

 

The purpose of those who conceived the division system was to make the child more central in 

educational planning, organization and practice. For too long have grade standards, external 

examinations, June promotions, mastering of one specific textbook in a given course, the lecture 

method of teaching and so on determined what went on in our schools. Each may have been good in its 

place and time, but in this age of universal education, with all that we know about how children learn 

and what is best for them to learn, these things are not necessarily good today. We believe that subjects 

like reading, the formal aspects of language and mathematics which depend upon a sequential 

presentation of material to ensure mastery must continue to be presented in a formal manner. However, 

there is an abundance of evidence that all children of a given age are not ready for these skills at the 

same time. Now if we accept this idea of differential treatment, if we accept the idea of continuous 

progress and the only way to make continuous progress work more effectively is to have a flexible 

school organization which is in effect the non-graded program. 

 

This was one of the points raised by my hon. friend opposite from Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) when he 

was referring to the rigidity and the fact that there has been no change. There has been change in this 

and many other aspects of today’s school system. Now there are other remarks in this letter that I think 

would be pertinent to this Resolution, Mr. Speaker. They go on to state that: 

 

It follows that a new high school curriculum was needed and it must be one which on the one hand is 

challenging to the bright student, yet in the other hand is within the capabilities of the average or less 

than average young person. Obviously one high school program as such is not sufficient. The academic 

courses of yesteryear with their abstractness and their stress on verbalization are not enough in 

themselves. The comprehensive school program with its wide range of electives and its variety of 

courses has emerged as the educator’s answer to 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1257 

society’s demands that high schools should be open to all young people. One of its strengths is that it 

makes more central in the education program. 

 

Now they go on to state, Mr. Speaker, that it would be utter lunacy to assume that all communities in 

this province can have a comprehensive high school. A comprehensive high school demands a relatively 

large enrolment to permit the efficient and economical offering of the broad program, many items of 

which are electives. Education tax dollars are still too scarce whether they are obtained locally, 

provincially or federally, to warrant the heavy expenditures required to provide the costly shops in 

equipment that go to make up this program in, as I say, many of the smaller communities of this 

province. 

 

They go on to state: 

 

The purpose of the high school is to retain students, to reduce dropouts and not to force young people 

out into the streets or into uncertain employment before they are equipped for it. They represent, if you 

want to talk about dropouts, a failure of the school and of society to meet their needs. The concern of 

the high school must be the adaption of the program to save the students, not rigid conformity which 

will in effect, as it has in the past quite often, force that student out of school. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment also on some of the remarks made by the hon. gentleman 

from Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). He went on to state, and I have just selected a few of his remarks to 

comment on, he believes that Saskatchewan’s education system is adrift. And I can only take from these 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, that he doesn’t know what changes have taken place in the last four or five years. 

I could remind him that the qualifications of the teaching force in this province today have never been 

higher. This year about 30 per cent of the teachers employed in the province hold professional 

certificates, 48 per cent hold standard certificates. Compare this with 1963, only six years ago, when you 

had 18.8 per cent with professional certificates and only 38 per cent with standard certificates. So 

certainly the qualifications of our teaching force in this province today are at an all-time high. Secondly, 

does he realize how many comprehensive schools there were in this province when this Government 

took office. There were none, one underway. Today six have been built and are in operation and a 

number of others are in various stages of building and planning. In 1964 there were 4,700 adult students 

enrolled in technical and vocational programs in Saskatchewan. Today the figure is something in the 

neighborhood of 12,000. During the past year as well, Mr. Speaker, coming back to the matter of more 

concern to the curriculum content, there has been a very comprehensive province-wide evaluation of our 

school system, the school program, the curriculum in divisions one and two, with feedback, Mr. 

Speaker, from teachers, from trustees and above all from the parents and the children themselves. 

Nursing 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1258 

education has been put on a completely different status since this Government has taken office. Under 

the regime of the Opposition nursing education was still in the Florence Nightingale tradition. It has 

been completely revamped and made a good deal more relevant to the needs of the day, I suggest. We 

have also done a good deal of work in experimental programs in teacher accreditation and in the 

semester type of school organization which have been initiated by the Department in the last two or 

three years. Today the opportunities for adults to obtain grade 12 standing have certainly been enhanced 

by more night school offerings, by more adult upgrading courses being offered, and also as well this 

program has been helped by holding grade 12 examinations in January as well as in June. Legislation 

has been enacted just last year which makes possible the establishment of French language schools in 

this province. I am sure the Hon. Member will be interested to know that a program of Ukrainian has 

been developed and offered this year for the first time in grade seven and eight with a very excellent 

acceptance from many schools throughout the province. The entire high school program, the entire high 

school curriculum, Mr. Speaker, has been subjected to very careful scrutiny by the Division Four 

Steering Committee, and I suggest that this scrutiny will continue. On that committee we have 

representatives of the SSTA, the School Trustees’ Association, the Teachers’ Federation and the 

University. 

 

A general reorganization of our entire high school program is pretty well nearing completion at this 

point in time. There will be fewer compulsory subjects, my hon. friend will be interested to know. I 

think we only have three compulsory subjects at the high school level today and it will result in the 

virtual elimination of a strict grading system in the high schools. Rather we will be going through a 

credit system and subject promotion. 

 

We have given in the last few years financial support to demonstration school libraries in Yorkton and in 

Watrous. We have provided incentive grants for library books and science equipment to make these 

programs and these courses in science particularly more meaningful. The fine arts have been 

encouraged. I suggest more emphasis has been placed on this aspect of the curriculum. 

 

I refer again to our band program which has been mentioned many times before. 

 

A comprehensive program of driver education has been introduced and has been very, very well 

accepted. 

 

Special attention has been given to the development of appropriate curricular materials for pupils of 

Indian ancestry. And this is a field, I can assure Hon. Members on both sides of the House, that we are 

going to continue to emphasize and to promote to the best of our ability. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1259 

A co-operative school work training program has been developed and is operating now in 54 centres in 

the province. More and more of the blind children are being integrated into our regular school system, 

Mr. Speaker. A total of 57 registered blind students are now studying in local schools in this province 

made possible by the special assistance from the Department of Education. 

 

A Teacher Classification Board has been set up. It’s only one phase of education I realize, it’s still in its 

early growing pains, but I suggest that it will reduce some of the many variations that have existed in the 

past in the matter of salary classification practices by the various boards of the province. 

 

Considerable progress was made last year in 1968, Mr. Speaker, toward the more complete integration 

of our pupils in the northern part of Saskatchewan. Last year I am sure Hon. Members will be interested 

to know that 39 teachers and 900 and some pupils from eight federally operated schools were transferred 

to the jurisdiction of the Northern School Board of this province. 

 

I mentioned the Nicks-Gathercole Committee. I mentioned the Joint Committee on Higher Education 

and other committees that have been going on. Now the very function and the organization of the 

Department of Education itself have been examined during a two-year study by people in our own 

Department, by the Budget Bureau officials and by a group that were retained for this purpose, a group 

of management consultants. They have just recently submitted a full report. I can tell the House that 

reorganization of the Department will be taking place in an effort to line up more effectively the 

activities and the objectives of the Department with today’s scene in education in this province. 

 

Now the Member for Riversdale stated again in the course of his remarks — I believe these are roughly 

his words — that our education system really exists solely and purely for job training. Now here again, 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that it is quite obvious that the Member has not examined the courses of study on 

their objectives for the course content when he makes a statement like this. There is the emphasis on fine 

arts related to job training, there is driver education, there is the new teaching in Ukrainian or French 

language instruction, or Christian ethics. Are these courses vocational or job-oriented? I don’t think so. 

He goes on to state that it is his personal conviction that our system is antiquated and obsolete. In other 

words we are in the horse and buggy age, and he thinks we should be in the rocket age. Well, I can only 

point out some of the changes that I have already listed, Mr. Speaker, and I think they clearly 

demonstrate that the educational system of this province has been progressing and adapting to meet the 

needs as we see them. I suggest, if he knew more about the objectives and the procedures and the 

courses of study as they are now available, he wouldn’t make the charges 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1260 

and the suggestions that he has made. For example, the Hall-Dennis Report, the Ontario Government 

report recommends the elimination of grades. Well, for several years we have had an authorized 

non-graded continuous program for divisions one and two or formerly grades one to six. In this program, 

as such, grade failure has largely been eliminated, and this was one of the points that he raised. Students 

are permitted to progress at different rates. It could be pointed out that different schools, and the 

teaching force in different schools have not all implemented this concept to the fullest degree as yet, but 

it is there for them and it is coming in this regard. 

 

“In my view,” he stated also in the course of his remarks, “the autonomy of the teachers should be 

established as a principle.” He went on also to state, “all the matter that I have referred to briefly should 

in any view be removed from the hands of the Department and put in the hands of local school boards.” 

In the course of his remarks he made it quite clear that he could see no place whatever in education in 

this province for local trustees or local government or local school boards of any kind. He went on to 

compare the teaching profession with the legal profession and the medical profession. I suggest his 

comparisons here are not very valid. The cliental of the legal profession in his case, or the medical 

profession have a good deal of freedom of choice. Certainly this isn’t so with pupils and teachers. By 

law children are asked to go to school and to designated school as such, and, therefore, certainly the 

public must have some avenue of appeal. So I suggest that it is not a valid comparison to compare the 

teaching profession with the legal or the medical profession. I mention again that from his remarks it is 

obvious that he has no faith whatever in the system of local government for the administration of public 

schools. He would prefer to have, as I understand him, the professional educator call the tune in all 

cases. Certainly I am not opposed to reasonable autonomy for teachers in many areas of 

decision-making, but certainly, Mr. Speaker, we cannot agree that we must have to abrogate the public 

responsibility for policy development in education. 

 

I mentioned also that our concerns in the whole field have not ignored the role of the Department of 

Education itself and that over two years ago we did initiate study on its present and its future role. I 

suggest that this project has resulted in an updating and redefining of the role of the functions of the 

Department. Within a year or two we will have many changes in the new structure that is now in the 

process of implementation. The results, I think, will be evident in the operation of the Department at that 

time. 

 

I don’t wish to imply, Mr. Speaker, that there are no problems ahead or that we don’t have problems 

today, or that all of the current problems we have are solved by any means. But I do say though that we 

have gone a long way to face up to the hard facts of the present and the future and to prepare ourselves 

for the task of meeting the challenges which do lie ahead. Now the 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1261 

Department itself, local governments, the trustees, the teaching profession and their organization, and 

the public at large certainly must together be prepared to search out better ways of doing things, be 

willing to abandon some of the older practices that, time-honored in themselves, are obsolete in today’s 

world, and I think be prepared to subordinate selfish motives from any side in the interest of the 

common good of the young people, who must live out most of their lives from here on, certainly in an 

environment very different from the one we have known, and very different perhaps to today’s 

environment itself. There can be no doubt that the educational processes must always be under question 

and analysis and not the subject I suggest of a Royal Commission every ten years or so. The matter of 

Educational objectives is one of everyday concern. I think, Mr. Speaker, it is safe to predict for example 

that changes will be needed soon, I suggest, in certain administrative systems to provide a better 

rationalization of material and management resources. I think the need for regional organization, in the 

provision of some educational services particularly, is becoming more and more urgent. As a matter of 

fact we have already initiated some preliminary studies in this regard: the utilization of mechanical aids 

to learning, the use of teaching assistants, the whole question of locally employed superintendents and 

the structure of our rural unions today. Accreditation of high schools are some things we must give 

consideration to, access to special education for all classes of the handicapped, the subject of a previous 

motion in this House this afternoon. These are all questions that are on our doorstep right now. I suggest 

that we must deal with these and continue to deal with these and other problems as they present 

themselves. But I suggest that they could be better dealt with by handling them one at a time than by the 

establishment of a Task Force as such. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to propose an amendment, 

seconded by Mr. Heald, to the Resolution that is before us to read as follows: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted and the following be substituted therefore: 

 

commends the Government for the measures taken to provide a program of educational services 

relevant to the present and future needs of the province, for its extensive consultation with 

representative groups in studying proposals for improvements; and further, commends the Government 

in particular for the implementation of curricular reforms for the expansion of educational programs 

for youth and adults, for the encouragement of the fine arts, for provision of expanded educational 

services for the handicapped and disadvantaged, and for the reorganization of the Department of 

Education in keeping with the modern role of government in providing leadership in educational 

development. 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, some of the remarks made by the Minister 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1262 

of Education (Mr. McIsaac) will need answering and I am sure will be replied to by my hon. friend from 

Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) in closing the debate on this Resolution and amendment. 

 

Briefly, the gist of the remarks showed that the Minister of Education relies on the answers of some 

reports and some commissions. Some of these of course being incomplete, in themselves are 

inconclusive, such as the Nicks-Gathercole Report. Mr. Speaker, for this day and age all I can say is that 

somehow I feel, and many other people in Saskatchewan do too, that some of this is just a little bit too 

little and too late, to have most of our education programs based on these reports. I think there should be 

a quick updating. They have their place, these reports, and they are extremely useful, as indicated by the 

Minister, but a new search of our own problems, Sir, must be initiated immediately for our own 

educational good. 

 

Now, our educational system in Saskatchewan is different than in many of the other provinces and 

somewhat similar in many respects as well. And certainly all bodies having anything to do with 

education; trustees, teachers and so on — and there are many of them who are very interested of course 

in our province, where a third of the Budget is being spent for education, this shows that education is an 

important part of our life — are searching for guidance as never before. Even the Department of 

Education, the people within the Department of Education, I know, are also searching for guidance. 

Sometimes I know as well that they are in a real dilemma for answers as the rest of us are. Now, I 

believe a study of this at this time would be very appropriate and very much needed. 

 

I want to make one remark in replying to the Minister, stating what I think he said was that grade seven 

and eight had French for the first time last year and that they had brought in a French course which is all 

right, which is very good, Sir. Also that Ukrainian was introduced in Saskatchewan public schools last 

year for the first time too. Now I am not sure — and if I am wrong, I stand to be corrected — but I think 

Ukrainian in grade seven and eight has been in many of our schools for a good number of years. I can’t 

tell exactly how many but I know it has been offered. So have German and Russian and Latin and some 

of the other languages. I say this is very good, Sir, and certainly along with French, this is going to be 

very useful in a province like ours. 

 

Now, this Resolution, Sir, recommending the constitution of a Special Task Force to examine into all 

aspects of education and its present relevancy to the future needs of our society, is a Resolution which in 

my mind and in my opinion is so all-encompassing, Sir, in the field of future education in our province 

and which, in our times, I consider the most vital, Sir, and I think a desperate and urgent challenge to our 

times. 

 

I am very proud to take part in this Resolution. Mr. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1263 

Speaker, I think that the key wording of this is “to examine into all aspects of education and its present 

relevancy to the future needs of our society.” From that standpoint, Sir, that knowledge in the last 10 

years has doubled when compared to the total sum of all knowledge from the beginning of time is really 

frightening. But that statement in itself is not so alarming except when one realizes that old, unwielding 

and many outdated mechanics of transporting that knowledge are still being used, when new methods 

and new ideas supplemented by technological and mechanical machinery of conveyances should be used 

and must be used, if the schools are to successfully give our youth the kind of education that the 

immediate future calls for. But if there is no relevancy to the education program that is being imparted to 

the needs of a very sophistically educated society, in the evolutionary leap into the fathomless questions 

of the new educational area, Sir, I believe it will falter and eventually die on the vine. 

 

But there are those of us who are afraid of the future. There are those of us who are afraid to ask 

questions, Sir. Now, the Hon. Member from Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) reminded me of one of these, 

Sir, seemingly desperately trying to hold back the tide and progress that comes along with the future, 

and in reality saying that what was good enough for my father is good enough for me. Well, Sir, this is 

just not acceptable in our modern day education. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Point of privilege, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t at all what I said. 

Mr. Speaker, what I said was that all of the things that we have had in the past we shouldn’t just throw 

out. It has nothing to do with my father, my grandfather, or any of the rest of my relatives. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, you can try to dam and hold back the ever-pressing, ever-searching 

lava of knowledge, but in a free and democratic question-searching society like ours, you can hold it 

back no more than you can hold back the rays of the coming of dawn. 

 

Our dedicated purpose in the field of education to the youth in the future should not be to try to hold 

back but to push on, exploring and fulfilling man’s capabilities to the utmost. A lot has been said about 

the great advances in the field of learning that have come about in the last decade. I am going to suggest 

that some teachers and some trustees have not really seriously grasped and accepted the significance of 

the revolutionary trends in our contemporary world of education. We, as teachers and trustees, 

particularly those of us who relate back to the Dirty Thirties, are sometimes so strait-jacketed and 

steeped in the traditional economic and educational set-up that I am afraid, Mr. Speaker, that for many 

of us there is little hope for a different outlook. To wean us off our educational prejudice sometimes is 

next to impossible. Worse than 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1264 

that many of us have been able to impart, to slough off our blinker-like narrow prejudices onto our 

children who although young in years are old in tradition and in ideas. I know, Mr. Speaker, that this 

outlook is sometimes not acceptable. We hate to really take a look at ourselves. Sir, I have been 

perceptibly watching for the last number of years the blossoming forth of the division system in our 

schools. Now, it isn’t blossoming, Mr. Speaker, it’s slowly dying on the stem. And what are the reasons 

for this unacceptability, Sir? Certainly one reason is the general public’s apathy and traditional 

resistance to change. But, Sir, more so is the resistance of some teachers who refuse to come out of their 

shell, yes, and even some superintendents who talk about these progressive education ideas but show 

little enthusiasm for them. 

 

Now, I am not saying that this is so with everyone or everywhere or with every teacher, or every 

superintendent. Certainly not. We’ve got some of the best progressive teachers and superintendents. But 

I say this is obviously evident every once in a while. From my own personal observation, it is far more 

prevalent than you would surmise. And trustees are no exception in this respect. I want you to know, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am not condemning anyone. I, as a trustee, like the next one am often jolted into the 

reality that this is the 20th century. The trouble seems to be, Mr. Speaker, that some trustees never get 

that holt. In comparison with the slow, ox-like moving world of 20 years ago, (and I’d like to suggest, 

Sir, what a comfortable age that was then and I think many of us would like to live back in that age) we 

are hurdling forward at a tremendously accelerated pace and our educational ideas and concepts must 

move along with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this is one reason why so many of us are so critical of the impatient youth of 

today. I realize that many of us feel that we must protect them from themselves, but really, Sir, how 

often it is, if we really soul-searched our conscience, that it is really we who are often out of step. I was 

exceedingly gratified to hear one gentleman tell us, at the dinner meeting of the Trustees’ Association 

Executive, that he was just as sceptical about those so-called young people at the Regina campus as 

ever. But after a number of meetings with them, and talking with them, he came to the realization that 

these young people really had a message to communicate, that the problems of university education 

were real problems, that these students’ demands should be heard and considered. This is what he said. 

Now, I want to say that I agree, not totally, but with most of the principles enunciated by my colleague 

from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), that to prepare solely for becoming the breadwinner is not 

enough. The old adage that man does not live by bread alone is even more so important today than every 

before. Technology, automation and cybernation shall make it possible for man shortly to devote much 

of his time to do things other than working from sun-up to sun-down for his daily bread. To be educated 

solely to become a cog in an industrial machine is the kind of a practice 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1265 

relegating human beings back into history to the days of the galley slaves, Sir. By no means, Mr. 

Speaker, am I suggesting that man shouldn’t work. I agree with the Member from Cannington (Mr. 

Weatherald). Man should work, should strive, should produce but not to the point that he can feel and 

see nothing and do nothing but work, be so brainwashed by his loyalty to the system and the master that 

he has no feeling for the human spiritual things of life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as a board member it would be assumed that I would be very 

vociferous in defending the existence of local school boards, who normally carry out the wishes of the 

ratepayers and thus provide the kind of education program needed. And so I do, Mr. Speaker. A local 

board with a strong sense of dedication to education and knowledge of local conditions, with the 

necessary powers to conduct the full program of a school district, can often be classed the best situation 

for administration of local schools. However, Sir, a local board emasculated of its most important 

powers is of no value. The local school district boards of a school unit, we all remember them, legal 

entities with powers of election of their own local board and certain other limited powers, have 

disintegrated almost in total in these school units. And, Mr. Speaker, I predict the same demise of unit 

boards and other board, whose powers are being whittled away by this Government. Nearly every 

education Bill being presented in this House takes away some of the power of the board. It won’t be a 

question of existence, Mr. Speaker. They will exist, these boards, but this emasculation of certain 

important powers, leaving only minor and mediocre decisions to be made, will result in less 

participation of capable candidates running for trustees, and finally, leading to eventual takeover by 

senior government bodies, probably the formation of area boards and leading to a total operation of 

these schools by the Provincial Government. 

 

As a unit board member I defend their existence, the unit boards, and I do so by virtue of the fact that in 

our experience as the board we think we have done a good job, administering and negotiating and the 

other essentials of good local government, as well. Mr. Speaker, I was very disturbed by the remarks of 

the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald). Someone said that he was expounding educational 

philosophy of the 18th century, I recall hearing that said. Probably going back farther than that, to the 

14th century would have been more accurate. He suggested that the ideas expounded by my colleague 

from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) were purely idealistic. Well, wake up man, you are so far 

behind in your thinking. You are a piker in comparison to Rip Van Winkle when it comes to being 

asleep. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1266 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — These ideas are already in existence in many states of the United States, in certain 

European countries and many of them are being tried out in Canada. You know, Mr. Speaker, he 

suggested that human nature is such that to get ahead it’s imperative that a student be pushed to study. 

Cramming is necessary, he said. Pressure must be applied, that the human being is such that he won’t 

move ahead unless he is driven, 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s not true. 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — that without this goading the student would just slacken off. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

after hearing that psychological analysis of student-study-situation behavior and the remedial solution, I 

wonder if he had ever heard of such encouraging student study incentives as involvement, stimulation, 

challenge, encouragement and many others. The suggestion by the Hon. Member that universal 

accessibility is now impossible is the usual Liberal philosophy. Tomorrow, not today, tomorrow. We 

can’t afford it today. With the population increase at the rate it is expanding in Canada and in 

Saskatchewan, that’s if it stays here, Sir, tomorrow will never come with men in power such as he. You 

can’t afford not to have universal accessibility today. Mr. Speaker, you can’t afford to wait until 

tomorrow. 

 

“University students should consider themselves fortunate to be able to get a university education,” he 

said. And certainly they should be, Mr. Speaker. I agree with the Hon. Member (Mr. Weatherald), but all 

students who have the mental capacity to get that education should be able to qualify irrespective of 

financial availability, Mr. Speaker. If we can pay for 80 per cent of student cost of a university education 

for those who can possibly afford to pay that 20 per cent, who have had a free ride on us at the 

university for many years, many of these who warmed a seat at the university for six or seven years 

getting a B.A., and for every year he was there, we, the public, paid for 80 per cent of the seven-year 

seat-warming safari, then surely to God we can put up the extra 20 per cent for the student who is 

intelligent enough and is capable enough and is certainly willing enough but only lacks that 20 per cent 

or an extra few hundred dollars, Sir. It’s time that the university became a learning institution for all 

people, not just a haven for the rich boys and the marriageable girls, or even for the poor fellow who 

grinds himself half to death trying to get university education. That is no way to have an education 

obtained, Sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) has taken a hard line on matters relating to 

education. He has made it obvious that the meat axe shall fall wherever cost can be pared regardless of 

the total effect on education. The harm that such a stringent financial policy will do, Sir, will be 

irreparable. I believe that, as the months go by and as the years go by, the Minister will see the folly of 

running the Department of Education like a big business enterprise. The 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1267 

ledger may balance, Sir, it may even show a profit, but the loss incurred by the youth of our province 

will be incalculable. I ask the Minister to raise the question of priorities with his Government and 

attempt a much more flexible policy towards expenditures in education, Sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent millions on many commissions and many reports, many 

of them pigeon-holed and collecting dust for years. I ask the Members of this House to vote 

unanimously for this Resolution to establish a Task Force on the aims of education. It will cost money, 

granted, but I think it will be an investment that will be more profitable than an investment in any 

oilfield, in any potash mine, or any pulp mill, a thousandfold. 

 

I want to finish by quoting the remarks of the Hall and Dennis Report as my closing statement. 

 

The underlying aim of education is to further man’s unending search for truth. Once he possesses the 

means to truth all else is within his grasp, wisdom and understanding, sensitivity, compassion and 

responsibility, as well as intellectual honesty and companions and maturity. The truth shall make you 

free. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if personally I 

have any strong reservations to the Resolution as it is. It seems innocent enough on the surface that we 

should review education in the province and re-define the aims for the seventies. That seems a 

wholesome enough exercise. I listened with interest to the Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. 

Romanow) who introduced this Resolution. What alerted me and interested me was not the wordage of 

the Resolution itself but rather the philosophy of the Member who introduced the Resolution. He spoke, 

for instance, of his belief that school grades should be done away with. I think he is entitled to that, that 

all restrictions on limiting the choices should be held to a minimum. There is something to be said for 

that. But I breathed a bit uneasy when he began to talk about the role that the school boards may play. I 

was somewhat astounded to hear him say that he thought we should question the relevancy of school 

boards and that we should probably look towards one provincial school board that would have control of 

education matters in the province. Then I hear the Member from Melville (Mr. Kowachuk) who just sat 

down decrying the fact, as he put it, that the Liberal Government was eroding the powers of the local 

school board and as determined to do away with them. I can recall reading in the press some time back, 

although I couldn’t quote the exact 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1268 

quotation, where the same Member who introduced the Resolution, was a bit more forthright and I 

believe he advocated outright disbanding of local school boards. This is the philosophy which to me is 

frightening. I can recall last year another gentleman who came to Saskatchewan. He spoke on education 

and created quite a stir addressing a group of teachers in the city of Regina, he too, referred to 

Saskatchewan educational system and he, too, referred to the role of school trustee in this system. He 

told this group of teachers that the day of the school board is finished and that it was time the school 

teachers rose up and overthrew the school boards because they were a parasite on the backs of the 

people. I wondered when I heard the Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) speaking if he 

subscribed to this philosophy of this gentleman who came to this province and called our trustees 

parasites and that the teachers should eradicate them. This gentleman was the Vice-President of the NDP 

National Association, Mr. Lapierre. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, that . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — And I would ask that when he speaks to the motion again in windup, he answer 

whether he subscribes to this philosophy. Is it his intention to do away with school boards in 

Saskatchewan? Is it his intention to make one provincial school board? Is it his intention to make all 

matters of curriculum and education out of the hands of the school boards and turn them over to an 

organization which he terms professionals in the field, professionals in the university and professional 

teachers? He would make a professional college of teachers and professors of university and they would 

determine the curriculum and what is best for the students of Saskatchewan. Then he said — and I was 

surprised to hear this — that after all teaching is very elemental, it’s very simple. All you have to have is 

a teacher in a classroom and a good feeling of co-operation between the pupil and the teacher. And if 

there are days and occasions when the teacher has doubts as to where he’s leading his children, just ask 

the children. They will tell her. Why, he said, these children, these little tots should participate in a 

decision-making as to what they think is in their interest to be taught. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Six years old. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — He says this is his philosophy of education. He says in other words we will progress 

together and these children will grow to maturity by having mature things to deal with. So he’s trying to 

place in the hands of the children the decision making as to what subjects will be taught in the classroom 

and how they will be taught. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Six years old. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cameron: — Yes, and he speaks of 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1269 

himself as my generation. He calls it. I was thinking that my generation, as he calls it, would come out 

with some propositions in tune with the times in which we live. Do you know what he did? He took us 

back to the generation of the former Minister, the former Premier. I can recall in this House when the 

present Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) was the Minister of Education, way back in 1958. I spoke 

in this House about education and I spoke in reply. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Alex, I can’t hear you. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well then be quiet and you will. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I spoke about the need of a review of financing education. I spoke about the need of 

some system of foundation program of financing education. I pointed out that it was my belief that 

education was the responsibility of all the citizens of Saskatchewan, not just the obligation of a few. 

These students’ parents through local taxes were educating and putting them through high school, but 

they did not return to the local community. They went on to the broader field because there were no 

opportunities for them to come back to. Therefore we were educating these children to make their 

contribution on the national and on the international scene and for that reason the state as such should 

carry the major burden of educating the children of the state. And this in our terms, the Province of 

Saskatchewan should be making a greater contribution financially than has been the policy in the past. 

 

I said to the Minister of Education at that time that we should look to curriculum revision, that we 

should look to some of the disciplines in the classroom which would train and develop the child. You 

know what his reaction was? He said, why you would turn back the clock. You would turn back the 

clock. He said this policy which we are following today has been established and has been in use for the 

past 20 years. He said it is a good policy of education. Recalling his approach, I was startled that the 

Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) should be following the footsteps of the former 

Minister of Education (Mr. Lloyd). He was a great disciple of Dewey, who said the whole child comes 

to school. You know he said, since the whole child comes to school, we must bring in those subjects 

which will involve the child. He clothed them in slogans of what an educational program should be. It 

should be conscious of the fact that the whole child comes to school not just a portion of him. It should 

be conscious of the fact that education should be geared for social living. Education should be geared for 

democracy . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cameron: — . . . Thus he said there should be a wide range of 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1270 

subjects in the classroom. This is the philosophy which they’ve had in this province ever since before he 

was Minister of Education. This Member comes back repeating the same worn-out statement, and says 

my generation asks for this new approach to education, student participation, education for democracy, 

education for social living. I can recall in those days too, every pressure group that was possible was 

trying to get their pet subject on to the curriculum. We have the Voice of Women asking us to deal with, 

what do you call it, goes in and examines the Metis people . . . well, it doesn’t matter, others were 

advocating that we teach psychiatry in schools. All of these subjects have crept into the curriculum, . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Anthropology. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — Anthropology, correct, thank you, Mr. Minister. A conglomeration of all of these 

subjects have been introduced into the curriculum. Then, he says, my generation would ask that we do 

away with classes, with grades, that we do away with compulsory subjects, that we teach the child to 

participate, that all we need in the interest of the developing child is a good spirit of harmony and 

co-operation, so the child will be free to tell the teacher what is best for him. This is what I was alarmed 

at when I heard the Member move the Resolution. Hearing the Minister of Education speak this 

afternoon, I was most impressed with his outline of the progress that he has made and that this 

Government has made in the field of education and in the field of a constant and continuing review of 

education and the curriculum, and the steps that should be taken to meet the conditions of the new 

technological age. I was surprised, and I might say too a little disturbed, to learn that we have even gone 

so far that there are only three compulsory subjects left in the high school. Yet the Member has 

advocated that we even eradicate those, move those subjects from the high schools. I am amazed to 

think my generation has nothing more to offer in the whole serious and complex field of education than 

to say we should carry on with the same system as we have the past 20 years. Therefore, let us 

participate with the students. Let them tell us what they want and in the meantime they will mature. We 

will grow wiser and together we will lift the province with us and we will be able to relax in our old age, 

having worked together, become enlightened together and lie down as lambs together to enjoy our last 

days peacefully, relaxing in the warmth of the sunshine of the new society we have created together. I 

will not support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry) — Mr. Speaker, I’m having some difficulty with my throat, but I 

couldn’t resist rising to participate in this debate and probably when I conclude I will ask for 

adjournment. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1271 

Mr. Speaker, no one amazes me more than the Minister of Mineral Resources. He has shown us how he 

goes off on a tangent from hard rock mining into education. He further amazes me, as the Hon. Member 

was a member of the teaching profession. He undoubtedly still dwells and thinks of the era when he was 

participating and trying to instill all the goodies which he spoke about, in the minds of the young people 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the amendment moved by the Hon. Minister of Education sheds a 

different light on the original Resolution moved by the Hon. Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). It 

is abundantly evident to all that this amendment heaps adulation unrestrained upon the Government and 

the Minister for all past educational achievements, which could not justifiably be attributed to the 

Minister and the Government opposite. I do agree that they have in some measure contributed to the 

betterment of education in Saskatchewan, but the amendment as moved by the Minister definitely heaps, 

as I have mentioned, adulation unrestrained as this Government is trying to take all the credit for all the 

educational progress that has been made. I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the Government is entitled to 

all this. 

 

I feel, Sir, too that many of the remarks made by the Minister require closer scrutiny. Therefore in order 

to do this, and because of the condition of my vocal chords, due to a cold, I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 — HIGHWAY TRAFFIC AND SAFETY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the immediate implementation 

of recommendations submitted by the Special Legislative Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety 

on December 31, 1966. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly endorse this Resolution, and 

in rising to participate in this debate, I must first congratulate the mover, who, as a member of our 

Highway Traffic and Safety Committee, conscientiously pressed for improvements in the traffic 

situation that confronts us in the Province of Saskatchewan. True, the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) said 

on television lately and, true, there was a story in the January paper that there had been a 50 per cent 

decrease in traffic deaths. For what period, where he got his figures, for when and what figures he is 

applying, I am not sure, but, certainly, if he looks in the House Journals he will find, on Friday, March 

15th, 1968, a question was asked as to how many traffic deaths there were in the year 1967 and the 

figure shown there is 287. As of March 1st, this year, 1969, if he will check, he will find that the traffic 

deaths are 269 deaths for 1968. I want to commend the Government for even this reduction in the 

number of 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1272 

traffic deaths. By March 15th, which was the date given to us in the Journals last year, the traffic figure 

could be a bit higher than it is at the present time. But to quote figures for 1968 after all the totals are in, 

and compare them with the figures of January 1st, 1969, is certainly trying to get the best of both worlds 

with your percentages. There is an old saying a well known politician used to quote time and time again, 

“When someone quotes you only percentages be suspicious. Percentages without figures and dates mean 

absolutely nothing.” The cold facts of the matter are during this past year, 1969, there were 269 people 

killed in the Province of Saskatchewan because of highway traffic accidents, 17 or 18 less than one year 

ago. More than five people per week died on Saskatchewan’s highways. Yes, nine more than if five 

people died every week in this province and 18 people less than died during the year 1967 comparing 

the same date one year ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Attorney General quotes the effectiveness of his legislation and quotes the 

limited experience with this legislation, I think it is presumptuous on his part to give it credit for the 

decrease of traffic deaths. Without either the impairment legislation or without the baby-sitting over 

night suspension of a licence because of the breathalyser test, there was a reduction of six deaths in 

Saskatchewan from 1965 over the 1964 figures. That’s what the record shows. In 1965 there were 223 

deaths and in 1964 there were 229 traffic fatalities in this province. 

 

Quoting evidence that there were 1,400 24-hour suspension, as a result of the new legislation from 

October 1st, and quoting their value based on such flimsy evidence is hardly acceptable. As a matter of 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General knows too that he could go to British Columbia and get their 

experience with a one-day temporary suspension for impairment. He could get their experience quite 

easily and he could quote it for a longer period of time. Police officers in British Columbia will tell you 

that there are many repeaters in this temporary arrangement and that the only answer, the only answer to 

prove impairment is to have a compulsory breathalyser test, in British Columbia or any other province. 

The breathalyser was introduced in this province in 1956. It is a matter of record on the Hansard of this 

House and anyone that wants to can read it. The problem then was to ascertain whether or not the person 

was impaired. There was no method of measurement, no reliable method of measurement. There is still 

no method of measurement today unless you have the compulsory test, unless perhaps if you are 

fortunate enough to get an individual who has been unfortunate enough to get into an accident to get him 

to admit to drinking to excess, or perhaps have him admit to plead guilty to a charge. 

 

When I discuss the matter of the reduction of highway traffic deaths I would like to say, well, this 

reduction will be of a permanent nature, that there will be fifty less deaths in Saskatchewan next year. I 

attempted recently to convince 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1273 

a traffic officer who has a great deal to do with traffic in this province that the reduction was noteworthy 

and should be considered as evidence. He discounted my contention and insisted on a longer-term piece 

of evidence. Mr. Speaker, I think evidence to maintain an argument, evidence to maintain a policy, 

evidence to convince others, must be on a long-term basis, must be as a result of specific and careful 

consideration by groups of people after examination of the facts. 

 

The Committee that examined highway and traffic safety, made up of six members of the Government, 

one Conservative and three members of this group, spent hours listening to briefs considering the 

problems and it made certain recommendations. The majority of those members didn’t come from our 

side of the House, the majority came from the side, Mr. Speaker, where the Attorney General sits. I 

would have thought, in all sincerity, because of the traffic situation, the increase in traffic deaths over 

the years, the situation that we are faced with in this province, that the implementation of the Traffic 

Safety Committee’s recommendations would have been number one on the list of priorities. Before 

money was taken from vehicle operators who pay compulsory insurance, a program should be 

organized, the staff should be hired, to do something concrete to reduce traffic deaths, not by 10, not by 

20, but by 100. Recommendations of the Highway Traffic Safety Committee have in the main been 

ignored. Oh, I know that the Attorney General goes on television. You hear him on radio. He is always 

talking about the improvement in the situation. But whether it is 265 or 269, you take the figure. These 

people have died. These people have died in the Province of Saskatchewan, young people, old people, 

babies, mothers, fathers. As I said, five people every seven days in this province and nine more than five 

people every seven days, nine more than if five people died every week, because of traffic. We have 

nothing to brag about, nothing to boast about, and I contend the real reason we have nothing to boast 

about is because we have ignored the recommendations of the Highway Safety Committee. If the 

Government had implemented all of them — and we still have this situation on our hands — then we 

could say, well they’ve tried their best. But anything less than implementation of the recommendations 

of this committee is just not good enough. Just not good enough. Even the death of one person, because 

we did not implement some of these recommendations is unexplainable. It is a life that cannot be 

brought back, one that is lost to this province, one that is lost to a neighborhood, lost to a family. Sure 

some of the recommendations of the committee have been implemented. Sure, some of the lesser ones, 

some of the less important ones, some of the less costly ones, some of the recommendations that don’t 

really cost a great deal, don’t require staff, don’t require a great deal of organization. They have been 

implemented. And maybe they have saved lives. This is probably true. The main recommendations have 

not been implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s have a look at first, the recommendation that we should have a permanent Committee 

of this 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1274 

Legislature to study, to constantly study highway traffic problems. It hasn’t met, it hasn’t been 

organized, no resolution has been introduced by the Government opposite. We talk about 1,400 or so 

temporary suspensions. Why don’t we interview some of those who have been suspended? Why don’t 

we interview some of those who have been suspended more than once on a 24-hour basis? We talk about 

impairment, and charges laid because of impairment, licences revoked. Why don’t we interview the 

judges? We talk about liquor and driving. Why don’t we interview the victims? Why don’t we interview 

the families? Why don’t we interview the people that have suffered as a result of liquor and driving? 

This Committee could ask people to appear before it who are interested in driver training and who have 

seen concrete results. I say, Mr. Speaker, that when we are talking about percentages, it is not 45 per 

cent, it is not 50 per cent, it is not 75 per cent. This recommendation of the Highway Traffic Safety 

Committee has been ignored 100 per cent. 

 

One of the most important recommendations of the Highway Traffic and Safety Committee called for 

immediate action on the .08 per cent regarding the breathalyser test. I want to ask the Members of this 

House how many lives could have been saved if it was implemented? How many lives could have been 

saved? Well, look at the British statistics. They proved that the compulsory use of the breathalyser saved 

hundreds of lives. Emergency sections of hospitals that looked after traffic injuries and traffic victims 

late in the evening and in the early morning practically closed their doors when the compulsory 

breathalyser was introduced in that country. In this province, we are introducing the breathalyser as a 

baby-sitting proposition, a baby-sitter’s proposition which hasn’t worked out in British Columbia. Now 

if a person is impaired or is suspected of being impaired his licence is suspended for 24 hours. His 

licence is taken from him. True, he cannot drive home, someone drives the vehicle home for him. People 

in British Columbia laugh about it, call it the baby-sitter’s arrangement. They think it is a nuisance, and 

they will tell you, those who enforce the law, that it is ineffective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Committee called for driver training for all young drivers as soon as possible. We still 

have the same situation. Conscientious drivers take driver training. Those who need it, those who should 

take it, those who do the fish tails and those who run the hot-rods around with their tires screaming, 

don’t take driver training, and they need it. There is a need to look at the whole driver training program 

and its place in the curriculum, the need to give it constant study. The whole field of driver training, its 

implementation on a compulsory basis was recommended to convince the student driver that he has 

taken on an extremely important responsibility when he gets behind the wheel of a car. This 

recommendation has to a large degree been ignored. Sure, there was driver training before the 

Committee sat, on a voluntary basis. There is still driver training on a voluntary basis. The money that 

we need to spend in this whole program has not been made available. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1275 

Too often the present driver training is on a hit-and-miss basis and is not training people who should be 

trained. 

 

What causes accidents? Do we know whether it was the car, the highway, or the driver? Until we have 

proper traffic research, until we have a bureau that checks out every accident, looks at the brakes, looks 

at the road, examines the driver, we will not know. Mr. Speaker, I recall interviewing someone who was 

involved in a serious traffic accident. He told me, in all sincerity the brakes on his car, although it was a 

late model car, and had been driven only a few miles after it came off the factory assembly line, he told 

me the brakes quit completely. I wasn’t convinced. He caught the look in my eye and said, “I am telling 

you the cold truth.” A week later, I read a story in the newspaper. The automobile factory that 

manufactured his car was calling back that particular model to fix the brakes. Mr. Speaker, what we 

don’t know, is how many times an accident has been caused because the brakes were defective, because 

they didn’t work properly. This bureau would tell us. This recommendation by the Committee should 

have been implemented. In my estimation, Mr. Speaker, this recommendation by the Committee was 95 

per cent ignored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Committee called for a university grant and bursary to be provided for the study of 

highway traffic problems, of traffic engineering. Where are the bursaries? When will they be provided 

and how? This, Mr. Speaker, this recommendation has been a 100 per cent flop. We haven’t enough 

students working and being paid to work on the problems of traffic. We haven’t nearly enough of them. 

We go on guessing when we should be really studying the problem. The Committee recommended there 

should be periodic checks for vehicles. It got a mention in the Throne Speech two years and two months 

after the report was submitted. 

 

I repeat, Mr. Speaker, it was mentioned. This recommendation has been about 85 per cent ignored and 

certainly there has been 100 per cent delay up until now. How many of us in this House can say that, 

because we didn’t have the periodic tests for vehicles, no one has been killed? 

 

I think statistics can prove, if we study the facts that we get from British Columbia, that some people 

have died in this province because we did not implement a periodic test for vehicles in the Province of 

Saskatchewan; a 100 per cent delay on this recommendation, 85 per cent ineffective, as far as the 

recommendation itself is concerned; 85 per cent ineffective implementation of this recommendation of 

the Committee’s report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Highway Traffic and Safety Committee recommended driver examination every five 

years. What action has been taken? Lives are at stake, lives of the people who are not capable of driving, 

lives of all those that they meet on the highway. Other jurisdictions have implemented this type of 

program. This performance of indifference on our part, after 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1276 

the recommendation of the Committee, defies logic. This is about a 90 per cent refusal on behalf of the 

Government to implement the Committee’s recommendations. The Committee’s recommendations 

called for improvement and study of highway designs. If the highways have been improved, because of 

better design, let a Committee decide. Let a Standing Committee of the Legislature decide. Let them call 

neutral engineers. Let engineers give the Committee information on research. Let research be 

widespread so that we will know what is being done. Until we set up a Committee where research on 

highways, where submissions on improvements for highways can be presented, who knows whether the 

performance of our Highway Department is good or bad? We can spend millions on the roads, how 

much are we spending to train people, to drive on them and to design these roads for safety? What 

proportion of it is for safety design? Who can say? 

 

Mr. Speaker, a friend of mine, in my constituency, helped to take the bodies of two dead people out of a 

car. It was badly smashed on an icy road in this province during the month of February. The Committee 

recommended research to find out how we should take ice off the roads in the winter. If this research 

program has been undertaken, no information is available, and no one seems to know anything about it. 

In my estimation the Government is ignoring this recommendation of the Highway Traffic Safety 

Committee. 

 

When the Committee met, Mr. Speaker, we were convinced that driver improvement clinics could 

improve bad drivers. In some areas in the United States and in some areas in Canada, people are 

requested to take courses in driver improvement before they can pick up their licences. They surrender 

them and then take the course. Where are these clinics that we were going to try on an experimental 

basis? When will they be organized? How will they be tried on an experimental basis? This 

recommendation in my estimation was a necessary one. It has been ignored completely. Knowing how 

much publicity has been given to so little activity I cannot imagine the Attorney General undertaking 

any activity in this area without telling the newspaper, and I haven’t seen a line anywhere about a driver 

improvement clinic. I must come to the conclusion, therefore, that this recommendation has been 100 

per cent ignored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could point out that some of the recommendations have been accepted, but the main 

recommendations were ignored. Were they the important ones? I suggest that they are the main 

recommendations of the Committee. They are the recommendations that cost money, that require staff, 

that require organization, that demand attention. 

 

Sure, Mr. Speaker, we have new policies regarding motor scooters, new policies regarding pictures on 

drivers’ licences. Mr. Speaker, we can paint school buses, we can have new traffic speed regulations, 

but, Mr. Speaker, vehicle testing, compulsory use of the breathalyser, a research bureau to find out what 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1277 

causes accidents, driver examinations on a periodic basis, improvement clinics for traffic violators, 

bursaries for traffic studies, these are the most valuable and carefully considered, the most necessary 

recommendations. And these recommendations, Mr. Speaker, the Committee felt would help solve our 

problem, and I repeat, these recommendations were in most instances 100 per cent ignored. They didn’t 

have the money for the program. I contend that, if you take money from motorists, and if you get taxes 

from motorists, that you should put some of the money back in the form of assistance to the motorist as 

tangible evidence that you are going to help him with traffic safety. Certainly if you are going to save his 

life you couldn’t do anything that is more evident and of a more tangible nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the taxes that are placed on the extension policy for automobile insurance and the taxes 

that were placed on the compulsory section of the automobile insurance add up to many hundreds of 

thousands of dollars, estimated between $650,000 and $700,000. Mr. Speaker, that money has been 

taken from the motorists and I suggest that it is being penny-wise and pound-foolish not to use money 

like this to save people’s lives. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Let me give the House a rundown on some of the funds that have been taken from the 

motorists just recently. Let’s look at the new taxes that have been collected from motorists and were 

given to us in Crown Corporation Committee the other morning. One per cent driver education tax 

collected last year, $236,000; two per cent tax on compulsory insurance - $480,000; $2 surcharge on 

25-year olds and under - $272,000; $25 surcharge on accidents - $610,000, for a total of $1,600,000, 

plus a one and two per cent levy on auto policies written by private insurance companies that could run 

to about $200,000. Mr. Speaker, I contend that the Government should be prepared to spend $1 million 

of this money plus some of the liquor profits to implement the Committee’s recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we must spend money on traffic safety education. Yes, we 

must spend money on traffic engineering and we must spend money on enforcement of traffic laws. Mr. 

Speaker, enforcement alone, or engineering alone, or education alone, will not solve the problem. There 

must be an overall safety program organized by this Government that will take in research, driver 

training, periodic testing of the vehicle and the driver. There must be bursaries to study constantly the 

traffic problem and above all an opportunity for the public to tell the Members of the Legislature what 

they think the traffic problems are and what they think the solutions to these problems might be. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1278 

Mr. Speaker, money spent here in these areas would save millions in damages, would save injuries, 

would save time lost on the job. But above all, Mr. Speaker, money spent here would save lives. Mr. 

Speaker, to use the motorists’ money for anything else is to defy the Committee. To defy the Committee 

is to make a mockery of its effort. Let’s not argue about over whether it is 287 or 292 lives lost in traffic 

accidents in 1967 against 265 or 270 that were lost in 1968. I would like to see the Government decide 

here and now that it is going to save 100 lives this year. Let it set a goal. Let us aim at a target. Let us 

really and truly go after it and go after it by first implementing the recommendations of the Legislative 

Committee. If there is any possibility that the Government will have any trouble getting the money, put 

the Legislative Committee to work and let them interview those relatives of people who have lost their 

lives in traffic. Let us hear their story and let us say that there is no money to solve this problem. The 

reduction in death is not satisfactory. Is there any improvement? Who can say. Have the Committee’s 

recommendations been met? No, they haven’t. Could the implementation of a Committee 

recommendation have saved lives? Mr. Speaker, the Committee in all its honesty and in all its sincerity 

thinks that the recommendations would have saved lives. But, Mr. Speaker, no one will prove that they 

are right and no one will prove that they are wrong as long as the Committee is not going to meet, as 

long as the recommendations — important recommendations — are not going to be implemented. They 

thought that the recommendations could have saved lives, many lives. The Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) knows that, as he was on the Committee. He was there when the recommendations were made. 

They are his recommendations as well as mine. Let us use the money that we collect on insurance and 

taxes and let us use some of the liquor profits that we made to stop the killing of people on the highways 

and roads of the province, not just slow it down, not just check it, but let’s really stop it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the recommendations of the Committee are no good, then let us say so. Don’t say it in a 

round-about way by ignoring the main recommendations as they have been submitted by a sincere and a 

hard-working Committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the Member for submitting the Resolution and I urge all Members of the 

House to support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 11 — ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMISSION TO EXAMINE HEALTH 

PROGRAMS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina 

North East): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1279 

Government the establishment of a Commission to examine health programs in Saskatchewan and 

elsewhere, with a view to determining: 

 

(a) the cost of such programs and the various methods of financing them; 

(b) the number, ages and economic status of persons who are deterred by utilization fees from seeking 

health services; 

(c) methods of organizing health services which will control costs without placing obstacles in the way 

of obtaining needed services, and at the same time make possible an improvement in the quality of 

health services. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Grant: 

 

That all the words after the word “Assembly” be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

 

commends the Government of Canada for establishing in 1968, a federal-provincial committee which 

is presently studying the costs of health services in Canada including: 

 

(a) the effectiveness of present delivery systems for health services; 

(b) the scope of community health services and preventive care programs; 

(c) the planning, organization and effectiveness of present health service programs; and 

(d) the responsibility of the patient in financing a portion of these costs; 

 

and which will recommend to the Conference of Canadian Ministers of Health, positive action required 

to contain the cost of health services in a logical, definitive and practical way, but not impair the 

quality or the availability of necessary health services. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, when I joined the debate 

the other day I said at that time that the purpose of the amendment appeared to be essentially similar to 

the original motion. May I point out, Mr. Speaker, that Members on this side of the House have been 

fully aware of the launching of cost-probe from Ottawa just a short time ago. This House and the 

Minister should know how this came about. This came about as a result of a health care symposium of 

community clinic associations held at Prince Albert, to which the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) was 

invited but who conveniently didn’t show up. But the Federal Minister was advised as to the findings of 

the symposium, and I am sure that the challenging figures and statistics of cost in comparison with 

Provincial costs paved the way for the Federal-Provincial cost-probe. However, the purpose of our 

Resolution 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1280 

is to impress upon this Government to discontinue its discriminatory program of penalizing the sick and 

the poor for no valid reasons whatsoever. 

 

It is known that sufficient proof is available at our doorstep to the Minister and the Government to prove 

to them and to the Department of Public Health that there is no justification in this war against the poor 

and the sick. Now in his reply to the mover of the motion, Mr. Speaker, the Minister made a very feeble 

effort in replying to the Hon. Members from Regina East and from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman), who 

together presented irrefutable facts. The Minister in presenting his amendment had only one thing to say 

and it was that a probe was underway and then he brought in the amendment. Well, of course, this we 

knew. One thing that he made clear to the House is that he seems to be very little concerned about the 

reasons for the probe or the terms of reference of the Task Force. Indeed this House was thoroughly 

disappointed in his total presentation. At least I was. Only one statement that he made held out a bit of 

promise to the people of Saskatchewan. He said that certain services which he had previously threatened 

to remove may be staved off for a while. I don’t know how long, maybe staved off until spring or maybe 

late fall. 

 

I would like to agree with the Minister when he says that he is concerned about cost. Of course, there is 

much concern about costs both here in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and if you go across the border to the 

United States you find the same kind of concern about costs. In going through and doing a little bit of 

research I came across some reports in the library which the Minister could have found and I find that 

they have tremendous cause for concern there. Now this United States report was for 1966. It is a report 

to the President of the United States on medical care prices by the secretary William Gormans, assistant 

secretary for Program Co-ordination. Right on the first page, the first paragraph says: 

 

“Cause for concern” 

 

Let me point out and I will quote what some of these concerns are. I quote: 

 

The price of medical care rose rapidly in 1966. The Bureau of Labor statistics index of medical care 

prices rose 6.6 per cent. The index of hospital daily room rates went up 16.5 per cent. Increases of this 

magnitude cause severe hardship to individuals in need of medical care whether they pay the prices 

directly or indirectly through higher insurance premiums. Medical price increases make government 

financed medical care programs more expensive for the taxpayer. And there is nothing new about 

rising medical prices. Since World War II medical prices have been rising considerably faster than 

consumer prices generally, but in 1966 increases were the largest in many years. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1281 

And then it goes on to identify the purposes of this report. So what the Minister said is nothing new, he 

is concerned, we are concerned, everybody is concerned. The question is: what is he doing about this 

concern? Now these people — and I will quote again a little later on — are doing quite a bit more than 

we are doing here in Saskatchewan. They have already, according to this report, done what the Task 

Force that has been appointed or the seven Task Forces that have been appointed are going to do in 

Canada. Information is now available. My purpose is to reiterate to this House that we are asking not for 

a Federal-Provincial Task Force but a Saskatchewan cost-probe or investigation. The report from our 

Prince Albert Community Clinic should be carefully evaluated as this is close to us. The cost of services 

of other clinics should be assessed and compared to Provincial costs forthwith. I would as well suggest 

to the Minister to obtain some statistics from the Flin Flon private plan, which is in existence between 

the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company and its employees at Creighton and Flin Flon. This is a 

broad universal health plan which has been very successful and economical. It is a company contribution 

as the Minister should know and requires employee deductions. This is a health service which is 

economical and gives thorough coverage. 

 

I would like to point out that the Federal-Provincial cost inquiry, which he has in his amendment, may 

take one, two or three years to investigate and then possibly another two or three years of consideration 

by Provincial and Federal Governments. It may then take another five or six years or ten years for a 

Liberal Government to get off its fanny and produce some legislation and regulations along the lines 

recommended by the Task Force or health team. This will take too long to satisfy the needs of the times 

for the people of our province and for the edification of this Legislature of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. That is why we brought in the Resolution asking that something be done now. There are 

certain very important aspects of our health program that should be looked at now. 

 

We all know, the Liberals in Ottawa made a Pearson election promise. Now they hold a tiger by the tail 

so they are going to have a study to evade the promise. We all know that Mr. Trudeau, Robert Winters, 

Edgar Benson, Mitchell Sharp and others have qualms about medicare. That is why they propose opting 

out of the Federal Government health plan in due course. But let me say this, Mr. Speaker, and Members 

of the Legislature, that once Canadians have judged and experienced the benefits of universal medicine 

they will defeat any government that would reverse the process of human progress. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And don’t forget that, Mr. Premier and Mr. Minister. Think of the political losses 

you have sustained already among your own supporters for daring to impose deterrent fees in this 

province. And it is not too late to back down and this is why 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1282 

we are trying to get his Resolution through. I doubt if you will ever regain your Liberal votes as a result 

of this unjustified and uncalled for Act of last year. 

 

I am going to prognosticate, Mr. Speaker, that that is just what is going to happen. You will be defeated 

unless you reverse that trend. You may still have some Liberals but they are not going to be Liberal 

unless you do something about these deterrent fees. 

 

You may ask why do I prognosticate. Well it is very simple, Mr. Speaker. Let me use the words of 

Health Minister John Munro, I admit that he has been a consistent supporter of the Federal Medicare 

Plan and has argued and rightly so that a universal program of medical care is a step forward in the fight 

against poverty. He has said in speaking to the Canadian Mental Health Association meeting and I 

quote: 

 

There is much Governments can do, especially in relieving some of the basic economic and social 

threats with programs such as medicare. It stands to reason that a person’s mental well-being is 

menaced if he has a crippling medical bill. Such a person cannot achieve peace of mind as long as the 

prospect of such disaster exists and without medical insurance this threat remains over him and his 

family until death. Medicare is one means the Government can use to relieve the emotional insecurity 

which is inherent in poverty environment and such a cause of major illness. 

 

Now this is what Mr. Munro said, but this isn’t what the Minister and the Government opposite said. 

The Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) fails to grasp and fails to understand Mr. Munro’s statement. 

He has compelled our ratepayers to pay deterrent fees because he does not understand the facts of life. 

Yet, surprisingly enough, this Minister and this Government can understand the words of the medical 

profession and of the medical associations. This Minister repeats the phrases and sentences and he has 

repeated them now for some years, which are relayed to him by high-priced executives, high-priced 

specialists in the medical field. Let me illustrate. I am going to quote from the Canadian Medical 

Association News and Views, Mr. Speaker, March 8, number 195 and I am sure that the Minister gets 

this report. He has probably read it. Here is the quote: 

 

The Governments of Ontario and British Columbia have demonstrated a realistic workable approach to 

the provision of Medical Care Insurance. They have recognized that there are many who require some 

financial help and others who need total assistance, but that the majority of the population are capable 

of providing for their own needs. These programs have resulted in close to 100 per cent of the 

population having adequate medical care insurance on a voluntary basis. 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1283 

Nonsense, Mr. Speaker. But this is the kind of stuff that is published by these people. This is what the 

Minister reads, this is what the Minister believes and this is how he behaves. This kind of statement is 

not true and I will quote again some other statements that we read in these periodicals. And I quote again 

from the same paper: 

 

There are many reasons for the rising costs of medical care, the chief one of which is the increasing 

utilization of medical services generated largely by the public, but to some extent by the medical 

profession. This has been well demonstrated in the United Kingdom and in Saskatchewan. On the 

other hand the increases in medical fees have not been greater than increases in the wages and salaries 

of other Canadians. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, this is not true and I will prove it before I sit down. But, I ask this: where did we hear 

these words, Mr. Speaker? When I heard the Minister speaking on different occasions I thought that he 

was original, yet these are exactly the kind of words, the kind of language that he has used in the past. 

And I quote again from the same periodical and the same paper. 

 

It would be much less costly and more to the point to assist those people who are not now covered with 

Medical Care Insurance because of lack of funds or other reasons. 

 

There you have some kind of medical philosophy, believe me. This is another phrase often heard from 

gentlemen opposite. But let us remember these are statements from the top echelons of the medical 

profession. These are the statements that the Minister produces here in this House. These are the kind of 

statements that are very often untrue and they are the kind of statements that we cannot accept. Such are 

only statements and not facts. If these words were true then a Task Force would not have been required 

to get the facts for the forthcoming conference of Ministers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me look at another paper. On checking I find the Canadian Health Association believes that health 

legislation in Canada requires a complete overhaul. It has enunciated that there should be long-term 

planning and evaluation of health arrangements and that there should be more attention paid to health in 

the future. I agree with this. So let us have our own Task Force to study, evaluate and prepare some 

plans for this Government and this Administration. And eventually we may be able to agree on all 

points. In the meantime I would suggest that this Government do not jump to conclusions which it has 

jumped to, conclusions which are false. Let not this Government begin penalizing sick and poor people 

on the say-so of prejudiced special groups who fail to produce worthwhile evidence for their arguments. 

 

As I said at the beginning, Mr. Speaker, there are many 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1284 

sources which can produce evidence and facts for the Minister and the Government, disproving some of 

the opinions that I have quoted, which are false medical philosophy. They can get real facts and I intend, 

before I sit down, to mention a few which it should know. 

 

The Member for Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) the other day very ably presented a summary of findings 

at the Prince Albert Symposium concerning costs at community clinics. Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that the same story pertains when you study other group practice plans in Canada and the United States. 

Group practices at Sault Ste. Marie and in the Maritimes and in the United States as well as here in the 

West have proven themselves. I am sure that the Minister will find that group practice costs are below 

the Provincial average cost, in some cases only 50 per cent of Provincial costs and in no case exceeding 

Provincial costs. This is the experience in the United States and right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I received the other day a periodical Group Health and Welfare News and in it is the story of the Prince 

Albert Community Clinic. I would just like to quote a few paragraphs, and I want to lay on the table for 

identification of all Members opposite. I suggest that every Member read this and you will get the true 

facts of some medical costs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — On the second page of this periodical it says here in the second paragraph: 

 

This means that in 1966 our doctors saw an average of 1,618 patients each versus a Provincial average 

of 817. In 1967 our average was 1,600 patients per doctor versus a Provincial average of 809. 

 

In other words the story here is that these doctors . . . 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, if the Hon. Member could tell me 

where that figure of 816 came from. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am getting it out of the Health Care Economic Saskatchewan report. These are 

the figures here which indicate that we have doctors who are working twice as heavily as the average 

doctor in Saskatchewan. Then you see other cost figures. You find this: in 1966 T and A costs Provincial 

total, the rate was 12. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Who wrote the article, Bill? 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1285 

Mr. Berezowsky: — It was written by a group of doctors at the Community Clinic at Prince Albert. 

They had a Symposium and the facts are there. I am sorry if you don’t believe facts. If I wrote down that 

two and two make four, and you wouldn’t believe that it is four, well then I could only feel sorry for 

you. We have other figures here and I am not going to take up these figures. I will leave it on the desk 

for Hon. Members to see. Do you want me to read them? Alright, and then you can ask questions on it. 

 

Provincial total appendectomies in 1966 — 2,094, the Provincial rate is three out of a thousand; 

community clinic did 50 and the rate per thousand is 1.9. Hysterectomies in 1967, Provincial total is 

2,057, the Provincial rate is 4.4 per thousand people; they did 40 at the Community Clinic and the 

number of patients that they had works out to 2.5. Looking at our hospitalization utilization figures and I 

am quoting now: 

 

Comparing the Provincial averages per thousand beneficiaries we find that something, probably the 

combination of general practitioners and specialists, plus diagnostic and therapeutic facilities under the 

one roof has resulted in hospital utilization of considerably less than half the Provincial average. 

 

They give you a summary of these averages. This is worth looking at, Mr. Minister, and this is 

something that you haven’t looked at. I am glad that you have seen it. 

 

Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, I hope the Hon. Member will table that document plus the other one that he 

was quoting from. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes, I will pass them both on to you. One belongs to the library and I hope that 

you will give it back to them. Don’t keep it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, this is what it says. “Each year our hospital use was considerably less 

than one-half of the Provincial average,” and this is a fact. Mr. Speaker, I am on the board and I know 

that this is a fact. If you don’t want to believe me that’s just fine, you don’t have to. Without going back, 

because the Hon. Member from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) I think indicated some of the figures, I am 

going to pass this on. I will lay this on the table later in the day. 

 

I would like to say at this time that there are some 582 such plans in the United States like the one in 

Prince Albert, and the membership, as you will find out if you read this little book, is increasing every 

day. It is the same, I suppose, all 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1286 

over the world, these are the times. Organized services are apparently less costly than those which are 

not organized and there is no argument on that score. It is obvious that the Minister doesn’t understand, 

but he will learn. It is obvious also that when you have group practice, which is a combination of 

specialists and general practitioners, which means diagnostic and therapeutic services in one building, 

not only do patients get better attention — that is the important thing — but hospitalization costs are 

very definitely and substantially reduced. You know that! If any clinic here in Regina or anywhere else, 

if they can do that kind of a job you would get less people going to hospital. That is plain language. 

 

I will read for edification of the Hon. Members a part of the letter that was written to the United States 

President which points out some very enlightening facts. I will take the third paragraph and it says: 

 

The report attributes these price rises to the pressure of the rising demand for medical services, the 

relatively slow growth in supply of physicians, the rising wage cost in hospitals without commensurate 

increase in productivity and the increasing complexity of medical care provided to the patients. 

 

The report holds out a little hope for an early end to medical price increases. Growing population and 

rising incomes as well as the public commitment to assure adequate medical care for all citizens will 

continue to put upward pressure on medical prices. 

 

These are the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why prices have been going up, not because of utilization fees. And 

the report further says: 

 

Nevertheless steps can be taken to moderate the rise of medical prices by using medical resources more 

efficiently. 

 

To this end the report recommends and makes a few recommendations. They recommend in the United 

States, to the President this: 

 

The establishment of a national centre for health services, research and development to discover new 

ways of delivering health care efficiently. 

 

They are going to study some more. That is what we want you to do in this Resolution. Do more 

studying. They put this as number two. That is how important this was. 

 

“The encouragement of the group practice of medicine,” which my hon. friends are belittling, which the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) is belittling. The secretary is writing to the President of the United 

States and puts this as number two, the encouragement of the group practice of medicine to save on 

costs. They ask for strong federal support for state-area planning for 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1287 

the efficient use of health resources and so on. You can read it. It is too bad that you haven’t read it. The 

only reason that I am speaking, as I am, is because I want to save the people of Saskatchewan tax 

money, and in order to save millions of dollars I think that this Government would be wise in having a 

study made to direct the department on the road to efficiency and the saving of dollars for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If that is the purpose of the amendment as is the purpose of the motion, then of 

course every Member in this House should support both the amendment and the motion. 

 

Now I am going to refer also to some other people who have spoken on this matter. The Globe and Mail 

for example, in their book, “Medicare Hodgepodge”, page 2 has this. Do you know what the heading 

says, Mr. Speaker? “The medicare answer? Extend non-profit plans!” There’s your answer in just one 

sentence. Mr. Speaker, no decision can ever be made wisely by government or unwisely, unless it 

approaches the problem properly by investigation, by research and getting the necessary information. I 

regret that this Government did not bother to get full information before it put on deterrent fees. I regret 

that it did not enlighten the public when the Minister decided to increase these health costs last year. I 

regret that he threatens removal of essential services and I regret that he makes unfounded statements in 

this House that the health cost isn’t high enough to the public and threatens to raise the prices, and 

suggesting that the taxpayer should pay more medical taxes. I submit he was short on information and 

that his behavior and his statements were neither proper nor wise. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

PROPOSED TRIP TO WESTMINSTER 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Before I leave the Chair, I draw the attention of all Hon. Members that 

they have a circular in connection with a proposed trip to Westminster and after I leave the Chair, I shall 

remain in the Chamber for a few moments to answer any questions that anybody may have in their 

minds in order to facilitate the filling out of their questionnaires. 

 

The House recessed at 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, before I sat down before 5:30 I had pointed out to this Legislature a 

number of pertinent facts. 

 

I had indicated that the Resolution did not conflict with the Minister’s amendment, but that the 

amendment was a smoke screen to evade certain issues, such as the imposition of 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1288 

deterrent and utilization fees, and the removal of minor surgery from clinics and threats of removal of 

physiotherapy, X-rays and lab services from the community clinics. 

 

I had made reference to the report of the Prince Albert Community Clinic, proving that health costs 

compared very well with Provincial costs. I had referred to the report on health to President Johnson 

which report suggested that one of the first answers in reducing health costs was the establishment of 

community health services. 

 

I also had argued that the Minister and the Government had failed the people of Saskatchewan by 

bringing in taxes without prior study of health facts. I said that the Minister had misled this Legislature 

and the people of Saskatchewan by imputing that overuse and abuse of health services by the public 

justified deterrent fees. 

 

Just before you called it 5:30, Mr. Speaker, I was dealing with an article from the Globe and Mail, 

indicating that a survey had been made in Saskatchewan and that the Government had not been telling 

the people of Saskatchewan the true facts about medicare costs. 

 

The Minister has used overuse and abuse as his reasons for penalties he imposed, but the same report in 

the Globe and Mail study says: 

 

As for overuse by patients, some doctors contend that this can be largely controlled by doctors who are 

fully co-operating, by others that it cannot. But the doctors are beginning to offer some leadership in 

this area. 

 

Now here is the interesting thing. And again I quote: 

 

A commission study of 550,000 patients indicated that overuse in any case was not a highly significant 

problem. 

 

But the Minister has said otherwise. He has been telling us for the past two years the only reason we had 

deterrent fees, utilization fees was, because of abuse and overuse. Yet his own Commission says that it 

is not a significant factor. And is it not strange that the Government’s own Commission reported in this 

study and on this point to the Minister? Did the Minister not know when he talked in this House about 

this survey? He says he did know! So I challenge the Minister and I say that he failed to tell this 

Legislature the truth as to why costs of medicare had gone up. It was not because of over-utilization, Mr. 

Speaker. His own Commission admits this. I say and I can prove that the increase of medical care costs 

was mainly due to the increase of the fee schedule to Saskatchewan surgeons and physicians. I’m not 

complaining about that, but that’s the truth. You will note from your own statement, Mr. Minister, that 

this schedule increased costs by six per cent by November, 1967 and 14 per cent by 1968. Why didn’t 

the Minister tell this 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1289 

to the House and what was he trying to hide? Why did he blame the people for over-utilization? Why 

did he begin cutting services at community and other clinics? Only to cover up the facts of the increased 

costs, Mr. Speaker, and only to fool the public, Sir, and it, the Government, knows it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now let me make it clear, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan know 

why the increases are there and we are not complaining too much about the reason for the increases. 

Here they are: 

 

There has been a 20 per cent increase in fee schedule for doctors. There have been increases in wages 

in hospitals, and in the administration of the plan. There have been increased costs of drugs that are 

used in hospitals, and we are providing them now to a greater extent. That’s another reason for the 

increase. And there has been an increase because of inefficiencies, and there has been an increase 

because of inefficient programming by the Government, such as, forcing minor surgery, physiotherapy, 

laboratory and X-rays to hospitals from clinics. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Haven’t done it yet? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well you said you are doing it. You did remove minor surgery, Sir, you know 

that, two years ago. Once you did that and you promised you would do it, I’ll have to believe you are 

going to do it once again. I hope you don’t do it. I hope you don’t do it and I’ll shake your hand if you 

don’t. There have been hit-and-miss policies of this Government. This brings on waste and has brought 

increases in costs. Now, if a Commission makes a study as suggested by the Resolution, then I am sure 

that other important areas of waste and unnecessary costs would be uncovered. At the same time we 

would find some means of finding efficiencies and saving money for the people of Saskatchewan. I am 

sure that the seven Task Forces that have been appointed to enquire into every major aspect of health 

of Canadians will do a fine job. I am sure that Canadians generally agree that health should be the first 

or one of the first priorities in this technological age. I am sure the Government agrees with that. But 

the behavior in the past of this Government, the threats that have been made by the Minister of Health 

(Mr. Grant) in this House and outside indicate that some firsthand information must be presented to the 

Government and to this Legislature for the edification of hon. gentlemen opposite. 

 

Now, I could go on and on, but I promised I’d be through in a few minutes so I just want to refer again 

to this report. Mr. Minister, I am going to lay it on the table. I hope you return it to the Library and you 

will see the different recommendations therein. It was a comprehensive survey made and you will find 

the same results when we get our survey in Canada and 



 

March 13, 1969 

 

 

1290 

you will find out that there are things here that probably your deputies and your civil staff haven’t told 

you about. You will learn from this report I am sure. 

 

Now, I’ll conclude because I think I have said what I had to say. If the Minister wants some more 

information, I have some more here that he can read and he will find out what I said was true. But in 

conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it is this: We must know what we must do to further improve our medical 

health services. They can only be evaluated after a full investigation has been made by a Commission 

for Saskatchewan. The Commission reports should be studied by responsible people and until such 

time the Government must not threaten anyone but must hold the line. If you hold the line, Mr. 

Minister, as I have said, I’ll come over and shake your hand. 

 

I will vote for both the motion and the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:59 o’clock p.m. 


