



















































Hansard: March 26, 1969


1591 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

37th Day 

 

March 26, 1969 
The Assembly met at 10:00 o‘clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

SAMPLES OF GRAIN PRESENTED 
 

Mr. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to bring to the 

Members‘ attention, and especially I would have like to have the Minister of Agriculture here, but 

seeing he is not I would draw the Premier‘s and the Provincial Treasurer‘s attention to the two samples 

of grain on their desk and the related facts to that grain. This grain is grown in the constituency of 

Kelsey. As the Premier knows the municipalities of Birkdale, Porcupine Plain, and the LID of 944, have 

submitted to the Government several times asking to be considered a disaster area. The last such 

presentation that was made to the Government was on behalf of the Farmers‘ Union of Saskatchewan. 

After looking at this inferior sample of grain and taking into consideration that the major portion of the 

grain grown in that area is very similar to this, I was wondering whether the Premier has reached a 

decision in regard to giving assistance to the farmers in this area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher (Premier): — We have looked into this matter and we have decided that we are not 

prepared to give any additional assistance at this time. The Hon. Member will realize that if every time 

there was a crop failure in Saskatchewan there would never be a year that we wouldn‘t have to do 

something of this nature. 

 

Mr. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, may I ask the Premier a supplementary question 

regarding this. Has there been any area in Saskatchewan declared a disaster area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — No. 

 

Mr. Willis: — I thought Prince Albert was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just when we elected Bill, that‘s all. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Premier knows 

that the pulp mill received another $3 million from the Federal Government because of being a 

depressed area. And also that the Northern Wood Preservers treating poles received $34,000 while at the 

same time the farmers have received nothing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I think on Orders of the Day it is recognized that there should be 

questions on some provincial urgency but this is no place for speeches like the Hon. Member just made. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I told you so you would know. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1592 

QUESTIONS 
 

ORDER FOR RETURN NO. 31 
 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, again I think this is becoming more urgent all the time. I am referring now 

to Order for Return No. 31 which I asked the Provincial Secretary for and the Provincial Secretary (Mr. 

Heald) tells me he hasn‘t located it yet. I could ask the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) whether the 

Order has been completed by his Department. He knows nothing about it. This is too bad, Mr. Speaker, 

to be denied information that we should have before the Estimates of the various departments come 

down. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, I had a memo from our people just a few 

days ago. The Deputy told us that my Department had to channel a lot of our people to this work of 

getting questions and Orders for Returns ready. I would say that of the questions which you have asked 

maybe one-third of them referred to the Department of Highways, and my staff is busy trying to get the 

data for us. We have tabled a good number of returns and I would say all the questions we have 

answered there must be about 70 or 80. I again recall when I was in the Opposition there were 40 or 50 

that we never received until a day of the next session. You know this is true. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Bosh! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boldt: — Bosh! You don‘t know what you‘re talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

HOUSES CONSTRUCTED FOR INDIANS 
 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I notice in the Prince Albert Herald, March 22nd, a news article from 

Ottawa. I want to ask if this is correct or not. It says: 

 

Saskatchewan constructed 34 houses for sale to Metis and enfranchised Indians, March, 1968. Hon. 

Paul P. Hellyer, Minister responsible for Central Mortgage Housing Corporation has revealed. 

 

The Minister can read the rest. I was wondering if this is the correct number of houses that were built for 

Indian and Metis in North Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — This isn‘t urgent . . . 

 

MOTIONS 
 

TRIBUTE TO JOYCE MCKEE RINK, SASKATOON AND ROBERT MILLER RINK, 

SHELLBROOK 
 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding any order to the contrary, this Assembly shall recess at 5:00 o‘clock p.m. today 

in order 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1593 

to pay tribute to the Joyce McKee Rink of Saskatoon, winners of the Canadian Ladies‘ Curling 

championship, and the Robert Miller Rink of Shellbrook, winners of the Canadian High School Boys‘ 

Curling championship. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SATURDAY HOUSE SITTING MARCH 29, 1969 
 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move Motion No. 2 which is on the Order Paper. I 

think the explanation is fairly simple. Hopefully we are nearing the end of the session and I believe 

Members on both sides of the House are anxious to complete it. We feel that by sitting on Saturday the 

business will be expedited. I move, seconded by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart): 

 

That notwithstanding Standing Order 2, on Saturday, March 29, 1969, and on each Saturday until the 

end of the Session, the Assembly shall meet at 10:00 o‘clock a.m. until 10:00 o‘clock p.m., two-hour 

recesses at 12:30 o‘clock p.m. and 5:30 o‗clock p.m., the Order of Business on Saturday to be the same 

as on Friday. 

 

Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — I want just to say a word about it. We had some previous 

discussion in regard to this motion on the possibility of sitting on Saturday. At that time we raised no 

objection nor do we raise any objection now. There was, however, tentative understanding I think that 

on Thursday or so we might just review where we are in the House and that, if it was going to be 

necessary, as it seems certain now, to come back next week anyway, we might consider whether or not 

the Saturday meeting perhaps could be avoided and we could still finish next week. Certainly we agree 

with the Premier that all of us could feel relieved by being relieved of the tensions each day at the same 

time. Let there be no misunderstanding we are not so anxious to get out that we want to do the work 

under undue pressure. However, we want to do it in any way which prevents us from doing the job here 

as much as we need time to do it in. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — This procedure I think is customary. It has been followed in all the years I have 

been here. But I would be very pleased to discuss the subject with the Leader of the Opposition on 

Friday. I am not anxious to sit Saturday any more than anyone else if it is unnecessary. But I do feel that 

we should try and get finished by Easter. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 76 – An Act respecting The 

Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts at Regina. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, this legislation as Hon. Members know, is designed to provide for 

the operation of the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. I shall contend again today that this beautiful 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1594 

new building will contribute much to the cultural life of our capital and our province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts will cost the provincial taxpayers a very huge sum of money. A 

majority will not object. However, many, and I am one of them, must take the strongest possible 

exception to the general attitude of the Mayor of Regina. 

 

Now Hon. Members will recall that five or six years ago the Federal Government decided to give each 

province $2.5 million in a matching grant for a Centennial project. Most provinces decided to locate 

their project in the capital city. The Government of the day which was the CCF party decided to divide 

the Federal grant between Regina and Saskatoon and it gave $1.5 million to each one, so that two 

auditoriums could be built. Now that decision created some financial problems, but I think personally 

that it was a sensible decision. Recently the Mayor of Regina has been making unbelievable statements 

around this province. For example, I quote the Regina Leader Post of February 27th: 

 

He repeated his contention that the provincial government give back the $1¼ million in auditorium 

money that it stole from Regina and gave to Saskatoon. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how on earth could anyone steal something from Regina that never belonged to it? 

But even if the decision to divide the grant was a wrong one, the Mayor should direct his protest to Mr. 

Blakeney and the former Government, not to this Administration. 

 

Once the decision was made to proceed in both cities, it is very interesting to compare the progress that 

was made. The city of Saskatoon under a Mayor who knew something about business matters showed 

fiscal responsibility. They proceeded, their council proceeded, in a sensible manner. They put a special 

tax, I believe, on water bills. Because they acted in that manner Saskatoon now has one of the finest 

auditoriums in all of Canada, and it has been operating for more than a year. Now I invite all Members 

in this House, I invite the people of Saskatchewan to compare Saskatoon‘s progress with the history and 

comedy of errors, mistakes and bugling that took place in Regina under the leadership of Mayor Henry 

Baker. Now I am not going to take the time of the House to discuss the long list of ineptitudes that were 

involved. Suffice it to say that, after Regina had invested about $1 million in their auditorium, all work 

stopped. Construction simply ground to a halt. Regina and her so-called monkey-bars became the butt of 

jokes from one end of Canada to the other. In short this province witnessed one of the worst economic 

fiascoes in her history. 

 

So the project stood dormant for about a year and this Government felt that something should be done 

about it. Some action was required to repair the damage, to save the face of our capital city, to 

re-establish the long-standing beauty of Wascana. Some of the Regina city aldermen, a number of them, 

came to my office and they said we have a disaster on our hands, we can‘t go any further, we don‘t 

know what to do about this. And they said, ―Won‘t your Government consider taking over the project?‖ 

Well I can tell you that there was a lot of reluctance in this caucus. There were a lot of our country 

Members who saw no reason why we should rescue the Mayor‘s chestnuts, take them out of the fire. 

However, with great reluctance we did proceed. 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1595 

After making that decision I made an announcement and I quote from the Regina Leader Post for the 

Mayor‘s benefit: 

 

The Provincial Government has. 

 

I am quoting May 12th, 1967, Regina Leader Post. 

 

offered to build and operate the Regina Centennial auditorium. We will, of course only proceed with 

these plans if specifically requested by the Regina city council. The Province will not give back the 

money the city has already spent on erecting steel at the site. 

 

Within a matter of two weeks, Mr. Speaker, the Regina city council eagerly accepted the offer. 

Unanimously and in writing they requested the Government to take over the project. They all, including 

the Mayor, agreed to all terms. In view of these facts and in view of his own request, Mr. Speaker, some 

of the recent statements of the Mayor just make me sick. Now surely one would expect the Mayor after 

his great fiasco to at least have the good sense to hide his shame. But, Mr. Speaker, this has not as you 

know been the case. Repeatedly he has had the audacity and the temerity to suggest that in addition to 

financing his own public failure, we should rebate the pathetically small amount of money that the city 

raised for the project. ―You owe me,‖ he parrots. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me make it crystal clear that this 

Government owes the Mayor absolutely nothing as far as the auditorium is concerned. 

 

I say to him, Mr. Mayor, you owe us, for turning a laughing stock into a valuable asset for your city and 

province. Mr. Mayor, you owe us for the salvaging of a $9 million fiasco, at a saving of more than $2 

million. You owe us for every cent of additional city revenue which accrues to your lean city coffers, 

and they are lean, Mr. Speaker, through the operation of that building. You owe us, Mr. Mayor, so let us 

hear no more of the kind of nonsense you have been talking on this subject around the city, because the 

people of the city and of the province have far too much good sense not to recognize and remember the 

facts. 

 

Now Saskatoon, as I said, has done a job that is just as good as the Mayor of Regina is bad. Because of 

that fact we are going to see as best we can that the city of Saskatoon is not penalized. We have given 

the city of Saskatoon $1¾ million, a half million more than was promised by the former Government. 

Since that time we have given them a $125,000 cheque. A few weeks ago we gave them additional 

$50,000 for capital grants and we are paying half of the operating costs. But I have assured the Mayor of 

Saskatoon on behalf of the Government that as time goes on yearly for at least a while we will try and 

give them additional sums, so that they can complete the convention facilities for their auditorium. 

 

Well now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word or two about the legislation that is now before us. I would 

like to tell the Legislature something about the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. The Centre will have 

not one theatre, but two. The largest of these theatres will be equipped with complete theatrical facilities 

equal to any other in North America. I think it will be slightly larger than the Saskatoon auditorium, I 

have been told that. The theatre, the large one, will seat about 2,000 persons for any one performance, 

and will be one of the show places in 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1596 

the West. I think it will permit Regina to obtain the large continental symphonies that tour across the 

country, probably it will be a help to Saskatoon in that regard, because when one of these symphonies is 

visiting two cities it is a little easier to finance. This building will provide facilities for the local Regina 

centre. It is not though just going to be for, shall we call it, high-brow performances like in Saskatoon. 

There will be facilities for square dancing, western music, country music and so on. And as such we 

think that that large theatre will be something that Regina has never had in the past. Of course there will 

also be a smaller theatre which will seat four or five hundred persons and it will be designed to 

encourage smaller theatrical groups, musical recitals, drama, cinemas, etc. Now, Mr. Speaker, it has 

been traditional through the centuries that such theatres cost more to operate than they can produce in 

revenue, if the price of admission is to be at all reasonable. Thus, at the Regina Centre, we are also 

establishing convention facilities in substantial size. Now these convention facilities will accommodate 

trade shows, automobile shows, equipment displays, hardware shows, machinery displays and so on. 

The basement can be converted into a beautiful dining room which will accommodate up to 1,250 

people. And on any given occasion it can be converted further into a ballroom or cabaret where the 

citizens of Southern Saskatchewan can gather together on festive occasions. So, as I say, we hope that 

the convention facilities will help to finance the overall project so that the annual deficit will either be 

nonexistent or at least not too great. 

 

Now this auditorium or this Centre of the Arts will establish or will lend itself to large meetings, to 

rallies, and gatherings of any sort of up to 2,400 or 2,500 people, and it will be of great service as a 

community centre to the greater Regina trading area. 

 

The two theatres and the convention centre form the greater part of the building, but in addition there are 

a number of smaller meeting rooms, ranging in size from accommodation for 30 people to 300 persons. 

There are seven lobby areas which I think will be about as beautiful as any buildings west of the Place 

des Arts in Montreal. Now we think that these will lend themselves to displays, permanent or temporary 

of the output of Saskatchewan artists, sculptors, potters and handicrafts of all kinds. And we do intend 

that these facilities will be available as much as possible to the students on the Regina campus. 

 

Now finally there will be six offices for Civil Servants. These will be rented to the Public Service. We 

are locating them there simply to help with the costs, the overhead costs. There will be parking for about 

1,200 cars and we think that will be adequate, in the landscaped area. 

 

Now the Bill which is before us provides for the setting up of a council of 50 persons. The purpose will 

be to involve a representative of as many community organizations as possible. This was based 

somewhat on the Regina Exhibition. Then the executive committee will consist of not more than 20 

members and will be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council, probably from those 50 

councilmen. I think it has already been announced that the Chairman of the Board of Directors will be a 

local Regina citizen, Mr. Herb Padwick. Hon. Members might be interested to know that we have had a 

local community committee trying to raise funds on a voluntary basis to help the furnishings. That 

committee has been under Mr. Maurice Carey and they have already 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1597 

raised $55,000. I am hoping they will raise another $100,000 or so. This money of course simply won‘t 

have to be raised by the taxpayers. 

 

Now I said earlier that it is traditional that enterprises of this nature have deficits. However, we are 

hopeful that with convention facilities operating, a break-even point can be reached after several years. 

We expect the new Centre of the Arts to be open about one year from now, April, 1970. Mr. Speaker, 

the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts I think will make a very major contribution to the economic, 

cultural and artistic life of this province. And it is my sincere hope that a very bad start will wind up in a 

successful finish. I hope that one year hence all Hon. Members will be on the platform to open this 

auditorium. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker (Regina South East): — Well, you know, it wouldn‘t be fair if I didn‘t stand up, Mr. 

Speaker, because I have such great admiration for the Premier and want to comment on his remarks. 

After listening to him this morning I think he should have remained in the hospital. I would suggest that 

he call in other doctors as well. 

 

But I am amazed at this man getting up and expressing himself as he did this morning. I could use a term 

but it would be unparliamentary. In fact I pity him rather than condemn him, because I really do think he 

is very, very ill. 

 

I should reminisce a little on the story of the auditorium. When he made the announcement that he was 

going to take over and build it, he did it for one reason only, to get Baker. He made that announcement 

in April because he planned to have an election in either May or June. The results of the spring seeding 

caused him to extend it to the fall. He didn‘t get the auditorium going until six or seven months later 

after he made the announcement anyway. However, those are things in the past. 

 

He compared our city to Saskatoon. If he would do just a little checking he would find that the city of 

Saskatoon‘s debenture debt is much worse than ours and yet is a smaller city. He doesn‘t tell this story, 

he doesn‘t realize that the mayor of Saskatoon has on numerous occasions said that they were broke. I 

assure the Premier that we are not broke in this city, and probably we have a better balanced budget and 

more sensible budget than he brought in this session. However, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

should look after his own city, Prince Albert, and see that they keep their head above water. While I was 

in Ottawa last Friday I was amazed at what was happening with regard to the Premier‘s position by 

leaders in Saskatoon including the Federal Minister (Mr. Lang) from there. But I can tell him today, that 

after the Kelvington by-election he will not be leader of the Liberal party in this Province. They‘re ready 

to move him. I had to go to Ottawa to hear this story. Those same people that he is extolling today as to 

their great virtues are the ones out to get his hide, and, boy, they have closed in on him now. You call 

that by-election in Kelvington and I am sure this will happen. 

 

I am so proud of him, however, that he did say it was one of 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1598 

the finest buildings in the country. Well, I‘m the guy that planned it. Everything he said about the 

auditorium included myself and the committee who started it. We planned it. He mentioned the added 

facilities. It is a fine building, I hope only they put in what the specifications set out. I will check it over 

with a magnifying glass when you‘re finished, because, Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina have put $4 

million in this auditorium. $4 million! He knows it! We have put in practically twice what he has put in. 

The Government before had promised us $2 million, and when he got in, he said you are only getting $1 

million. That‘s the man who killed the project right there. Because we did have the $4½ million ready to 

go. Let me repeat how this $4 million comes about that the city has invested in it. He didn‘t get the $2½ 

million from Mr. Diefenbaker when he was Prime Minister for the capital city. The Mayors of Canada 

got it. Every capital centre was to be given $2½ million. That was my money, that was Regina‘s money 

and he or no one else can deny that fact. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Tell Mr. Blakeney! 

 

Mr. Baker: — Alright, but Mr. Blakeney at least said, ―If we do divide it we‘ll give you the full $2 

million.‖ You came in and only offered us $1 million and you killed the project. Now just a moment, 

that was the agreement when this project was started. There is the man who held it up for the past two or 

three years. There is the man right there! The previous Public Works Minister was the boy that worked 

hand in hand with him. I am going to give the Attorney General and the Minister of Health credit, 

because when we met with the former Minister of Public Works, those two men supported me. I am sure 

they did not support Mr. Thatcher and what he did in not giving Regina the other $1 million. It is not all 

black over there, because two did show common sense. The Premier was so inflated and so egotistical 

with winning the election, that he thought he was on cloud nine. I assure you he is not there anymore. 

He is on the ground now, and he‘ll be buried after the Kelvington by-election. Anyway I have to outline 

again, Mr. Premier, that the $4 million we gave is simple arithmetic in revealing the facts. We had the 

two . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — That‘s why . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — . . . well we‘re in better shape than Saskatoon. You had better check their debenture debt, 

Mr. Premier. We had the $2½ million, we had $1 million that the people voted. If the Premier had given 

us the other million this would have made the $4½ million. But what did he do, was say, ―I‘ll give you 

the $1 million,‖ but he took $1¼ million away and gave it to Saskatoon. So we were short $1 million. 

What do we do? We went to the people for another $1 million vote. Because the Premier took away that 

$1¼ million, half of the grant from Ottawa, the Regina people said, ―No, we‘ll not give another million 

for the auditorium,‖ and turned down the by-law vote. This is the way it went along. Of course the 

others that helped to kill this project were his Liberal friends on city council. He told us the truth today, 

that they did go to him behind the scene. Then they sit holier-than-thou on city council, but they kept in 

touch with the Premier and the Minister of Public Works. Between the two groups they were able to 

hold up the project. He stated it will be a wonderful project, I agree it will become a good centre for 

Saskatchewan. I appreciate the name, I thought it could have 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1599 

been called the Baker Auditorium, and I would have gladly named the lower part after him, because 

that‘s where the cocktails will be served. 

 

He mentioned it is going to be a real show place. I believe it will be a fine edifice. As I said it is our 

plan. I am looking forward to the opening and welcoming the people of Regina to my auditorium. Well, 

I could go on and on with this, Gentlemen, I do pity the Premier today as I think he still has second 

thoughts on what he said here this morning. I made the statement during the Speech from the Throne 

and on other occasions that there are three things that will happen when this Government takes over in 

another two years. First of all, the $1¼ million be given back to Regina with interest. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Is that your platform! 

 

Mr. Baker: — This will be part of my platform, and I am sure my colleagues on this side will back me 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Ha, ha! 

 

Mr. Baker: — . . . I will put the title back in the name of the city with the 31 acres of land. 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . monkey bars! 

 

Mr. Baker: — You had some monkey bars in North Battleford, didn‘t you? Well, with what he did to 

the mental hospitals in this province, I am sure that he will be in the hottest place after eternity, I can 

assure you of that. I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, giving facts of this fine project. It is going to 

serve Southern Saskatchewan. It will be a great tribute to our city and our Province and will bring the 

arts here. Regina is a great centre for this as he mentioned, for the symphony and other fine arts. I hope 

that the University will extend the Conservatory of Music to duplicate in a smaller way the one in 

Toronto. We have built up a great reputation here under Dr. Leyton Brown, and I think the Premier 

agrees with me on that too. 

 

To sum up, he did it for one reason, and then he got caught in his own lair. He probably didn‘t expect to 

get elected in June of that year, so he figured we would have to build it after he made the announcement. 

We would have done it. But to think that he could get up in this House and say that the good Regina 

people gave practically nothing toward this project, yet we gave most of the money. We paid more into 

it than Saskatoon paid in theirs. If you add his figures, he has given them $2 million over and above the 

$1¼ million. The same $2 million we wanted when we were ready to get ours under way. So you see he 

had already given that to Saskatoon. I am not against that, that‘s good, but why take our money? 

 

An Hon. Member: — They need it! 

 

Mr. Baker: — They needed it, and how! So when we wanted the $2 million, he wouldn‘t give it to us. 

There again he has shown discrimination against the capital city. He has done this in so many ways with 

other buildings too. To give an example, the 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1600 

extension of the University Hospital. He should have built the one here first that he has been working 

on, and said would start in the past two years. I am not trying to hurry them along, and yet they go and 

put millions of dollars in the one in Saskatoon. I am not complaining, they need it too, but we have been 

waiting patiently over the years, to have a hospital started here. You have done nothing! 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — You had 20 years! 

 

Mr. Baker: — I made the remark about the auditorium here last year that it looks as though he would 

complete it and have it ready, the next election when he and I would cut the ribbon on the eve of the 

next election. There would be a new Premier then of course to do the honors . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Let me . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — . . . I couldn‘t think of anybody better than myself to become Premier . . . outside of a 

few others. 

 

So Mr. Premier, for what you have said today, I am sure the Regina people will condemn you for this in 

years to come. Something that you took from them, you took the beginnings of a great art centre . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — What do . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — . . . planned by the people of Regina. Today he stood up and through me condemned the 

good people that backed us in this wonderful project. I am not one bit sorry that I didn‘t start this. This is 

the greatest thing that ever happened to this city. To repeat again, the $4 million we put in there is more 

than Saskatoon put in theirs, is more than this Government put in here. He has the gall to stand up in this 

House and tell us here how much he put in this structure. And yet he has put just as much in Saskatoon, 

as he has in this project here. What a shameful thing to do, to ridicule the people of Regina. It doesn‘t 

matter to me, but when you pick on the poor people as to whom they elect, and the city council members 

that backed this project, it is most unfair. We were all sincere, but this man was not sincere. He played 

politics with it from the word ―go,‖ from the word ―go‖ when he got into office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — I want him to know that. I can tell him again. Mark what I tell you, that when the 

Kelvington by-election is over, the Premier will not be leading the Liberal party immediately following. 

He had better know it! This is the talk in Ottawa. They are ganging up on you, right across the floor 

right now – the gentleman sitting behind you is just waiting, he is looking down now, but he‘s got a 

knife ready to shove it into you at the right moment. And by golly, if sometime you get up and want to 

have these from me, I‘ll give you names of the people who are doing it! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Ha, ha! 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1601 

Mr. Baker: — Yes, I had to go to Ottawa to hear the full story. I am glad I went. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

thank the people of Regina for giving us this project, this wonderful Saskatchewan Arts Centre, and who 

have paid the lion‘s share. I think that somewhere the name Regina should have been used but I am not 

going to object, because it does give the connotation of a province-wide art centre, which is good. I 

agree with the name, I‘ll go along with it. We thank the Regina people for their determination, their 

planning and courage to build one of the finest art centres in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson (Regina South West): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about the 

auditorium, the new Centre of the Arts. I just listened to the Mayor of Regina give his leadership speech 

of the NDP party . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Provincial or Federal? 

 

Mr. McPherson: — I am not sure which one it is, but anyway this was a leadership speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having been born and raised in the city of Regina, I certainly would like to say a few words 

about the new building. The completion of the building and the operation of the Saskatchewan Centre of 

the Arts, Regina, is going to have a tremendous effect on the whole southern part of Saskatchewan. I 

feel that this effect is going to be felt from Yorkton to the east, south as far as Estevan and as far west as 

Swift Current. This impact will be tremendous on what will happen over the years to come. 

 

Recently, Mr. Speaker, I was chairman of a group to bring the winter games to Regina, and in reviewing 

the facilities that we have in the capital city, I find that we are a leader as far as hotel accommodation 

and also motel accommodation in Western Canada. We are even ahead of Winnipeg, Calgary and 

Edmonton and Saskatoon. As a matter of fact, the city of Regina has over 1,400 first class hotel and 

motel rooms against 800 for the city of Saskatoon. You can see why the opening of the Centre of the 

Arts will contribute so much to the convention facilities at Regina. Geographically, Mr. Speaker, we 

have always been the logical location for Western Provinces‘ conventions. Regina is a centre, as you all 

know, is the hub, and Regina is really the place that we‘ll be able to hold these conventions. The 

combination of the superb facilities of the Arts Centre combined with the existing hotel, restaurants and 

operations of all existing facilities, will put us for the first time in our rightful and logical place as the 

West‘s convention centre. I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that the operation of the building must have 

the interest and support of all segments of the community. I am particularly happy to see in the Bill that 

they have a large board of directors, and having had quite a bit to do with the Regina Exhibition Board 

along with many other Members here, we find this organization worked very well. I am quite sure that 

the board of directors and the management committee will operate this to the best for the community. 

This will enable them to bring together all types of people that are interested in the 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1602 

arts and to serve all the ethnic groups. 

 

Completion of the building in Regina will see all of our five prairie cities with first class theatrical 

enterprises. I urge the Government to consider, Mr. Speaker, the absolute need to coordinate to a degree 

the operations of these five buildings. All the three provincial governments have a major stake in 

underwriting the cost of operations, and I sincerely hope the Government of Saskatchewan will lead the 

way in setting up a coordinating committee of the five managers to take full advantage of a coordinated 

operation. I hope also, Mr. Speaker, that this committee would pool their financial resources and their 

physical resources to attract artists of the finest calibre at the lowest possible cost. 

 

I spoke a moment ago of the excellent combination of facilities that the city of Regina will be in a 

position to offer. In this regard, I urge the Mayor of Regina to get together with the Provincial 

Government and embark upon a sales and promotion campaign for the city in a major way. I feel that 

one like it as has never been put on before should be put on to tell the people of Canada just what Regina 

has to offer. The city finances a tourist and convention bureau; the Chamber of Commerce has a tourist 

and convention committee; and the Provincial Government in the Department of Industry and 

Commerce has a tourist development branch and is now financing a major theatre and convention 

complex. Surely, Mr. Mayor and Mr. Premier, it is logical and sensible that these four organizations 

should communicate, organize and present a united fund for the benefit of all concerned. You will 

realize, Mr. Speaker, that as an MLA for Regina South West, and a citizen of Southern Saskatchewan, I 

am very enthusiastic about the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. 

 

There is just one or two things I would like to say. I would like to thank the Government for taking over 

this project and giving the citizens of Regina a real first class auditorium. I know it has been a problem 

for the Premier to sell it to the rural Members. This is something that has gone on in caucus. but they 

have come around to see there is a need for the southern part of Saskatchewan, and I want to thank all 

the rural Liberal Members for coming to the aid of the city of Regina. Now Henry hasn‘t been a bit 

bashful about this, and I don‘t want him to feel that he is left out at all. This is being done by the Liberal 

Government and will be a great credit to the citizens of Regina. The citizens of Regina know after all 

who is putting this program over. Henry, as I said to you before in a previous speech, you want to go to 

Mr. Blakeney, the Member for Regina Centre, for your money. This Government doesn‘t really owe you 

a cent. You might have talked to someone in Ottawa who said that the Premier is going to be ditched, 

but as far as I am concerned and the Members on this side, we‘re quite satisfied with the Premier. I 

know we are going to win the Kelvington election. If there is an election called very soon, I want you to 

know, Bashful Henry, that we‘ll win again and you‘ll be sitting in Opposition with those that will be left 

across there. I take great pleasure in seconding this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make one brief comment about this 

debate this morning. I am happy to hear the Mayor of Regina say that he was responsible for the 

auditorium. That is very 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1603 

much open to question. Mr. Speaker, I just want to say one thing. That is that the Province of 

Saskatchewan this time has bailed the city of Regina out. The Mayor tells us and all the city Members 

tell us how fortunate we are as rural people to have such an auditorium. Now I just wish that they could 

convince all the rural people that this is true. I hope it proves to be true, Mr. Speaker. I just want to say 

one thing to the Mayor. The next expensive idea that the city of Regina gets that they really can‘t afford, 

I hope they‘ll go it alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, I hadn‘t planned on getting into this 

debate but since hospitals came up, I thought maybe I should join in. 

 

About 16 years ago I made myself a promise that, since I had suffered visitations from previous mayors 

telling me how to run Regina, when I was Mayor, that I would never, in my day, tell my successors how 

to run Regina. I can tell you I abided by this right to this day. I am going to try and get through the next 

few minutes in this manner, but I can tell you it has been difficult for the last 10 years with Mayor Baker 

holding the reins at City Hall. 

 

I for one cannot understand why the mayor of any city would not be jumping with glee at having the 

Government take over and build an auditorium of this type. An auditorium of this nature in my opinion 

is going to be a white elephant financially for many, many years to come. Why a city would want to get 

into the auditorium business is beyond my comprehension. It is almost as bad for any city wanting to get 

into the hospital business these days. The Mayor made reference to the fact that we should be building 

the base hospital before the University Hospital. Apparently he hasn‘t been reading the facts very 

closely or is not keeping up to date, because I can assure him this is exactly what is taking place. The 

Base Hospital has priority over the University Hospital extension. The University Hospital extension 

proposal was made to me last December, as yet is not approved by Cabinet, and will be dealt with very 

shortly. The Base Hospital is pretty well on schedule and tenders will be called next spring. 

 

Actually, I was pleased to see the Leader of the Opposition making a rapid note when the Hon. Member 

from Regina South East said that he was counting on $1 million plus interest after the next election, 

because I have a feeling that there will be some competition for that money, regardless who is the 

Leader, or who is the Treasurer. I don‘t think that the city of Regina or the city of Saskatoon should do 

too much bragging as to which one is in better financial shape. I don‘t think either one of them has very 

much to brag about. I doubt very much whether the Mayor could have ever built the auditorium anyway. 

He didn‘t do too good a job at building a city hall. Actually, he built three city halls in a week. As yet I 

haven‘t seen a building. One week it was going to be on the corner of 12th and Hamilton. About two 

days later it was down over the railway tracks on South Railway Street, and about two more days, 

apparently they had some fantastic scheme to build a connecting link between the present building and 

some buildings across the street over 11th Avenue. Since the first planning consultant, called into 

Regina, designated an area west of the main part of the city for a City Hall, 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1604 

the city has been busy acquiring that property and now owns it. In my opinion that‘s where the City Hall 

should be built. The city should get on with building the City Hall, not getting in to these fantastic 

dreams such as we have witnessed recently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the city of Regina is very fortunate to have this auditorium, I think it is going to do 

much for our city. I particularly appreciate it being in the section of the city it is. When we get the new 

hospital completed in a few years, these are going to be two fine institutions for my constituency. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to add a few words to the debate with 

respect to this auditorium. I don‘t think it is worthwhile or very constructive at this point, since we have 

had a little review of its history, for me to enter into the history of this project, although, if I may say so, 

I know something about it. May I say that there were mistakes on several sides and they certainly were 

not all on the part of the city of Regina. However one wants to argue about this, the crisis arose with 

respect to this auditorium when the Auditorium Commission, whatever it was called, headed by Mr. 

Justice MacPherson, decided that they were forced to call for tenders for this project in two pieces. That 

is what ripped it. I think we all know that. The view is taken that this was forced upon the Auditorium 

Commission by the withdrawal of promised Provincial support in 1964 – I am not here to argue whether 

that view is correct or incorrect – that there was an understanding by the Provincial Government that 

they would get up to $2 million made by the former Government is indisputable. It is in writing and the 

file was with the previous Minister of Public Works, the Hon. Mr. Gardiner, I don‘t know where the file 

is now, but that this offer was made is indisputable. I know it, because I signed the offer. That this offer 

was withdrawn in 1964 when the Premier took office and the figure was reduced to $1 million is 

indisputable. 

 

An Hon. Member: — $1¼ million. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Oh no, $1¼ is Federal money. We all concede that. We all concede the split of the 

Federal money. It was what additional Provincial money that was going in there that is at issue. As I 

said, our offer was up to $2 million, a matching amount of up to $2 million was our offer. In your offer 

in 1964, this amount was reduced from $2 million to $1 million in the early $6 million cut era. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — It was put back to $1¼ million. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Right, put back, but during the interval between $1 million and the time you put it 

back, in that interval the split tender was called. Now, I am not here to say that, merely because the 

Government made that decision, the people in charge of the auditorium should have reacted as they did 

and called for tenders on part of the project. This was an error. They indicate that they did it because 

they couldn‘t see the finances available to them, to cover the whole project, and that this was a result of 

the decision of the Government. As I say, that is the history 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1605 

and from it I think you can see that, if one wants to be partisan, one can lay the blame at several doors. 

The decisions were made, they were all made in good faith. They were made in good faith by people 

who had the goodwill of the auditorium at heart. They include the Mayor of Regina, who happens to be 

of my political persuasion, they include the council of the city of Regina at that time, which did not 

happen to be of my political persuasion, but largely of the persuasion of Members opposite. They 

included other distinguished citizens, one of whom I have mentioned, the Hon. Mr. Justice MacPherson 

who has no political persuasion now, but prior to his elevation to the Bench, had the persuasion of the 

Conservative party. I think this indicates that they were not made in any partisan way, these judgments, 

wise or unwise, though they be. 

 

I think the point now is that we must act to pull this together and make it a project of which we all can 

be proud. I compliment the Government on their decision to proceed with this project. I believe that this 

project can be of great value to the city of Regina. I share the views of the Member for Regina South 

West in that this can be a stimulation, not only for the arts in Regina, but also for general entertainment 

and catering business and the general convention business. I want to make one suggestion to the 

Premier. I note that he has provided, and I believe wisely, for a board of 50 members. I want to 

underline the suggestion, which was at least implied by the Member for Regina South West, that it 

would be highly desirable if the Premier would canvass the various ethnic communities of this city to 

find representatives of the various communities to serve on this board. I believe that, if anyone is 

familiar with the cultural life particularly in music and dancing in Regina, he is well aware that much of 

the real thrust for this life in Regina comes from certain of the ethnic communities. I don‘t want to single 

them out, but I have watched highly masterful performances by persons from the Ukrainian community. 

The Hungarian community, although small, is very, very vigorous in the field of music and the arts. The 

Rumanian community is active. The German community doesn‘t have quite the same focus. It is a large 

community and there are several centres, but it is an active ethnic community. There are some smaller 

ones, I have been to some Serbian presentations and doubtless there are others which I have overlooked. 

I simply want to call to the attention of the Premier the fact that in almost every one of those 

communities there are one or two, more or less recognized cultural leaders. I would suggest to him that 

he give serious consideration to including some of those people on the board. And, may I point out that 

in case anyone feels that these are solely Regina communities, they in fact are not. And I will merely 

instance the Hungarian community, but I could probably say the same for others. The Hungarian 

community, their ballroom in Regina and their cultural centre, operates as a focus, not only for 

Hungarians within Regina, but also for Hungarian communities outside Regina. I think of the one at 

Kipling and to a lesser extent the one around Esterhazy and Stockholm. There are others – I don‘t 

propose to outline this in detail. 

 

I want to make this suggestion, which I think is offered in the most constructive and nonpartisan way, 

that these people could make a great contribution. I will be supporting the Bill. I believe that the Centre 

will make a considerable contribution to the cultural life and the business and entertainment life, not 

only of Regina, but of all of Southern Saskatchewan. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1606 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, in supporting this Bill I just want to make one 

comment on the Mayor‘s earlier remarks. First of all in his proposal that he would upon the election, if it 

should ever take place, upon the election of an NDP Government, turn $1¼ million over to the city of 

Regina, he said he would see to it. Well, first of all the people of rural Saskatchewan think that the 

Government was just a little bit more than generous in providing Regina with this auditorium in the first 

place. I challenge the Mayor to go to Kelvington when the by-election is called and tell the people of 

Kelvington if an NDP Government was to be elected that he would give Regina an additional $1¼ 

million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I will only take a moment. According to the Leader Post of 

February 27th the Mayor made this statement, and he made it again today, so I would like to refresh the 

memories of Hon. Members in this House. 

 

In regard to the Provincial Auditorium in Regina, Mr. Baker said the city now has a $4 million equity 

in it, more than the Provincial Government. 

 

I have always wondered about Socialist arithmetic and I wonder particularly how on earth the Mayor 

(Mr. Baker) arrived at that figure! Today he gave us the answer, he said: 

 

We should have had $2¼ million from Ottawa and we should have had $1¼ million or more from the 

Provincial Government, then we put a little in ourselves, and that adds up to $4 million. 

 

Is it any wonder that the city of Regina is in possibly the worst financial shape of any city in Western 

Canada? Is it any wonder that Regina taxes, year after year, keep skyrocketing? Is it any wonder that 

they are in a mess over their city hall? Why if it wasn‘t for the Saskatchewan Local Government Board 

keeping this fellow under control, I don‘t know what would happen to taxes in the city of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this Bill before us is going to provide for the 

operation of the auditorium. The auditorium is being built not in any way because of the Mayor, but 

despite the mess, the shemozzle that he made of the whole project. He said, ―People will remember the 

Premier for years because of what he took away from Regina on this auditorium.‖ The only thing we 

took from him was a huge debt. The only thing we took from him was some steel bars sitting out on the 

prairie unfinished. The only thing we took from him was an unbelievable fiasco. The only thing we took 

from him was a project that he started and failed to complete. Now he says, ―the Premier played politics 

with this project. The only reason he built it was because he was going to have an election.‖ If anybody 

has played politics with this auditorium, it is the Mayor and no one else. 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1607 

The Hon. Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker) suggested that there might be some trouble for the 

Liberal party out in the Kelvington by-election. Well we‘ve had seven by-elections in the last few years 

and the Liberals have won six of them, six out of seven. We expect we will win seven out of eight. Mr. 

Speaker, I know that if we can persuade the Mayor, the would-be Provincial or Federal leader, if we can 

get him to campaign, then there will be no problem at all. His modesty is something which is always 

unbelievable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have as I say an auditorium, and the Provincial Government is building it with the 

taxpayers‘ money. It will be a good auditorium, and it will be very valuable in South Saskatchewan. The 

Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) suggested that we should invite various ethnic groups 

to sit on the board of directors. I can assure him that this is being done. The executive director is inviting 

organizations all over Regina and Southern Saskatchewan to name one person to sit on this board of 

directors and the ethnic groups will certainly be included. 

 

It gives me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 69 – An Act to amend The Liquor 

Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, this amendment to the Liquor Act involved the amending of three 

Sections presently in the Act, along with the addition of two Sections. These amendments in the main 

have been requested by the Attorney General‘s Department, or the officials of the Liquor Board to aid 

with various aspects of administration. The first amendment to Section 2 of the Act more accurately 

defines liquor within the context of the Act. The new definition set forth is substantially the same as the 

definition of liquor now contained in The Liquor Licensing Act. This revised definition is necessary in 

order to assist the courts in prosecuting offenders under the Act. 

 

The amendment to Section 28 of the Liquor Act, as proposed in this Bill, makes it possible for the Board 

to accept a bank draft, money order or cheque from a special liquor vendor in payment of liquor 

purchases. As you know we have in past years established special liquor agencies in some of the smaller 

towns throughout our province. In other cases where liquor stores were not operating efficiently, we 

have closed these stores and replaced them with special liquor agencies following the conduct of a vote 

in the community. The amendment to this Section of the Act makes it possible for the Liquor Board to 

deal with special vendors insofar as purchases are concerned on the same basis as licensees under The 

Liquor Licensing Act. 

 

Section 4 of this Bill is a new addition to the Act and it authorizes the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council 

to prohibit, restrict or regulate the sale of certain products that may be used in the preparation of 

beverages with an alcoholic content. This amendment has been prompted by a number of situations, 

only one of them in the Sandy Bay area. There our Government received 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1608 

numerous complaints regarding the wholesale distribution of malt to residents in the area to produce 

alcoholic beverages. We were told by teachers and missionaries in the area that even small children were 

on occasion coming to school intoxicated as a result of drinking beverages produced from malt which 

was being sold in the community. It is hoped that the new proposed Section will permit the regulation of 

the sale of malt and similar substances under such circumstances. 

 

Section 5 of the new Bill and Section 6 of the new Bill deal further with the definition of liquor under 

the Act, again to facilitate prosecution under the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that if there are any detailed questions, and I‘m sure there will be, that I 

could answer them in Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I find myself having to take the position of opposing 

this Bill and I do so with some reluctance, because I think some of the things which are sought to be 

done by this Bill are things with which I would agree. My opposition is based upon the method which is 

being used to do these things in two of the cases. I have no objection to a more precise definition of 

liquor, I have no objection to the procedural matters as to whether drafts or cheques can be accepted. I 

do take exception to Sections 4 and 6. My objection to Section 4 is one which is based upon the fact that 

it is rather wide and sweeping in its application. Note, Mr. Speaker, that by this Section, the sale of any 

product likely or possible for use in making an alcoholic beverage can be prohibited. That, Mr. Speaker, 

I think is fair enough if it is done with a good deal of care, because a great number of things can be used 

to make alcoholic beverages. Instances have come to my notice where the police have now, apparently, 

been of the view that the sale of lemon extract or vanilla extract is illegal. This is not the case and I think 

that we need to recast the principles contained in this Section to give the merchants some more 

protection. I am in essence therefore suggesting that this section – the idea behind it is perhaps 

satisfactory – but I am suggesting that there be a time lag between the time when such a substance is 

banned and the time that it becomes illegal to sell it. Secondly, I would suggest that because it will be 

very easy for a merchant to fall into error under this Section, I would suggest that the minimum fine 

provision be deleted. Consider the situation which can happen. Suppose that there is a real run on 

almond extract in Buffalo Narrows as there may well be. Suppose that the Government then decides to 

prohibit the sale of almond extract north of a particular area, and the prohibition can be on a geographic 

basis. It is going to be a little while before merchants realize that the sale of almond extract is legal in 

Meadow Lake but illegal in Buffalo Narrows. I think this is a difficult position for merchants to be in. I 

realize the position the Government is in, of needing to prohibit this, and I would suggest that we need 

to work this over a bit in Committee. 

 

My objection to Section No. 6 is on a rather broader basis. Section 6 provides that a judge, a justice of 

the peace, a magistrate who is trying a case may, in the absence of proof to the contrary, infer that any 

liquid or substance in question is 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1609 

liquor from the fact that an officer describes it as liquor or by a name that is commonly applied to liquor. 

I think that is going too far. This merely says that if you are picked up and an officer says that what you 

have in your car is whisky or wine or beer, then it falls upon you to prove that what you had was not 

whisky or wine or beer. I think this is going too far. I don‘t think it is necessary in order to provide for 

the administration of liquor provisions. This is reverse onus with a vengeance. The mechanics of the 

thing are such that it puts a very heavy burden on the citizen. The police really don‘t have much trouble 

getting their liquor tested. They send in their samples by the thousands to the Provincial Laboratory. If 

the Section said that the certificate of the Provincial Laboratory shall be prima facie evidence, and if the 

policeman says that it applies to this sample, I wouldn‘t object to that. But this Bill really puts the onus 

on the citizen. Let‘s suppose there is a dance hall and let‘s suppose there is coke about and let‘s suppose 

that some of the coke bottles are spiked, as has been known to happen at dances, and let‘s suppose you 

have coke which isn‘t spiked and let‘s suppose the policeman picks you all up and says, ―OK, that‘s all 

spiked coke, I say it is all liquor.‖ Now your position, if you are charged, is that you have to get your 

coke and seal it in some sort of a package and send it into an analyzing lab. You have to have some sort 

of defence to the proposition that this is liquor. I think this is going too far, I think that this is a little too 

oppressive on the citizen. I‘m going to ask, before this Bill goes in Committee, that the Attorney General 

have a particular look at that Section. Because of these Sections in it I am going to have to vote against 

the Bill. I think that I am not violently opposed to the basic principles in it, but because of these two 

provisions, which I think are inimical to the proper administration of justice as I see it, I will be 

opposing the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should make a comment or two as a 

result of the observations of the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney). The reason why we found it 

necessary to ask for the insertion of new Section 79A has been alluded to by him. What we found in 

some areas, particularly in the north part of the province concerns various substances. One I think of is 

hair oil, hair spray. In the Loon Lake area was one situation which gave us a great deal of difficulty; the 

situation alluded to by the Premier at Sandy Bay, the malt situation. We‘ve been wrestling with this 

problem. We have been under a great deal of pressure, many, many submissions from church groups, 

local chiefs. Everybody in the area has been camping on our trail and is very much concerned. So they 

should be and we are very concerned. So we came up with this Section 79A to put us in a position where 

we could . . . You know the danger of putting a net down for the whole province, something that‘s a 

problem in one area is not a problem in the rest of the province, so you can‘t do it on a general basis. So 

I put my law officers to work on this problem. They have been working and wrestling with it for some 

time and they came up with Section 79A which does put the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council in a 

position where when we do have a particular problem in a particular area, we can pass this proclamation 

in dealing with that area and dealing with a particular substance or a particular product. Sure, we will 

look at the matters raised by the Hon. Member for Regina Centre so far a notice is concerned. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1610 

I‘m not as concerned as he is with it, I think it will work fine but we‘ll have a look at that in Committee. 

I wouldn‘t think that would put him in a position where he felt that he had to vote against the principle 

of this Bill. Insofar as the other item is concerned – he refers to Clause 6 or Section 6 of this Bill, 

Section 150A which says the justice trying the case may – I draw your attention to the word ‗may‘- in 

the absence of proof to the contrary infer that any liquid or substance in question is liquor within the 

meaning of this Act and the fact that an officer describes it as liquor by the name that is commonly 

applied to liquor. Now I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that the protection of the citizen in this case is the 

protection of the court. You have the protection of the court. A justice may in the absence of proof to the 

contrary, I submit that that is ample protection and that there will be no danger of anybody getting into a 

situation where he does run against the reverse onus. We can have a look at that. We have run into some 

problems and I‘ll be prepared to discuss those problems in Committee. I‘d be prepared to discuss with 

the Hon. Member any suggested alternate wording. This is the best wording we could come up with. We 

think this Section is necessary and really I invite him to agree with the Bill in principle, because what we 

are doing here is putting us in a position where people are convicted and found guilty, where they should 

be convicted and found guilty, not where they should be found not guilty. 

 

Mr. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to very briefly add a few words in 

opposition to this Bill. Mr. Attorney General, I‘ve heard your comments in this area and think we can 

take some courage or heart in the fact that you are prepared to discuss this matter along with the Premier 

in Committee of the Whole. However, regarding the proposed new Section 79A, I would like to have 

seen some statutory delineation of perhaps even the substances. I know this varies from time to time, I 

agree, that this is a difficult area but some delineations of the powers that are vested in the Lieutenant 

Governor-in-Council. Like the Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) I‘m not placing too much 

stress on Section 79A, but I may say this, Mr. Premier, that I particularly find offence with the 

amendment to Section 150. That is new Clause 5 and Clause 6 referred to by the Member from Regina 

Centre. I don‘t know of any statute in the Province of Saskatchewan that has taken away so many of the 

common law rights of the citizen. I‘m not blaming this now on any party. I know this Liquor Act has 

been in the Statute Books of the Province for a long time. But any statute that has taken away as many 

rights of the average citizen as this Liquor Act, for example, has to be studied. It has wide powers of 

search, search and seizure. As I understand The Liquor Act now, a person can almost at any time go into 

any person‘s home and carry out a search in the hope that there may be some unlawful liquor or some 

offence being committed pursuant to The Liquor Act. I grant you that there are some difficulties with 

respect to proof and there have to be some special powers given to the Police Force. But nevertheless, 

Mr. Premier, my contention is that The Liquor Act, as it is presently worded, has greatly mitigated 

against the common law principle that a person is deemed to be innocent until he is proven guilty. And 

my quarrel with Clause 6 is simply this that it reverses the onus as my colleague from Regina Centre has 

said even more so and adds another situation whereby the common law remedies of the individual 

citizen are abrogated. Now I agree that it may be difficult to prove that but after all, Mr. Premier, 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1611 

the Crown has all the resources at its facility. It has all the powers. It has a far greater advantage in terms 

of monetary resources and technical aid in order to convict a person. I think Clause 6, in allowing the 

person to infer guilt by a mere statement by an officer – and I have been in court far too many times to 

see statements of this nature – to me is a denial of natural justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Have faith in the courts. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, may I just make one observation, Mr. Attorney General, and that is a question 

of faith in the courts. I have faith in the courts but I think that the protection of the court is only so good 

as the law that says and is founded on the premise that the person is innocent until proven guilty. I think 

this law is founded on a reverse position, that the person in fact is going to be guilty unless otherwise he 

proves himself. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — It says ‗may‘. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, the word, ‗may‘, is correct. There is a discretionary point there, but I simply 

say that read with Clause 5 which now has taken out the question of potability. The question of 

potability has arisen from time to time in courts. Very often some slick defence counsel gets up and 

says, ―Yes, this may be alcohol but it is not drinkable. It is not fit for human consumption.‖ The Liquor 

Act contravenes it and I can see this being a proper delineation. But the fact of the matter is that with the 

amendment to Clause 5, there is really no defence possible whatsoever for the person who may be 

falsely or wrongly accused, coupled with No. 6. And I think, Mr. Attorney General, that the effect of 

both those two proposed Clauses is a law which was founded on the principles, as I said, that you are 

guilty and you have to prove your innocence. I think my colleague from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) 

has described the financial cost and the burden that will attach to an individual citizen. I‘m going to have 

to oppose the Bill because I know there are problems, as the Attorney General and the Premier have 

said, in the North, but I think those are outweighed by the very distinct possible problem of a further 

encroachment of what I consider to be fundamental democratic principles. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I will have to agree with my colleagues who have spoken on 

this Bill. When I look at 79A – take the A Section of it – under that Section, the sale in certain areas of 

such commodities as raisins, prunes, or other fruits could be restricted because the extracted juice can be 

used to make alcoholic beverages. I can see that maybe the intention of the Government isn‘t that that 

will be done, but this Bill would give the authorities the right to do those things, to restrict the sale of a 

good many commodities. When you take that along with Sections 5 and 6, as my friend from Riversdale 

(Mr. Romanow) has just raised, I think this is a very bad Bill and a very bad principle of what we know 

as British justice. I think it should be taken back to have a fresh look at the Bill and be amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think there‘s much disagreement as to what needs to be 

done in the North. I suppose that we can disagree on the methods of achievement. It‘s fine to talk 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1612 

about civil rights, and we must be sympathetic to civil rights, but the fact remains that somehow we have 

to have an Act that we can enforce. Everyone I think knows that most of our native people in the North 

like wine. At several stores the RCMP strongly recommended that we take out wine to slow down the 

drunkenness that existed. In the two cases where we took such a step, it has sharply dropped the rate of 

drunkenness. But I have visited several communities and I‘m sure other Hon. Members have also. I 

remember one community in the North where I went, I would think there were 500 people came down to 

the wharfs with the school children to meet us. It was shocking to note the number of adults and the 

number of school children who were under the influence of liquor. I asked the missionary and I asked 

the school principal how this could happen since there was no liquor outlet. There wasn‘t one for a 

hundred miles. I was informed they get malt at the local store and they make their own liquor. We‘ve 

had repeated representations from the band there and the Chief, asking us to do something. Our Attorney 

General‘s Department and the RCMP say that under existing legislation there‘s no way that we can force 

that storekeeper not to handle malts. We had another town that I‘d like to tell you about. This is one of 

the stores where we discontinued the sale of wine. We thought we had accomplished much. But then 

many people commenced to go over to the store, many native people – and buy some kind of hair oil – I 

don‘t remember the exact product – and they were making alcohol out of this hair spray. Local people 

said if you don‘t do something about the situation somebody is going to go blind. Thus the local people 

asked us to have this hair spray removed. We sent up the RCMP, and the local storekeepers on that 

occasion were willing to co-operate. On a voluntary basis, they took out this product and some of the 

problems disappeared. 

 

The Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) pointed out that sometimes you‘ll have a problem 

in one town but not in another. If all the storekeepers would co-operate, we wouldn‘t have to have this 

legislation. But we have found that there are some storekeepers who won‘t co-operate. Thus we must 

have some kind of an Act that will permit us to go up into some of those northern communities. If they 

are selling these products just to get natives or children drunk, we must be able to do something. 

Unfortunately there are no officers in many of those communities, so we think we must remove the 

product. 

 

Of course when we get into Committee and the Opposition can suggest a better way of accomplishing 

this objective, we‘d be quite pleased. Our Attorney General‘s Department has framed this Bill. This is 

what they‘ve come up with. There is no thought of taking civil rights away from anybody, but there is a 

strong feeling that something has to be done to protect these native people, and particularly the children 

involved. 

 

I know this from first hand because I‘ve seen the difficulties. I hope the Opposition can go along with 

the principle, and may be change details in the Committee. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Could I ask the Hon. Premier a question. He 

apparently must know that the Indians not only buy in the bottle but they also buy beans and other 

things. If you have distillers back how are you going to tell storekeepers they can‘t sell beans? 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1613 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — The Hon. Member may be right, but in this one community the priest and the 

Chief and the group all blamed it on malt. They said if we can remove the malt, the situation can be 

rectified. However the local storekeeper wouldn‘t agree to discontinue the sale of malt, and there‘s no 

way we can force him to do it. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time on the following recorded division: 

 

Yeas –- 28 

 

Thatcher Larochelle Radloff 

Howes MacDonald Weatherald 

Cameron Estey Mitchell 

Steuart Hooker Gardner 

Heald Gallagher Coupland 

McIsaac MacLennan McPherson 

Loken Heggie Forsyth 

MacDougall Breker McIvor 

Grant Leith Schmeiser 

Coderre   

 

Nays –- 19 
 

Lloyd Berezowsky Michayluk 

Wooff Romanow Brockelbank 

Kramer Smishek Pepper 

Willis Thibault Bowerman 

Blakeney Whelan Matsalla 

Dewhurst Snyder Messer 

Meakes   

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher (Premier) moved second reading of Bill No. 78 – An Act to amend an Act to 

provide a Superannuation Allowance for a Certain Former Member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I think the wording of this Bill makes fairly obvious the intent. 

The Hon. W.J. Patterson, who served as an MLA in this Legislature, I believe, for 28 years. He served as 

Lieutenant Governor for four years. This gentleman is now in his 80s and I have been given to 

understand has certain financial problems. Former Governments some years ago recognized these 

difficulties and provided a pension for Mr. Patterson in the amount of $3,000. This Legislature several 

years ago increased that amount by $1,200, to bring it to $4,200 a year. In view of representations which 

have been made to the Government, in view of the increased cost of living and so on, we are 

recommending to the House that this pension be increased another $1,200 which will bring the total 

amount to $5,400 per year or $450 per month. I think most Hon. Members will recognize the problems 

involved and I hope there will be sympathy for this proposal. 

 

Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Bill. As the Premier has 

pointed out it was a number of years ago that the Bill was first introduced. As I recall it, it was 

introduced 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1614 

at or about the time when legislation providing for superannuation generally for Members of the 

Legislature was introduced. Certainly nobody I think would have any compunction or hesitation about 

the amount of the increase that is involved here. The Premier has mentioned the very extensive service 

which the Hon. Mr. Patterson has given to this Province in a variety of ways. 

 

I do want to say, however, that I could have hoped that the Government might have extended a 

somewhat similar consideration to a number of other people. As was mentioned the amount originally 

made available to Mr. Patterson was increased on one, and I think perhaps two, occasions. It was 

increased along with increases to the plan generally. There are other Members who have superannuated 

at the amount of the Bill for Mr. Patterson originally. They have not been increased. Some of them are 

still at the level of $3,000 and some slightly over it. In almost every case these Members had service and 

contribution which under the formula would have produced more than that except for the ceiling 

imposed by the formula at that time. And this group of people I would hope that the Government might 

have given some consideration about too. It was raised last year when The Superannuation Act for 

Members of the Legislature was under consideration. It‘s probably true that no special representation 

has been made to the Premier with respect to them. However, representation was certainly made during 

the discussions of a year ago and it seems to me that they, too, have some entitlement to consideration. 

The cost of living has gone up for them. Some of them have special expenses because of illness or at 

least indifferent health, I know. I simply want to put it to the Premier and the Government that this 

group are equally deserving of consideration and in saying this I take nothing away whatsoever from the 

deservingness of the move with respect to the Hon. Mr. Patterson. As a matter of fact, I draw to the 

Premier‘s attention one person at least who could qualify except for the matter of age and who is 

physically disabled and unable to earn a living otherwise. He will qualify in a few years from now, but I 

would hope the Government would give some consideration to that person and other persons who might 

in the future be in a similar circumstance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I think there‘s a good deal of merit in what the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) has said this morning. The Government should perhaps look into the matter of 

increased pensions for former retired MLAs. I will say though that the only one that I have had 

representations in connection with an increase in the pension, has been Mr. Patterson. Our caucus 

discussed this case and we did feel that because he had so many years of service, and headed the 

Government for so long, perhaps his case was stronger than most. I say again that we will be pleased to 

look into this other matter that the Leader of the Opposition has raised before another year comes by. I 

am not giving a commitment, but we will certainly look into it. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst (Wadena): — May I ask the Premier a question before he takes his seat. Do you recall, 

Mr. Premier, that I personally discussed with you last winter the plight of a former Member who does 

not qualify on account of age and yet he is totally disabled. At that time you said we couldn‘t include it 

last year but you would take a look at it for this year. Do you not recall that, that I personally took it up 

with you? 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1615 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — Now that you mention it, I think you‘re referring to the Member for Bengough. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — Allan Brown. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — I had forgotten that case. Yes, I recall it now. 

 

Mr. Kramer (The Battlefords): — This is an unhappy situation and this man, Mr. Speaker, had a long 

record, you‘re willing to . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — If the Hon. Member should ask me a question . . . 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I wonder if you would. The question I‘m going to ask, I wonder if you would now, not 

next year, consider at least this one particular case because it is a needy case and it is a deserving case. I 

think that you know, all politics set aside, it should be considered now and not put off any longer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — I can‘t make that commitment, but I‘ll discuss it with my colleagues. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF STUDENTS 
 

Deputy Speaker: — Through a period of many years by the matter of courtesy but not by rule in this 

Assembly and in this Committee, individual Members have welcomed students from their constituency 

to these Chambers. As all Members are aware, last evening a motion of the House was passed in which 

the responsibility for welcoming of those students was given to the Speaker or to myself, when I occupy 

the Chair in this House. There is no question that over the years that the Assembly has been very 

courteous to Members in this regard and I would hope that in embarking under a new procedure, a 

procedure laid down by the vote of the Assembly, the same courtesy could be extended to ourselves. I 

would, therefore, like to welcome to this Assembly here today the following groups of students: 

 

The first group, situated in the east gallery, are from Westmount school in Saskatoon and they are 

accompanied by Mrs. Sutherland. The school is situated in the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair and is 

represented by Mr. Brockelbank, whom I would ask to rise and be recognized at this time. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Deputy Speaker: — The second group of students from Weyburn school, Junior High, are seated in the 

Speaker‘s gallery. They are accompanied by Mr. Weinmaster. This school is situated in the constituency 

of Weyburn and is represented in this House by the Hon. Mr. Pepper, whom I would ask to rise and be 

recognized. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1616 

Deputy Speaker: — In conclusion, I would like to extend to all visitors from the various schools here 

today a most sincere welcome on behalf of this Assembly. We‘re delighted that you are able to be with 

us. We hope that you will profit from what you see taking place here today and I trust you will carry 

back to your school a knowledge of the Legislature and its function that you did not have before. Also, 

on behalf of the Legislature. I would like to wish you a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONGRATULATIONS: SHELLBROOK ELKS HOCKEY CLUB 
 

Mr. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — I have received word this day from the team manager, Mr. Johnny 

Hollowell from Shellbrook that the Shellbrook Elks Hockey Club have recently attained this honor in a 

final playoff game with the club from Lafleche. Mr. Speaker, there are many complimentary factors that 

are associated in the very fine constituency of Shellbrook. However, this year‘s evidence of both 

national and provincial honors among the youth of this agricultural community says a great deal more 

for the community and its people than I can accord to them in any brief congratulatory remarks that I 

might make on this occasion. 

 

I am sure that all Members will join with me in extending to the Shellbrook Elks Hockey Club our 

sincere congratulations for the teamwork and sportsmanship that resulted in the honors that they have 

attained for both their community and their people in that community. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONGRATULATIONS: R.M. OF MONTROSE NO. 315 CURLING CHAMPIONS 
 

Mr. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I‘d like the indulgence of this House to bring to your attention 

and the Members of this House that in the Provincial-Municipal Curling Playoffs held at the Regina 

Exhibition Curlodrome on Monday and Tuesday last, the municipal rink of the R.M. of Montrose No. 

315 with the office at Donovan, won the championship. The consolation prize winner was the R.M. of 

Reford No. 379 with office at Wilkie. I might say the curling competition was sponsored by the Rural 

Municipal Secretary Treasurers‘ Association of Saskatchewan. This was the first year of such 

competition and with the enthusiasm shown it is hoped that this competition will continue. 

 

Being a director of the association, I‘d like to, in your behalf, Mr. Speaker, and the Members of the 

Legislature, congratulate the R.M. of Montrose No. 315 for their good curling and achievement. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

CONGRATULATIONS: REGINA CAPS HOCKEY CHAMPIONS 
 

Mr. Gallagher (Yorkton): — Mr. Speaker, I would like the indulgence of the House for just a moment. 

I don‘t know whether the Members from Regina City had a lapse of memory or if they are just not good 

hockey fans, but I want to congratulate the Regina Caps on their victory 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1617 

in winning the Saskatchewan Senior Hockey Championship over the Yorkton Terriers. They did so in 

four games. They only outscored the Terriers by one goal. I think the Regina Members should have been 

watching this and pay tribute to their own team. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, the only reason we didn‘t, we are waiting for them to 

win higher pennants. 

 

Deputy Speaker: — If the Committee would grant me indulgence for a moment, the list I had from the 

Weyburn school, they are accompanied by Mr. Jim Nedelcov and Atlee Morrow. Is that right now? I 

was wrong. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. Mr. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 35 – An Act to amend 

The Trade Union Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is for second reading, I would like to very briefly say 

something about the rationale for the amendments. 

 

I‘ve discussed at some length in this Assembly in the past the industrial relation climate in this Province 

and how very important harmonious communications are between employers and employees. I‘ve 

referred to the fact that the rising number of strikes and walk-outs in Canada in recent years have 

focused the attention of government at all levels on the need to improve labor-management relations. 

This is what all governments are attempting to do and this is the purpose and the intent of the Bill before 

the Assembly. 

 

I suppose you could put it this way, that we in Saskatchewan are putting the dam up before the flood 

begins. It is obvious to everyone that when labor-management relations are strained or break down 

completely, hardships are imposed on parties and on the community in general. Work stoppages are 

wasteful and harmful in terms of losses in terms of income and production, which results not only in 

relation to the employee and employers affected but also the economy as a whole. There is no doubt that 

in the present era of technological change, when every member of society is increasingly dependent on 

all other members, the impact of work stoppages is becoming greater. The industrialized society in 

which we live is characterized by the growing interdependence of the factors of production. If one stops, 

all others are affected. At the same time in this mechanized age, all our productive processes operate on 

a large scale. We depend heavily on modern means of mass communication, transportation and 

production and distribution of goods and services. Under these circumstances, a single strike can 

penetrate every sector of our economic structure. Moreover the economy is geared to full potential and 

can function smoothly only if that potential is reached. In this context The Trade Union Act functions as 

an essential guide to the maintenance of a sound and productive union-management relationship. 

 

In amending the Act, I want to stress that the Government 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1618 

has no desire to interfere in the process of collective bargaining. I say most emphatically it is quite the 

reverse. The Government wants to strengthen the process and make it more systematic and effective and 

democratic. This is the intent of the present Bill. Our concern is to find improvements which will make 

the collective bargaining function more efficiently and to remove obstacles which hinder the smooth 

operations of a process. I also want to emphasize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with reference to this legislation, 

that the Government is not introducing a series of changes simply because it wants to do it for obscure 

philosophical reasons. I say on the contrary, very real and practical problems underlie the Bill before us. 

 

One of the most important clauses, for example, provides that, where a strike has continued for 30 days, 

the union, the employer or an employee involved in the strike, or anyone directly involved in it, may 

apply to the Labour Relations Board to conduct a vote to determine whether a majority of the striking 

employees wish to continue the strike. This clause is there to protect the rights of the individual workers 

who is caught in a squeeze between union-management in a dispute. It is intended to prevent a situation 

which existed in two large resource industries in one of our northern communities. A negotiation dispute 

in this community resulted in a strike. The individual, business agent in this case, carrying on the 

negotiations for the union involved resided outside the province, and bargaining could take place only 

when he was available and had made this quite clear at that particular time to his negotiation committee. 

As a result the strike dragged on for nearly two months. As the strike progressed it was suggested to me 

by a great number of the striking employees that the majority of employees desired to return to work and 

that some action should be taken. Unfortunately, however, there was no established procedure for the 

Government to determine whether this was true or not. There was no way of ascertaining. 

 

Mr. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — What was the union? 

 

Hon. Mr. Coderre: — Now I must make it quite clear that this is the exception to the rule. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Who was the union? 

 

Hon. Mr. Coderre: — IWA. It is now proposed that such a procedure be included I should say, while 

on this subject, that there was no established Government procedure, but the only procedure that was 

used was the number of phone calls to my home, to my office, delegations, groups of three or four, and 

very different types of groups expressing their concern. As I‘ve indicated often in this House that, 

whenever an individual comes to me with a complaint, then I find it my duty to try and rectify this 

individual‘s problem. I‘ve indicated time and time again that no individual member anywhere or 

employee or working man should become a pawn in a game, regardless of whether it‘s economic or 

financial or caused by business or business agents. This is something that I firmly believe. I also believe 

that no third party should be hurt because of the actions of any two parties in one way, shape or the 

other. 

 

It is now proposed that such a procedure be included in The 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1619 

Trade Union Act. In making such provisions, the Government has no intention of preventing the strike 

from occurring. The amendment is merely intended to ensure that no strike will continue on and on 

against the wishes of the majority of the employees. I might add that a somewhat similar provision is 

included in the recommendations of the recent Rands Commission Inquiry into labor disputes in 

Ontario. I might also refer the hon. gentlemen opposite, of course, to a publication provided by Her 

Majesty‘s Government in England, particularly Barbara Castle and her White Paper, ―A Place of Strike‖ 

a policy for industrial relations. I think it might be interesting to read the problems that England is now 

facing today. 

 

Another clause in this Bill will make it that after a period of 30 days a person could apply to the Labour 

Relations Board for a Government-supervised strike vote. Provisions will be changed, an amendment 

would be made that only one vote will be allowed at the end of 30 days. In other words, if they have 

then decided after 30 days they want to remain on strike, that‘s it. It will not be a repetitious affair. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Once every 30 days? 

 

Hon. Mr. Coderre: — No, one attempt. Another clause in this Bill will make it an unfair labor practice 

for a trade union or a group of employees to engage in so-called ―hot cargo‖ or third party boycott 

activities by refusing to handle goods being delivered or shipped by a carrier, unless there is a valid 

dispute with that carrier. I sincerely believe, Mr. Speaker, that with a little thought on this matter, every 

fair-minded citizen of Saskatchewan will recognize that it is not at all just to involve innocent third 

parties in labor disputes. 

 

Now again in this Section there will be another amendment. The intent of this amendment is that, if a 

cargo is delivered to a place that is legitimately on strike, the employer could not ask these employees 

who are on strike to unload the cargo. In other words, it‘s not intended as a strike-breaking procedure. 

The amendment is also intended to streamline the procedural application of The Trade Union Act and 

render it more effective and appropriate in the operation of modern-day labor-management relations. 

 

The definition of the term ―employee‖ is amended to make more explicit the definition which has been 

implied right along, the question of what is an employee and what is an employer or self-employed and 

so on. 

 

Another amendment will make it possible for certification orders issued by the Labour Relations Board 

to be enforceable as a court order. I have noticed very often that trade unions will lay an unfair labor 

practice charge against an employer. Then there is an order of reinstatement, so that they have to get 

back to the Board, and ask the Board‘s permission to prosecute. This new amended Section, once an 

order has been issued by the Labour Relations Board, then becomes enforceable as a court order. The 

hon. gentlemen know that about 95 per cent of unfair labor practices are brought in by a union. The 

requirement that no prosecution concerning an unfair labor practice can be instituted without the second 

consent of the Labour Relations Board will be removed. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1620 

Finally, a provision is made for the operation of a collective bargaining agreement for the full term, if 

another union is certified to represent a group of employees, when the existing agreement has more than 

one year of its term remaining. I understand, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill has been labelled as a 

controversial, and an anti-labor piece of legislation by some of its opponents and by many of my good 

friends within the trade unions. 

 

I don‘t suppose that Government legislation dealing with labor-management relations is not going to be 

accepted at all times because there is going to be controversy. 

 

Keeping in mind the principles that I have established of the rights of the individuals and protecting the 

rights of the third party, I think the rationale is there. I want to say, however, that it is controversial only 

because – and I say this – a few misguided persons make it so. I am convinced that no employee in this 

province will be hurt by any amendments made to this Act. I also want to assure once more to the people 

of this province that the Government of Saskatchewan is not anti-labor, we are not anti-anybody, we are 

pro-labor, we are pro-employee, we are pro-employer, we are pro-Saskatchewan. The Government does 

not discriminate against or unduly favor any special group. The Government has a clear-cut obligation to 

protect the rights of all citizens whether they are union members or workers not in unions, whether they 

are employers or self-employed, whether they are professionals or pensioners. In the case of legislation 

applicable to labor and management our only concern is to guarantee that the rights of one group do not 

interfere with those of another. 

 

The present Bill embodies this principle and the amendments are designed to reduce industrial conflicts 

for the benefit of both parties and for the people of the province. Collective bargaining is not going to be 

interfered with. The right to strike is not being abrogated. The Government is simply adapting The Trade 

Union Act to the demands and pressures of modern-day industrial society, to enable the citizens of this 

province in all spheres of endeavor to get on with the business on an equitable basis of continuing the 

development of the economy of Saskatchewan. One, and the only reason, that much of this legislation is 

brought in is because there has been a constant breakdown in the communications, lack of good faith, 

which I have indicated time and again by both labor and management. For this reason if labor and 

management do not take their responsibilities in assuring themselves that labor-management relations 

continue, I as Minister of Labour have no alternative but to recommend to my colleagues changes in the 

Act. 

 

Mr. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, at the outset I again want to remind this 

Legislature that in the year 1964 the Liberal party and Premier Thatcher made a firm promise to the 

wage earners of Saskatchewan if elected to form a Government they would ―maintain and improve 

workers‘ wages, vacations, hours of work, compensation and trade union rights and security.‖ 

 

This commitment, like many other Liberal promises, was immediately forgotten as soon as the Liberal 

party took office. Without delay they initiated a ―hate-labor‖ campaign and in almost five years of office 

they have not relented in their 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1621 

efforts to besmirch the name of labor and labor organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a rare occasion when a Saskatchewan Liberal Cabinet Minister or a MLA speaks that 

he does not attack the trade union movement or does not place the blame on the wage earners for the 

failures of this Liberal Government in Saskatchewan or the one in Ottawa. Whether it is the present 

agriculture economic problem and damp grain, somehow the workers are at fault. Or whether it is the 

high interest rates, which the money changers have forced on the people of Canada, or Canada‘s 

education or housing crisis, no matter what social or economic problem, the Liberal answer is the 

workers are to blame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the Legislature started meeting late in January almost every Liberal MLA in one 

form or another has taken a pot shot at labor and at the trade union movement. Over the years the 

Liberal party and this Government have with the support of certain news media tried to persuade the 

public that trade unions are irresponsible and somehow harmful to the public good. Mr. Speaker, I 

challenge this. Such accusations are nothing but an effort to undermine the trade union movement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite the newspaper editors and the various radio and television commentators to 

carefully and sincerely examine the oppressive legislation and the total anti-labor record of this Liberal 

Government. I invite them to say to Messrs. Thatcher, Coderre, et al – ―Stop, you have gone too far with 

your madness, with your hate labor campaign, with your anti-labor legislation, with your efforts to 

destroy the trade union movement.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, last year when I spoke in this House on February 27th, I drew attention 

to the fact that, since June, 1964, the news media had failed or refused to cover hearings of the Labour 

Relations Board. Since raising this issue I want to acknowledge with thanks that at least the press has 

covered many of the hearings. I understand that as a result this has had a desirable effect on the behavior 

of the Board, even though its decisions continue to be as biased as they were before. 

 

Newspaper editors rise in righteous indignation any time anyone suggests that its editorials go beyond 

the accepted rights and freedoms of the press. If our press and news media are defenders of freedoms 

and justice, they have a duty and a responsibility to also defend the rights and freedoms of wage earners 

and the union movement, when their rights and freedoms are being suppressed or denied by the powers 

of the state. 

 

I also readily concede the right of the press to constructively criticize the trade union movement when 

criticism is justified. I, therefore, invite the news media to analyze the anti-labor record of this 

Government and expose it in the name of justice and in the name of fair play. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill denies freedom of association, freedom to withhold one‘s labor. 

It legalizes harassment, it gives security to company unions, against the wishes of the workers. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1622 

This Bill is among the most vicious, if not the most vicious, piece of anti-labor legislation enacted by the 

Liberal Government. It is as bad as any labor legislation enacted in recent Canadian history. It makes the 

notorious Taft Hartley Act of the United States look pale. 

 

I have reason to believe that the workers of Saskatchewan, and citizens generally would welcome the 

news media exposing all the iniquitous labor laws passed by this Government, and their failure and 

refusal to improve labor standards to keep pace with other provinces and Canada and ―to improve labor 

standards, trade union rights and security‖ as it promised. But too often we read biased condemnation 

out of ignorance, rather than constructive criticism, out of their failure to understand the workers‘ 

problems and out of misunderstanding the trade union movement. 

 

This Bill is going to tilt the scale of balance far too much in favor of the employer and far too much 

against the employee. My appeal is specifically directed to the news media, because trying to convince 

the Members opposite that this is a totally unjust law, and to ask them to withdraw it, seems almost a 

waste of time. Most of them hold such deep prejudices towards unions that they would just as soon have 

unions outlawed and be done with it. 

 

Those who are not so biased don‘t understand the problem and don‘t even bother taking the time to 

learn. The few who have some knowledge of the serious effects of this law don‘t have the courage or the 

guts to stand up and oppose it. Mr. Speaker, I would invite them to join the Member from Yorkton (Mr. 

Gallagher) to show their courage in the same way as he showed his courage this morning when he rose 

and opposed the actions of this Government on a different issue. I ask them to do this with respect to this 

Bill. It indeed would be justified and commendable. 

 

I invite them to show their independence. May I suggest to the Hon. Member for Regina South West 

(Mr. McPherson), if he really meant what he said last year during the speech he made when moving the 

Address-in-Reply, then he is compelled to speak and vote against this Bill. Let me quote just a few 

sentences of what he told us last year. 

 

The right to strike, the right of employers and employees to disagree is a guarantee of the freedom 

which we cherish. 

 

Government should stick to conciliation and stop there and permit labor and management to practise 

free bargaining. Neither side can ever hope to bargain freely when they are hampered by laws binding 

one side or the other to certain predetermined procedures and conditions. 

 

It is preposterous to claim that bargaining between two parties is free, when a third party, government, 

is sitting on the shoulders of the bargaining teams pointing out that one or the other has certain 

privileges not available to the other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this proposed law is passed in its present form, (and I am glad to hear that the Minister 

will bring in some amendments) not only will the Government, through its action, sit on the worker‘s 

shoulders, it will sit on labor‘s back paralyzing almost completely the only economic measure 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1623 

labor holds, the right to withhold its labor. Our society says that one of the fundamental freedoms is the 

right to withhold one‘s labor or the fruits of the production of one‘s labor, when that becomes necessary. 

The employer is always free and unimpaired by law to close a plant and cease production for as long as 

he wants; he is free to lay-off or discharge his employees without justifying his action to anyone, 

regardless of the number of people that may be hurt in the process. 

 

The professional, the doctor, the lawyer, the engineer, is free to withhold his labor individually or 

collectively and no action will be taken against him. The farmer is also allowed that right and freedom. 

The wage earner is the only one who is restricted and prohibited by law to that same right and to that 

same freedom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will discuss in some detail the implications of Bill 35, with the proposed amendments. 

But before doing so, I want to pay tribute to the wage earners of Saskatchewan and this country. The 

workers with their brains and muscles have built the mighty railways, the highways, the bridges. They 

have diverted the rivers and built the great irrigation and power dams. They have built our homes, our 

schools, our churches, the factories and buildings we work in. They build the cars, the tractors, 

refrigerators, all the machines that make our lives better and more comfortable. They process the daily 

food that we eat and the clothes we wear. The achievements of Canadian workers are visible from sea to 

sea. Their accomplishments are truly great, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For their labor and accomplishment, for their strengths and their weaknesses, for the good things and the 

mistakes, for all this and more, the Liberal Government of Saskatchewan continues to harass and 

condemn the workers and their unions. This condemnation is as regular as night follows day. During the 

session and out of the session, at public meetings and at private conferences, at every session of the 

Legislature, more and more oppressive laws. If it is not satisfied with the harm it has done to labor at a 

regular session, it doesn‘t hesitate to call a special session to do more of its dirty work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unions are a very important and essential part of our society. They are more than just 

economic instruments designed to help the workers in their relation with employers, even though this is 

a very important part of their function. Unions have added immeasurably to the democratic process and 

our democratic institutions; they have spearheaded many a campaign for freedom and social justice, not 

just for their members but for the people generally. 

 

The trade union movement can justly be proud of its contribution to the general well-being of all people. 

Higher wages, shorter hours of work, better working conditions, are here because there is a trade union 

movement. To the extent we have legal minimum standards, it is because we have unions which 

consistently pressure governments to legislate and improve the minimum labor standards. 

 

In every area of social legislation, unions have played a leading role: old age security, Canada Pension 

Plan, welfare legislation, hospital insurance, medicare, unemployment insurance, workmen‘s 

compensation benefits. Many of these laws are here today because of the influence, the pressure and 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1624 

representations of the trade union movement. Labor‘s achievements for the public good are too many to 

recap in a short speech. 

 

Perhaps the major achievement of unions is that through collective bargaining unions brought 

democracy and a form of constitutional government into industry. Without a union and without 

collective bargaining, industry is a dictatorship of the employer. Unions have given workers status, 

dignity and self-respect, the right to talk to employers with a measure of equality. It is this measure of 

equality that this Liberal Government is determined to destroy. 

 

The Minister of Labour, when he spoke during a previous debate, chose to devote the principal portion 

of his remarks to attacking and criticizing the trade union movement. I concede that for the first time he 

recognized that there are employers and employers‘ agents whose attitude towards collective bargaining 

and industrial relations is archaic. 

 

While the Minister opened his eyes for a moment to see the truth, he closed them very quickly for fear 

the Premier might accuse him of treason against the Liberal gods, the free enterprise masters. So, the 

Minister quickly closed his eyes, pulled down the shutters, and in his usual blind manner proceeded to 

berate unions and labor leaders. It may be useful to just remind the House of the Minister‘s chastising 

remarks of some of the employers. He is reported in the Regina Leader Post of February 26th, to have 

said: 

 

Some of the employers and management representatives run their businesses as modern-day tyrants 

and operate in a way which suggests they want to be modern in 1969, but under 1869 working 

conditions. These people are pretty sharp when it is a question of manipulating dollars and cents, but 

are totally naive and immature when it comes to the operation of a sound and stable labor relations 

policy. 

 

He then went on to say that he has found these employers to be ―two-faced‖ and ―less than honest.‖ But 

has he proposed any legislation to enable unions and his Department to deal more effectively with these 

industrial, ―modern-day tyrants.‖ Of course not, Mr. Speaker. He proposes more regressive and 

oppressive legislation to cripple the trade union movement. 

 

Or did the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) take issue with some of his colleagues, the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt), the Minister of Welfare (Mr. 

MacDonald), the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy), the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), the 

Hon. Member for Rosetown (Mr. Loken), the Hon. Member from Nipawin (Mr. Radloff) and others, 

who tried to put the blame for the plight of our farmers on the strike of grain handlers at the Lakehead 

last summer? 

 

The Minister of Labour should have chided and criticized the Members on his side of the House for their 

unfounded and mischievous attacks on the grain handlers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — He should have reminded them 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1625 

of their remarks and findings of his compatriots at Ottawa, Mr. Olson, Minister of Agriculture, and Mr. 

Mackasey, the Federal Minister of Labour. What did Mr. Olson tell Gerry Wade, Leader Post 

Agriculture Reporter on September 9, 1968, when he was in Regina? Let me quote: 

 

Mr. Olson said his chief concern was that he wanted to dispel the idea that 100 per cent of the blame 

for the strike lies with the labor union. 

 

Fifty per cent or better lies on the other side of the table. I think it is erroneous for farmers and the 

general public to think the labor union is the devil in this case. In my opinion it is not. The offers the 

companies have made to the union, in terms of the wage issue when compared with what they gave 

their employees at Vancouver, are not at all reasonable. At no time since the strike started have the 

company offers come close to restoring the traditional difference. 

 

Why didn‘t the Minister of Labour rebuke the attacks of his colleagues by stating these facts, Mr. 

Speaker? Why didn‘t the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) tell this House of the findings of the 

Federal Department of Labour and Mr. Mackasey, that the negotiators for the grain-handling companies 

were not informing the managements of the union‘s offers and proposals for settlements. It was not until 

Mr. Mackasey went over the heads of the company negotiators directly to the top management that they 

got the union‘s position straight and settlement was reached. 

 

Why wasn‘t the Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture honest and report this statement of Mr. Bryce 

Mackasey, Federal Minister of Agriculture, made in the House of Commons on September 19, 1968, as 

reported on page 251 of Hansard and let me quote: 

 

I have been able to establish to my satisfaction, if not necessarily to the Opposition, that not one single 

grain sale was lost as a result of the strike. Not one market was jeopardized or one commitment not 

honored. Our commitments to existing customers were filled. There was sufficient grain at the port of 

Montreal to look after the customers in the Eastern part of this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Yet the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) tried to blame this strike for the loss 

of grain markets and the present plight of Saskatchewan farmers. The truth about the Saskatchewan 

agricultural crisis lies with the total bankrupt agricultural policy of this Liberal Government and the one 

in Ottawa, not because of some industrial dispute, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me now recap the anti-labor legislation that this Government has passed to date. It may raise a few 

questions in the minds of some of the newer Members on the Government side of the House. I hope it 

may persuade some of them to vote against this Bill. 

 

In 1965, the Government brought down Bill 86 but was persuaded by the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour and other unions not to proceed with it. The Government agreed to appoint a 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1626 

committee to inquire into and report on The Trade Union Act. This it did. It established a 

Labour-Management Government Committee. Even though the Labour-Management Legislative 

Review Committee was weighted to express the Government‘s point of view, one part of the report said, 

and let me quote: 

 

The Committee was of the opinion that, so far as it is possible, labor negotiations should be left to 

management and the trade union to carry on with as little interference from outside as possible. 

 

This Committee was rushed to submit its report before its study was completed. The Government had its 

1966 Bill 79 ready and prepared before the Committee‘s report was even printed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the notorious Bill 79 was passed in 1966 under strong protest from the trade union 

movement and unanimous opposition of the New Democratic party MLAs. What did this Bill 79 do? Let 

me recap. It gave employers the right to interfere with employees in their desire to form unions. Since 

the enactment of this provision many employers have taken advantage to interfere and pressure 

employees against joining unions. The union security section of the Act was drastically weakened. New 

majority rules were introduced, over 60 per cent majority requirements for certification in place of 51 

per cent, except in case of a vote and here only a 25 per cent support requirement for raiding purposes, 

but 40 per cent support is required before the Board may consider a vote in the case of an ordinary 

certification. Non-union members were given a right to vote in the strike votes. A set of rigid rules was 

imposed to interfere with the internal functions of a union. Arbitration decisions were made legally 

binding, with penalties for infraction. A cynical provision was enacted permitting employers to change 

wages and working conditions during a period employees try to organize a union. The reverse onus 

clause was weakened, making it more difficult for unions to establish unfair labor practices. A 

conscientious objectors clause was included, something that does not apply to any other organization, 

teachers, doctors, lawyers or any professional organization. 

 

This Government established a double standard. Many new unfair labor practice clauses against unions 

were legislated. At the same time those against employers were relaxed and weakened. Many more 

discriminatory and unfair provisions were injected. They imposed many compulsory measures on unions 

with legal penalties and court threats, and gave employers the right to interfere with what used to be an 

employee‘s legally protected right to form and to belong to a union of his choice. Fines against unions 

were increased. 

 

That same year, 1966, the Government called a special session to enact the disreputable Bill 2, the 

so-called Essential Services Act, a law which placed some 20,000 wage earners under compulsory 

arbitration. It gave the Government absolute powers without giving unions a right to appeal. It placed 

extreme penalties of up to $1,000 a day on individual unionists. It gave the Government the power to 

determine guilt and exercise the penalty, the execution. The Government gave itself the power to 

decertify unions and to take away collective bargaining rights from thousands of wage earners in this 

province. 

 

Last year we had the infamous Bill 73. Its enactment brought about more difficulty in resolving 

industrial disputes. In the 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1627 

event of a strike, the entire collective bargaining agreement is cancelled. Unions are now denied the 

right and freedom to merge, amalgamate and transfer without the sanction of the Labour Relations 

Board, even though a vast majority of employees favor such a merger, transfer or amalgamation. The 

law now interferes with the employee‘s rights to select a union of his own choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government now proposes Bill 35, an Act to amend The Trade Union Act. In doing so 

it is acting in bad faith, Mr. Speaker. Last July, the Government appointed a committee composed of 

three employer and three employee representatives under the chairmanship of C.K. Murchison, former 

Deputy Minister of Labour. The present Deputy Minister of Labour, Mr. Parrott, is an ex officio 

non-voting member of that Committee. The Committee was given broad terms of reference, to study and 

report on the present Trade Union Act and its administration, also to study and report on other Provincial 

labor laws affecting labor and management, including labor standards. 

 

This Committee has been meeting regularly. However, it has not completed its study and has not 

submitted a report, Mr. Speaker. My information is that the Committee has not been consulted about this 

oppressive legislation before us. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the Premier personally 

gave assurance to representatives of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour on November 22, 1968, 

when the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour submitted its annual brief to the Government, that no 

amendments would be introduced during this session of the Legislature to The Trade Union Act. The 

Government‘s answer was that, until a report is received from this Labour-Management Committee the 

Government established, no action would be taken. The Minister of Labour also gave labor 

representatives an understanding that no amendments to The Trade Union Act were to be introduced 

during this session of the Legislature. In view of this, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us is a double breach 

of faith on the part of the Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Now let me deal item by item with what this Bill proposes to do. Firstly, it proposes to 

exclude employees who may have the status of independent contractor from belonging to a union. Over 

the years, certain employers have attempted to enter into many different arrangements to get employees 

excluded from the rights of bargaining. I recall, not so many years back, that an employer in the city of 

Regina in a dry cleaning business made a phoney arrangement to sell his trucks to his salesmen. By 

doing this he said he was contracting their trucks and their services. He got each salesman to sign a piece 

of paper. By doing this he had hoped to get the salesmen out from under the bargaining agreement. The 

salesmen, while agreeing to truck ownership, did not want to be excluded from the rights of collective 

bargaining. I might inform the Minister of Labour that within the last couple of weeks that the employer 

of a shop, that my union has just organized and which has just become certified, has already made 

efforts to enter into the so-called independent agreements, even before he agreed to start collective 

bargaining. He is anticipating the provisions of Bill 35. 

 

This amendment, Mr. Speaker, proposes to deny bargaining rights to thousands of Saskatchewan 

workers. Some of you may recall the story of the efforts on the part of school-bus drivers 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1628 

and janitors to organize a few years back in this province. Certain school boards played games to make 

independent contractors out of the drivers. The case was argued before the Labour Relations Board. The 

Board held that the drivers were employees within the meaning of the Act. The case went to the courts, 

including the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. It ended up in the Supreme Court of Canada. The highest 

court in the land held that these people were employees within the meaning of the law, and had the right 

to belong to the union, and to bargain collectively, and the school board was directed to bargain 

collectively. 

 

The proposal to exclude the so-called independent contractor will create one more area for dispute. 

There will be employers who will try to enter into phoney arrangements to exclude employees from 

bargaining so as to weaken the trade union. These will likely be the most prevalent in the construction 

industry, in the delivery and general trucking industry and the janitorial services. Lawyers will have a 

field day in preparing agreements. This is another clause, Mr. Speaker, which will give more security to 

the legal profession. 

 

The Minister has referred to the so-called ―hot cargo clause.‖ This provision will compel employees 

under the penalty of law who are on strike to act as their own strike-breakers. If they fail to act as their 

own strike-breakers, they may be subject to a fine of up to $200, a fine of $25 a day for each day they 

refuse to break their own strike, and on second and subsequent offences, for refusal to act as their own 

enemies, to imprisonment not exceeding one year. This kind of provision is unheard of in Canadian law. 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, employees who may be on a perfectly legal and justified strike required 

not only to act as enemies of their brother workers but in fact required to act as their own enemies, their 

own strike-breakers. 

 

Let me give you an example from an industry I am very much familiar with, the wholesale food 

industry. Take the fresh fruit and vegetables now trucked into Saskatchewan exclusively by carriers 

other than those of a wholesale company, and delivered to stores or merchants mainly by trucking firms 

other than those owned by the wholesale company. In a food wholesale industry, excluding the clerical 

employees, the warehouse work consists mainly of receiving and shipping of merchandise. It means 

taking ―delivery of goods from carriers‖ and ―loading of a carrier with goods.‖ For all intents and 

purposes, the Government is proposing in this Bill to outlaw the right to strike for most of, if not all, the 

wholesale employees in this province. The provision is much wider in scope. It is designed to prevent 

the union members or anyone who may be sympathetic, although not even a union member, from giving 

assistance to workers who are on strike, either against the carrier or against the producers of goods. 

 

As I read the amendment to the Act, it appears, Mr. Speaker, that the eleven Roman Catholic priests who 

recently published a leaflet may be subject to penalty under the provisions of this law. Mr. Speaker, let 

me jut find the leaflet I want to refer to. These eleven Catholic priests are very much concerned about 

the California grape workers. They have endorsed the strike of the California farm workers against the 

grape owners. If, as a result of the concern of these eleven priests about the plight of the grape workers, 

some of our members in Saskatchewan employed in the food wholesale industry refuse to unload 

California grapes, which are brought in by truck, or if our members 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1629 

refuse to load California grapes, they could be charged with aiding, abetting and counselling – an unfair 

labor practice. 

 

Let me read you the pertinent provision of the proposed Section 9, Subsection (5) which states: 

 

It shall be an unfair labor practice for a trade union or an employee or a group of employees for any 

reason whatsoever to refuse to take delivery of goods from a carrier or to refuse to assist in the loading 

of a carrier of goods for the shipment unless the board is satisfied that the union or the employee or 

group of employees has a valid dispute with the carrier. 

 

Well in the case I have mentioned, the carrier would not be involved. It would be the employees of the 

wholesaler. 

 

Section 10 presently reads: 

 

No person, 

 

Take note of this: 

 

No person shall take part in, aid, abet, counsel or procure any unfair labor practice. 

 

Section 13 presently provides for penalties up to $200 and up to one year imprisonment and $25 a day in 

case of a refusal to abide by the order. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the leaflet issued and paid for by the eleven Roman Catholic priests. Let me quote 

briefly the message. At the top of the leaflet is a picture of a hungry California grape worker‘s child. It 

says: 

 

Every California grape you buy helps keep this child hungry. Don‘t buy California grapes. 

 

What is this message doing in your Sunday Bulletin? There are 400,000 farm workers in California, 

most are Mexican Americans, black Americans and Philipinos: the greatest number of them are mere 

children. Canadians buy 20 per cent of the grapes picked by these unfortunate laborers. The Catholic 

Bishops of the State of California have issued two major statements re-affirming the workers‘ right to 

organize and strike when necessary. 

 

This ‗No California Grapes‘ circular is endorsed and personally paid for by the following Regina 

priests: Little Flower Parish – Fr. Deutscher; St. Peter‘s Parish – Fr. Sullivan; Sacred Heart Parish – Fr. 

Gibney and Fr. Gorski; Canadian Martyrs – Fr. Reilly and Fr. Koep; Good Samaritan – Fr. Slezak; St. 

Joseph the Worker – Fr. Murphy; Holy Trinity Parish – Fr. McGrath; St. Charles – Fr. Charette; St. 

Cecelia – Fr. Lucey. 

 

For issuing this leaflet, they could be guilty of an unfair labor practice and subject to the penalties I have 

just quoted, which include up to one year of imprisonment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan Liberal Government‘s anti-labor laws have no limits. They exclude no one. Nothing is 

sacred, except the 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1630 

protection of the employer, the corporate elite, the free enterprise masters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Let me further describe in some detail the implications of this Section. If employees of 

a trucking firm go on strike, but the employer decides to hire strike-breakers and they operate the trucks, 

the proposal is that everyone is compelled to assist those strike-breakers. It doesn‘t matter whether it‘s a 

union or an individual – not even a union member – who refuses to co-operate with the strike-breakers, 

he is guilty of an unfair labor practice. This is how far-reaching this proposed amendment is, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In reference to the 30-days vote provision. Now we are going to have another painful and 

union-crippling provision of government conducting votes after 30 days of the strike. To start with, there 

can be no legal strike now except after a secret ballot vote, where all employees, whether or not they are 

members of the union, must be given a vote. Under the proposed Section 10A, the Labour Relations 

Board is not given any discretion. If an application from an employer, or any employee, not necessarily 

a union member, is made to conduct a vote, the vote must be conducted. The Labour Relations Board 

has no right to refuse. An application by the trade union to conduct a vote is totally irrelevant. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 5:00 until 7:30 p.m. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I was on my feet when time was called for the ceremonies at 5:00 o‘clock. I discussed 

the far-reaching implications of the so-called hot cargo clause that is contained in Bill 35. I told the 

House that the proposed new Section 9 (5) had very serious implications particularly when you read it 

together with Section 10 of the present Act. I mentioned that in this city of Regina, eleven Catholic 

priests published and paid for a circular where they called on the people of Regina and Saskatchewan 

not to buy California grapes. If, as a result of their plea, the workers in my union, working in the 

wholesale shops become so concerned that they would refuse to unload or load California grapes, these 

eleven Catholic priests could be charged under the terms of The Trade Union Act for aiding, abetting, 

counselling or procuring an unfair labor practice. If they continued to do that, they could be subject to 

unfair labor practice charges, to penalties up to $200, thereafter $25 a day so long as they persisted in 

continuing their campaign, and thereafter, they could be subject to imprisonment up to one year. This is 

how far these amendments go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to discuss the far-reaching implications of another provision to which the 

Minister did mention that he will submit some House amendments. However, since we have not seen the 

House amendments, I can only discuss it in the form that we now have it in the Bill. There is going to be 

another painful and union-crippling provision of government-conducted votes after 30 days of the strike. 

To start with, there can be no legal strike now in the Province of Saskatchewan except after a secret 

ballot vote has been taken where all employees, whether or not they are members of the union, must be 

given a vote. Under this proposed Section 10A the Labour 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1631 

Relations Board is not given any discretion whatsoever. If an application from an employer or an 

employee, not necessarily a union member, is made to conduct a vote, the vote must be conducted. The 

Labour Relations Board has no right to refuse such a vote. An application by a trade union to conduct a 

vote is totally irrelevant. 

 

Why would a trade union make an application to the Board to conduct a vote among its members? Any 

time the union officers or members want a vote, a meeting is called to have one. I hope union members 

will still have the right to call a meeting without first getting the permission of the Minister of Labour, or 

the Labour Relations Board. I perhaps shouldn‘t be giving the Minister ideas. This may well be next 

year‘s amendment to The Trade Union Act. This proposal is extremely far-reaching and oppressive. It is 

designed to harass the union members with government-conducted votes on the employer‘s last and 

unacceptable offer. Each day after the initial 30 days, even if the employer offers one cent to one 

employee, the employer may ask the Government to conduct a vote and the union must comply. It is 

designed to undermine the confidence of union officers and union-bargaining committees. The Minister 

tells us that he will have a House amendment requiring only one vote to be conducted after a 30-day 

period. While this perhaps softens the blow, I suggest to the Minister that it is one vote too many to be 

dictated by the Government. Mr. Speaker, what the amendment does is that it legalizes 30-day strikes, 

which I submit is unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the Members of the Assembly to make note of how one-sided this provision is. An 

employer may ask for a vote among the union members and it must be conducted. Yet an employer is 

not required to submit the union‘s offer as a basis of settlement to the company‘s board of directors or to 

the shareholders for a vote. The union or union members do not have a right to request the Labour 

Relations Board that a vote be conducted among the shareholders after 30 days, in the event of a dispute. 

The Minister of Labour admits there are ―modern-day tyrants‖ managing industry. He admits that some 

of them are ―two-faced‖ and are ―less than honest‖ with him and his Department, but he proposes no 

measures to deal with them. 

 

The Federal Minister of Labour discovered and publicly revealed in the grainhandlers‘ dispute that 

senior management was not informed by the company negotiators of the union settlement proposals. A 

vote among the shareholders may have resulted in an earlier settlement, Mr. Speaker. This is a clear 

indication of the double standards of this Government. When it comes down to dealing with trade 

unions, it will compel and legislate that votes must be conducted. Yet when it comes to the employers 

and the shareholders why not provide for the same kind of requirements? If it is good for the trade 

unions to conduct a vote after 30 days and compel them to do it, why not compel employers to conduct 

secret ballot votes among the shareholders and among the board of directors? The Minister of Labour 

(Mr. Coderre) tried to rely on the Rand Commission Report. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the 

Minister that he first of all take note of what is in the Rand Commission Report. First of all it is not a 30-

day provision but a 60-day provision. Secondly, that after 60 days of strike it is proposed that there be 

established a Commission and it would be up to the Commission to determine whether or not such a 

vote should be conducted, whereas in the proposals here in Saskatchewan, the Labour Relations Board is 

given no discretion whatsoever. In addition to 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1632 

this, Mr. Speaker – and this is important – when the Minister talks about the Rand Commission Report 

the truth of the matter is while the report has been submitted to the Government of Ontario, the 

Government of Ontario has not acted and perhaps will not act on the Commission report. Mr. Speaker, 

the Minister of Labour relies on the case as a justification to bring in this harassing legislation. He relies 

on the IWA strike of last fall. Mr. Speaker, what a lame justification, to bring in this kind of oppressive 

legislation because he can only cite one example. This Bill will affect hundreds and thousands of trade 

unionists in this province and hundreds of locals in our province. There is just no justification 

whatsoever. Does the Government always legislate if there is an employer that violates the law or 

engages in some malpractices? Surely one case cannot be said as justification to accuse everybody and 

tar everybody with the same kind of a brush. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I wish the Minister would have told us the whole story in respect of the IWA. 

It so happened I was in Saskatoon when the Department of Labour arranged a meeting to be held with 

the employer and the union. I know that Jack MacKenzie, IWA representative from the West Coast flew 

down for a meeting together with Alex Smith to meet with the Government officials and employers. He 

waited for two days and the employers refused to come to the meeting. I would suggest to the Minister 

of Labour (Mr. Coderre) that if he inquired of his own officials he will find that the employers were 

more guilty in refusing to meet and sit down and bargain in this dispute than the trade union. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — It‘s a weak case, Mr. Minister. There is really no justification. You can cite only one 

example. It is the Government‘s contempt for the trade union movement that is behind this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, repeal of Section 11 (2) is proposed. This was a 1966 Liberal amendment, which no one 

quite understood what it was supposed to do, least of all the Minister of Labour. This Government, in 

1966, was so determined to hack up The Trade Union Act, it didn‘t care what it wrote in and whether it 

made any sense. On the other hand, Mr. Minister, repealing this provision, together with Section 13 (3), 

which permits prosecutions in court without the consent of the Labour Relations Board, may have some 

serious consequences. I ask the Minister to have some ready answers as to why he proposes to repeal 

this provision now, when the Bill is in Committee. One opinion is that, by repealing this Section, all 

Labour Relations Board‘s orders will be enforceable as judgments of a court, including the orders 

requiring employers and unions to bargain collectively. Previously this was not the case. 

 

I don‘t know why the Government wants to repeal the provision which now requires that no prosecution 

shall be instituted without prior consent of the Labour Relations Board. Mr. Speaker, this provision was 

in the Act for almost 25 years. I know of no employers, or not trade unions that have made 

representations for the repeal of this provision. The provision has worked well, it has prevented 

unnecessary referrals to court. The only purpose, as I see it, is to get unions and employers suing each 

other in courts. This is obviously another lawyer‘s pension 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1633 

clause that the Government is proposing. Perhaps this can be called the Liberal Political Patronage 

Clause for the legal profession. It is a clause designed to create conflict, not good faith and good will 

between labor and management. On the other hand, the action is understandable in the light of the 

numerous unfair labor practices enacted by Bill 79 in the year 1966 against unions. It appears the 

purpose of repealing this provision is to permit employers to harass unions in the courts. As always, Mr. 

Speaker, there is something for company unions: Section 30 (5) is amended to give security to company 

unions. Again this clause restricts employees to select unions of their own choice. Other than giving 

security to company unions, the reasons for this amendment are not understandable. Surely, Mr. 

Speaker, if employees want to change their union, they should have the right to shed themselves of an 

organization and the bargaining agreement they don‘t want. The law now imposes the agreement on the 

workers for a period of two years anyway, but the Government is saying they must live under that 

agreement for at least three years. I am convinced that the dirty hands of this Government and their 

friends are the motivation behind this amendment. 

 

This Bill has nothing but bad stuff in it for labor. It‘s an anti-labor Bill in the extreme. This Bill is not 

being introduced because we have any serious labor-management disputes in Saskatchewan. It is 

introduced because of this Government‘s hate and contempt for unions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, shortly after the Government took office, the Premier announced that he was going to 

attach someone to his office as a special advisor to the Government on labor relations matters. You 

know, we have wondered for a long time who that special advisor was. Finally it has come to light. We 

now know who it is. It is none other, Mr. Speaker, but Mr. Ralph J. Purdy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, no! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Yes, Mr. Ralph J. Purdy, Saskatchewan‘s extreme reactionary who at times . . . 

 

Mr. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Nonsense, that‘s a bunch of B.S. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! That was just a little bit too loud. It didn‘t add to the dignity of this 

House, and I hope it will never be repeated. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying the advisor is Mr. Ralph J. Purdy, who makes even the John 

Birchers cringe with his wild-eyed, far right-wing ideas. 

 

Let me quote, Mr. Speaker, from a bulletin issued by the Employers‘ Association of Saskatchewan dated 

February 25th as evidence. Mr. Purdy is the king pin in that organization. Under Item 2 of this bulletin 

under a heading ―Amendments to The Trade Union Act‖ he states: 

 

Bill 35 brought in for the first reading on Thursday, February 20, 1969 proposes certain amendments to 

the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1634 

He then describes the effect of the amendments contained in the Bill and states: 

 

The foregoing amendments 

 

Take note, Mr. Speaker, I want the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) in particular to listen to this. 

 

The foregoing amendments or additions to The Trade Union Act were all included in the Employers‘ 

Association‘s brief presented last November to the Cabinet. 

 

Then he goes on: 

 

Several other amendments suggested by the brief failed to receive recognition. 

 

He then appealed to his employer members to pay up their membership dues. Apparently he has 

difficulty in getting employers to continue supporting him. In the main the supporters of the so-called 

Employers‘ Association of Saskatchewan are those whom the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) 

described as ―modern-day tyrants.‖ Respectable employers have openly told us that they don‘t want to 

be associated with Mr. Purdy, because they don‘t agree with his extreme reactionary ideas and are 

embarrassed by him. 

 

On the other hand, the Premier, Mr. Speaker, accepts him as his counsellor and advisor on labor 

relations matters. Take note of the language which ends Mr. Purdy‘s February 25th bulletin: 

 

The amendments we have been instrumental in securing. 

 

Let me repeat what he says: 

 

The amendments we have been instrumental in securing to The Trade Union Act will benefit all 

employers, but this work costs money and time. May we have your co-operation? 

 

I am prepared to table this bulletin, Mr. Speaker, as well I‘m prepared to table the leaflet I referred to 

published by the eleven Catholic priests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I think it is evidence that people in this House should have access to, to prove what I 

have quoted is completely accurate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, often we have heard from the Premier and other Members of his Cabinet that it is 

important to create a climate for industrial development. We have heard them argue that the reasons for 

some of the amendments to The Trade Union Act are to establish industrial peace. They have said that 

the legislation before has been such that it barred industry from coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote an article that appeared in a magazine called ―The Advocate.‖ I think it has 

a telling story. It says: 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1635 

North Dakota anti-labor laws have hampered the state‘s industrial development and are driving young 

people to areas where they are protected by union contracts. 

 

The State of North Dakota which has had some of the worst labor legislation has finally learned a 

lesson, that bad labor legislation, reactionary labor laws, chase away industry and they chase away 

people. I suggest to the Minister of Labour that he take note of that because we will find the same thing 

is going to be happening in Saskatchewan. Let me continue with the quote. The State Governor made 

this charge in a plea for repeal of the labor laws in his annual message to the Republican-controlled 

Legislature. He said, and let me quote: 

 

We need to be concerned about the wage levels and working conditions, because our own youth are 

judging us in comparison to what is available to them outside of our state. North Dakota labor law has 

not adequately recognized the desirability of working people gathering together to take action to 

improve their lot. The industrial states have recognized the rights of their working citizens. 

 

One of the myths that still prevails in some quarters of our state is that industry will seek to locate 

where sub-standard wages are paid and where working people are discouraged from organizing. 

Nothing could be further from the truth, 

 

said the Governor. 

 

We have tried that philosophy for nearly 80 years of North Dakota‘s existence and yet we still find 

ourselves the least industrialized state in the union. If low wages and weak labor laws protecting the 

rights of workers could attract industry, then we should have been one of the most industrialized of all 

states. 

 

I recommend that we start to rectify that oversight by repealing that law which now denies the majority 

of working people in industry the right to contract with their employers for certain contract collective 

bargaining provisions. Our state labor laws have protected no one but are driving our youth from this 

state to states where they can have such protection. 

 

He carries on and says: 

 

Low wage anti-union laws cannot create prosperity. Anti-labor laws do not create a labor supply as 

claimed. During the last 20 years hundreds of thousands of people left low wage areas for the west 

coast where jobs are available at higher wages. Anti-labor laws cannot develop a supply of skilled 

labor where these laws keep down wages and salaries. Many skilled workers leave the state for better 

pay in other areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I concur with the proposition put forward by the Governor of North Dakota. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know the Premier of Saskatchewan often goes across the border. He often used to 

meet with the former Governor Tim Babcock from Montana. I would suggest that he make some 

acquaintances with other Governors in the United States. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1636 

In fact, I know that the Premier of Saskatchewan listens to one of his Cabinet Ministers quite often, the 

Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy). The Minister of Public Works may be interested in knowing that 

the Governor of North Dakota has his name. His name is Mr. Guy. I am very pleased that there are those 

―Guys‖ that do hold some progressive views, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps this debate started today was most appropriately timed. At 6 

o‘clock I listened to the news when I got home and I heard on the CBC news that the Woods 

Commission, the Federal Commission or the Federal Task Force on Industrial Relations, which studied 

the industrial relations in the Dominion of Canada for a period of two years, had just tabled its report in 

the House of Commons. It took two years for Professor Woods and the Commissioners to submit their 

report. It is of significant interest that the Woods Commission does not recommend a single proposal of 

a reactionary nature that is proposed here in this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, they underscore the right of workers to strike in a democratic society. 

They say it‘s a must for labor to have the right to strike, so that labor can secure a measure of freedom. 

To be able to secure a measure of justice strikes must be preserved. There is nothing in that report that in 

any way suggests such measures as are proposed here. There is no suggestion for the sort of ―hot cargo‖ 

clause. There is no proposal for 30-day votes to be conducted. In fact, it is interesting that the 

Commission completely rejects the idea of compulsory arbitration as a basis for settlement of disputes. 

The Commission does recommend that there be a permanent Commission established which would 

investigate disputes that have been in existence for a long period of time in the so-called essential 

industries, and that the Commission would report and recommend a course of action, and to use their 

influence to assist in the settlement and also make recommendations to the Government. 

 

I was interested in the observations of the Federal Minister of Labour, Bryce Mackasey, who said that he 

does not propose to proceed with any kind of legislation immediately. He said if legislation is going to 

be introduced in the field of industrial relations out of this report, it will not be until the next session of 

Federal Parliament. 

 

Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with what happens here in Saskatchewan. The Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) last July established a Committee of three employer representatives, three employee 

representatives, a former Deputy Minister as chairman. Before that Committee had a chance to examine, 

to study and submit a report, the Government has already taken action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the introduction of this Bill, Bill 35, is an expression of non-confidence 

by this Government in the very Committee it established. 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1637 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of Labour in fairness to the working people of 

Saskatchewan, in fairness to the Committee that he himself appointed, to withdraw this Bill. It is totally 

unjust, it is totally unfair, it is totally unnecessary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Withdraw the Bill, Lionel! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — The Minister of Labour admits that we don‘t have any serious problems. When he 

introduced the Bill, he told us that there are employers who are opposed to this Bill. Why not withdraw 

it? There is no reason for it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What for? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few things about the Minister of Labour and I want to pay 

a compliment to him. I know that it‘s a wee bit difficult except that I do want to acknowledge that the 

Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) has learned a fair bit about labor in the last while. I know that he was 

extremely prejudiced towards unions and towards labor, but progressively he is finding out that unions 

are not always at fault. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You‘re learning, Lionel! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — He acknowledged in his speech he made earlier during this session – and to that 

extent, I congratulate him – that he had opened his eyes and his mind a wee bit. But he still holds quite a 

few deep prejudices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister can help improve industrial relations provided he sheds himself of the 

prejudices that he holds and provided he influences his Government. I ask him to say, ―Gentlemen, let‘s 

stop. We have gone too far. There is no justification for this kind of legislation.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the opening remarks during this debate, I appealed to the press to document the record 

of this Government in the field of labor-management relations law. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — In closing, I appeal to them again. My remarks should not in any way be interpreted as 

any criticism of the working press. I have had a good relationship with the men who write the news 

stories. I would hope that in the period to come they will be able to influence the people they work for to 

document and print clearly the story of this Government in the field of labor legislation, because it is a 

record that stands out very distinctly as the worst in the Dominion of Canada in recent years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I again plead with the Minister to withdraw this Bill 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1638 

and to persuade his colleagues that this legislation is totally unnecessary. If he does that we will 

commend him for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious I cannot support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Member from Regina North 

East (Mr. Smishek) up to a point. He suggests after a lengthy documentation of the position of labor in 

the Province of Saskatchewan, both organized and unorganized, that the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) should withdraw the Bill, and I commend that thought to the Minister. He should withdraw the 

Bill. I don‘t think he should be afraid of establishing a precedent because he‘s withdrawn labor Bills 

before in this Chamber. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — And we will thank him if he is about to withdraw the Bill. However, here is 

where the Member for Regina North East and I part company. I do not believe that this Minister of 

Labour has learned a thing about labor since I‘ve been in this Chamber. He still has narrow policies. He 

still displays a bigoted attitude about labor in this Chamber and outside of this Chamber. He comes into 

this Chamber and he makes wonderful speeches. He attacks labor and he attacks management, equally 

on each hand, but he speaks with a forked tongue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Forked tongue! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — His actions speak so loud that I can‘t hear what he‘s saying about how good he is 

in the field of labor relations. I oppose the presentation of Bill 35 and I shudder, as I am sure other 

Saskatchewan workers do, every time this anti-labor reactionary Government of Saskatchewan says it 

will amend The Trade Union Act. 

 

The Trade Union Act served the working people of Saskatchewan admirably during the years we were 

in power. Our record in industrial harmony was superior to the other areas of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — As I have said before, this Government‘s actions in the field of labor legislation 

were characterized by haste, by carelessness and in addition the changes they propose were ill-advised 

and anti-labor in approach. Earlier this session when the Member from Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) 

was speaking on changes made in The Trade Union Act since 1964, the Member from Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Coderre), the Minister of Labour, was heard to comment from his seat, ―They had the approval of the 

Committee,‖ when the Member from Moose Jaw was referring to amendments that were made in The 

Trade Union Act prior to this year. The Minister of Labour shouted across the Chamber, ―They had the 

approval of the Committee.‖ I assume he meant that the Government Committee of Review on Labor 

Legislation was the Committee he was referring to. If that is the basis of this Government‘s acceptance 

of new legislation, then this Bill, not having had 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1639 

the approval of the same Committee, if we are to be consistent, should be withdrawn and not proceeded 

with at this time. 

 

In support of this plea, I want to put on the record a copy of a letter I have received from the 

Saskatchewan Building Trades Labour Legislative Review Committee. This is a copy of a letter sent to 

the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) – and I don‘t think the Minister of Labour will be putting this 

letter on the record of the House – so I will take the opportunity to do it for him, because I think it 

should be recorded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The letter is addressed to the Hon. Lionel Coderre, Minister of Labour from the Saskatchewan Building 

Trades Legislative Review Committee established by the Saskatchewan Building Trades Councils. The 

chairman is John Hart, the secretary is M. Upton. This is dated on February 24, 1969 and the body of the 

letter reads as follows: 

 

As you are well aware, the Saskatchewan Legislative Review Committee is composed of members 

from the two building trades councils in Saskatchewan. We are speaking for a considerable number of 

people who have a like interest. I am directed on behalf of this Committee to write you and 

respectfully request you withdraw Bill No. 35, an Act to amend The Trade Union Act or to refer this 

Bill to the Labor-Management Committee on the Construction Industry in Saskatchewan. It was our 

understanding your Government would not proceed with any legislation in connection with The Trade 

Union Act during the course of the present session or until such time as the Labor-Management 

Committee brought in a report or recommendation. 

 

We are convinced any further amendments of a regressive nature to The Trade Union Act will only 

create more unrest in labor relations rather than assist in the development of improved labor relations 

in the province. Therefore, we again respectfully request Bill 35 be withdrawn or referred to the Labor-

Management Committee on the Construction Industry. 

 

And this is signed by the secretary, M. Upton. 

 

I have another letter from the Saskatoon Typographical Local No. 663. Mr. Speaker, the letter is a letter 

to the Minister of Labour. He has a copy. If anyone requests it in the House I will table it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Minister of Health apparently requests the tabling of the letter. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Who did? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I have a letter here from the Saskatoon Typographical Union, Local 663, which I 

will table if anybody requests it. It is addressed to me. The covering letter is addressed to me and it says: 

 

Re Bill 35, our Local urges that action on this Bill be postponed at least until Committee reported. 

International 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1640 

Typographical Union, Saskatoon No. 663, signed by Helmut Gebhardt, 320 Second Street East, 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 

 

This letter supports the same general position that I have put forward at this time. I would launch an 

appeal to the Government Members because I think the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) has his mind 

made up on this. He is going to try to push it through. I would make an appeal to all Members on the 

Government side to seriously consider the words that were spoken by the Member from Regina North 

East (Mr. Smishek) on the labor situation in Saskatchewan. Considering the past history of labor 

harmony in the Province of Saskatchewan, I plead with the Members opposite to withdraw this Bill or 

postpone it until they‘ve heard from their own Committee on the matters that are under study at this 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, when it became known that The Trade Union Act 

was to be amended again this year during this session of the Legislature, the general consensus was that 

further attempts would be made to weaken and to erode the long-established rights of Saskatchewan‘s 

organized workers, organized wage and salary earners in the Province of Saskatchewan. This judgement, 

Mr. Speaker, was based on the fact that over the past number of years this Government has had an 

almost instinctive ability to choose a course of action that is harmful to the trade union movement in 

general in Saskatchewan. 

 

When the printed Bill appeared, Mr. Speaker, all doubt was removed. In less than two printed pages 

there are incorporated at least three principles which must be regarded as a deliberate move by this 

Government to weaken the entire concept of collective bargaining, to exclude greater numbers from the 

collective bargaining unit, and to intimidate and to render ineffective any group of employees, who are 

in dispute with management and who have found it necessary to withdraw their services. 

 

When this Government contends, Mr. Speaker, that it is not anti-labor, we need only to recall the many 

extreme and the many biased positions that were assumed by the Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Coderre) and his party, when they were in the Opposition in this Legislature and when he assumed the 

role of labor critic. 

 

This bias and instinctive contempt for working people has become even more apparent during those 

years since the party opposite assumed the reins of Government. This hostility has not been restricted to 

highly paid and well organized workers either, Mr. Speaker. An attack has also been aimed at those who 

have no organization to represent them and are at the bottom of the wage scale. Unorganized workers 

have been betrayed by this Government. We have seen the cost of living rise at an ever-increasing pace 

and at the same time the Government has ignored the need to adjust the minimum wage in any 

meaningful way in order to keep pace with rising living costs. Where Saskatchewan was once a leader 

with respect to minimum wages, we now assume a low spot among other Canadian provinces. Hospital 

workers who are close to the bottom of the wage scale across Canada and indeed in our province, too, 

have been placed in an economic strait jacket with the passage of The Essential Services 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1641 

Emergency Act some months ago. With their basic rights removed or restricted, their organization 

becomes something perhaps just a little better than a debating society. This Government, Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest is courting a disaster. There is a limit to the tolerance and to the patient endurance of these 

workers, and the Government need not be surprised if the major problem manifests itself within the next 

few weeks or this next few months. The responsibility for most of the discontent can be properly laid at 

the doorstep of this Government and the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) in particular. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation that is before us provides further evidence of the intention of the 

Government to weaken and to erode the trade union movement. The Act provides for the exclusion of 

yet another category of workers from the collective bargaining unit. It makes provision for excluding, 

and I quote: ―an individual having the status of an individual contractor.‖ I expect it will be difficult, Mr. 

Speaker, to detail all those workers who are presently included in the unit which will be excluded, 

regardless of their personal conviction or their personal wishes, if this Act receives the approval of this 

Legislature. 

 

I presume the individual, who is purchasing a truck with which he transports petroleum products, will be 

excluded regardless of his wishes, or a janitor or a caretaker, who contracts to provide a service for a 

given sum of money, will no longer have the right to be part of an organized group regardless of what 

his wishes may be. 

 

Members of this House, Mr. Speaker, officers of trade union organizations and members of the legal 

profession have been frustrated and appalled by the inconsistent judgements which have been made in 

recent months by the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board. If this is the body that is to make decisions 

with respect to those employees, who fit into a category of an independent contractor, then I share the 

feelings of apprehension with many other Saskatchewan people. 

 

I believe many people, Mr. Speaker, will wonder and marvel about the anxiety of this Government to 

restrict the membership of a variety of organizations and associations. We remember well the eagerness 

of this Government to provide for the exclusion of supervisory and semi-managerial employees from 

collective bargaining agreements in the past. We remember well, as does the teaching profession, how 

the Government attempted in legislation a year ago to exclude principals and other supervisory 

personnel from the teachers‘ bargaining unit. These people are included to ask, Mr. Speaker, why the 

Government insists upon sticking its nose into areas that are properly not within its jurisdiction. 

 

The second principle contained in this Bill which has shocked those who are sensitive to the basic rights 

of others is the provision in this legislation for the laying of an unfair labor practice charge against an 

individual or a group who for any reason whatsoever refuses to take delivery of goods from a carrier or 

refuses to assist in the loading of a carrier with goods for shipment, unless the Board is satisfied that 

those involved have a valid dispute with the carrier. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the objection to this kind of a provision is so obvious that I‘m sure even the Minister 

of Labour 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1642 

(Mr. Coderre) can see the practical impossibility of bringing a legal dispute to an amiable solution under 

these circumstances. This legislation not only provides the machinery for strike breaking, Mr. Speaker, 

but it provides a penalty by law if the employees in dispute refuse to destroy their own position in the 

dispute. It simply provides, Mr. Speaker, that these employees in dispute refuse to destroy their own 

position in the dispute. It simply provides, Mr. Speaker, that these employees under the threat of legal 

action must become scabs in conflict with their own personal and collective interests. 

 

Surely, Mr. Speaker, even the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) and this 19th century reactionary 

Government must recognize that the days of chattel slavery are in the past. Industrial workers in 

Saskatchewan are no longer slaves or bondsmen. It‘s many years, Mr. Speaker, since recognition was 

given to the principle that no man could be put to work by force, by threat or by intimidation. Similarly 

it was recognized many years ago that workers have the right, if legally and orderly executed, to 

withdraw the only asset with which they have to bargain, namely, their labor. 

 

This Government, Mr. Speaker, is attempting to reverse decisions which were rendered several 

generations ago. They‘re dedicated, I‘m afraid, to fighting old battles which workers won a century ago 

and which have been accepted over the whole of the free world. 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated by others speakers in this debate, has an enviable 

record with respect to time lost as a result of labor-management disputes. It‘s to be hoped that this might 

continue. But let it be recognized, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre), and let it be 

remembered in the light of the acts of scorn and contempt by this Government that, if trade unions and 

other people are to act responsibly and respectably, this will happen only when they are treated with 

respect and concern. 

 

The provision in this Act which obliges workers to load or unload a carrier under the threat of an unfair 

labor charge, has the smell of autocratic dictatorship about it. I suggest to you that, rather than hastening 

the settlement in disputes, it will have the effect of a prolonging the dispute, where employees in dispute 

with management are obliged by law to load and unload trucks delivering crude oil and perhaps trucking 

away refinery products for a refinery operated by a skeleton staff of supervisory personnel. I think it can 

be indicated, Mr. Speaker, that this has no doubt the element of prolonging a strike. The provision will 

make it possible to starve workers into submission and make it unnecessary for management to exhibit 

even the slightest evidence of bargaining in good faith. 

 

I think, when we‘re talking in terms of passing this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that there is a fundamental 

question that we must ask ourselves before the vote is taken on the second reading on the principle of 

this Bill. And that question is: do we consider it desirable for management and labor to reach agreement 

in the most expedient and the least troublesome manner in case of labor-management disputes? If the 

answer is Yes, then we may be certain that this objective will not be served by voting for the legislation 

that is before us. 

 

The third provision contained in the Act that I feel I must 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1643 

pass a few comments on is also a provision which ensures that there will never be a strike of short 

duration in the province if this provision is acted into law. Section 4 of the printed Bill provides that any 

time after a strike has been in progress for 30 days, the trade union, the employer or the employee may 

apply to the Labour Relations Board to have a vote conducted to determine if a majority of employees 

are prepared to accept management‘s final offer. In simple terms, Mr. Speaker, this provision is 

designed to take advantage of the financial pressures that are exerted upon workers and their families 

when they have been without a pay cheque for a month. This provision will destroy any initiative by 

management, I suggest, to attempt to reach a settlement until 30 days have elapsed. At that point in time, 

management may offer a crumb to the employees, arrange for a vote to be taken by the Labour Relations 

Board or a person appointed by the Board. This provision, Mr. Speaker, I suggest will rule out almost 

completely the possibility of any strike of short duration or the possibility of an honest attempt to settle 

the dispute during the first 30-day period. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, if it is understood by all interested parties, cannot, I am sure, recommend 

itself to either of the parties who are normally involved in industrial disputes. It appears, Mr. Speaker, 

on the face of it to pour fuel on a smoldering fire rather than to solve any of the problems which 

normally fall within the scope of labor-management relations. 

 

I hope that the Minister (Mr. Coderre), before he closes the debate on second reading, will indicate 

where this inspiration for the legislation actually originated, as I‘m convinced that the measure will 

create confusion and sharpen conflicts rather than lessen tensions as they presently exist. 

 

If the Minister has received some bad advice – and I‘m convinced that he has – then I‘m certain that 

he‘ll be able to count on a good deal of support if he should decide to withdraw the Bill. If he finds 

himself unable to take this course of action, then I will most certainly be obliged to vote against the Bill 

on second reading. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I might at this time be allowed to adjourn the debate. 

 

Motion to adjourn negatived. Debate continues. 

 

Mr. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition ): — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the Premier is anxious to 

continue this particular debate so as a result we will accommodate him in his desire. 

 

If I may say so, Mr. Speaker, this is the first occasion when we‘ve had an opportunity to discuss it. It 

was only a few hours ago that the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre), introduced it and gave us the 

advantage of his explanation on second reading. I might also mention that as recently as noon today, 

assurance had been given to the House that we would be in Estimates all afternoon and all evening, and 

that as recently as yesterday we were not given any assurance whatsoever with respect to this Bill being 

under discussion today. As a result perhaps there may be longer speeches than they would otherwise be 

because they may not be as well and as concisely prepared. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1644 

I say if that‘s what the Government wishes, if that‘s the way the Premier wants to play the ball game, 

then there are a lot of us quite prepared to play it that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, so far as the direct legislative effects of this Bill are concerned, they have 

been well interpreted and well exposed by my colleagues who have already spoken in this debate. The 

Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) went to a considerable amount of work to enlighten this 

Legislature with respect to the meaning of the various changes in law which this Bill will produce. 

Certainly nobody who wishes to see a developing healthy industrial climate in this province could be 

happy with the kind of prospect which we have. Certainly everybody who wants to see good industrial 

relations between employer and an employee in this province should support the request made that this 

Bill should be withdrawn and forgotten about at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — It‘s been already mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that the Government had given commitment to 

segments of the trade union movement in the province that this Bill would not be introduced at this time. 

In other words the Government has broken faith with a very substantial number of people in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

My colleague from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) read just a minute ago a letter from an 

organization representing a very large number of working people in Saskatchewan. It was a letter which 

the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) received on February 24. It was a letter which said, ―It was our 

understanding your Government would not proceed with any legislation in connection with The Trade 

Union Act during the course of the present session or until such time as the Labor-Management 

Committee brought in a report or a recommendation.‖ And it is suggested that this assurance, that there 

would be no labor legislation brought in until this committee reported, was given to other groups of 

working people as well. In spite of that, the Government seems insistent on rushing ahead regardless of 

what it said to working people and their working organizations in this province, that it would do. That‘s 

a little bit hard to understand. It is, I may suggest, Mr. Speaker, legislation which was conceived in haste 

and shaped in confusion and it should not be proceeded with at this time or later in this particular 

session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — One reason why I have made reference to the particular letter from Mr. M. Upton, 

secretary of the Saskatchewan Building Trades Council, secretary of the Saskatchewan Building Trades 

Legislative Review Committee, I believe, is a letter accompanying the copy of the letter which I 

received. It was a letter to the Hon. Minister of Labour. As I‘ve said, Mr. Speaker, accompanying that 

letter was a letter addressed to myself along with a number of other Members of the Legislature. Those 

Members included all of the Members from Regina City. They included all 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1645 

of the Members from Saskatoon City. They included those Members because the letter says, ―The 

majority of people we represent are citizens of either Saskatoon or Regina.‖ I think perhaps the 

accompanying letter which was attached to the copy of the letter sent to the Minister of Labour ought to 

be read as well. Listen, Mr. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre), Mr. Premier, Members from Regina and 

Saskatoon over there, what a large segment of the working people in this province think of you now. 

Think of this action. The letter says: 

 

We feel the Government is showing a real lack of faith in the Labor-Management Committee they 

appointed last July to delve into the problems with industrial relations in the construction industry. It is 

our understanding this Committee was assured no legislation would be introduced during the present 

session in respect to The Trade Union Act. That we find Bill 35 having been read once and due for 

second reading on February 28 of this month. 

 

The letter goes on: 

 

We definitely feel that under the circumstances this Bill should be referred to the Labor-Management 

Committee on Construction Industry for their study and possible recommendations in respect to it in 

their report to the Minister at such time as it is submitted. 

 

There is this rather significant paragraph, I think. It‘s addressed, I may say, to those Members who sit 

across the way from Regina or Saskatoon. The paragraph says: 

 

Trusting you responsible people will see your way clear to support us in our request to our Minister. 

 

I‘m going to wait with very much interest to see whether the Member from Saskatoon City Park-

University (Mr. Charlebois) is going to support this group of his constituents and their request to the 

Minister. I‘ll wait with considerable interest to see what the Member from Nutana Centre (Mr. Estey) 

and the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) do with respect to this request from their constituents. 

I shall wait with interest to see what the Member from Regina South (Mr. Grant) and my own Member 

of the Legislature, the junior Member from Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) have to say about this 

particular request. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think we can emphasize too much the effect in attitude which it‘s going to 

have on these people. Here they are. There is a Committee which the Government has set up which is 

looking at The Trade Union Act, and this Committee has not as yet reported. Here is a group of people 

who have been given assurance by the Government that there will be no changes in The Trade Union 

Act this session. Here is a group of people who have been given assurance by the Government that there 

will be no changes until this Committee has reported. They ask their Members that this legislation be 

referred to this Committee which is attempting a survey of the whole field of labor legislation. Here is 

the Government shutting its eyes, going blindly ahead regardless of these requests, regardless of the 

commitments which it made to large numbers of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1646 

Mr. Lloyd: — The Government says it‘s doing this, the Minister says it‘s doing this in order to improve 

relationships between labor and management. Mr. Speaker, I repeat this is legislation which was 

conceived in haste, shaped in confusion and should not be proceeded with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — It‘s legislation, Mr. Speaker, which is a mixture of impudence and incompetence. It‘s 

impudent because of the facts I have just related. It‘s impudent for the Government to proceed when it 

said it wasn‘t going to. It‘s impudent for this Government to proceed when it has a Committee which it 

set up to advise on revising legislation, but the Government says it‘s going to go ahead and it should not 

do so. It‘s incompetent because the Government in this legislation is going to make industrial relations 

worse in this province rather than better. This can‘t be emphasized too much. It is important to have a 

decent climate as between employers and employees. And as the Member for Regina North East (Mr. 

Smishek) pointed out, this has a bearing on the quality of workmanship, on the ability of people to give 

quality work. Whether or not we attract people here who are skilled in trades that we need, whether or 

not they‘re willing to stay here, does depend to a considerable extent upon this industrial climate. This 

Government seems intent and insistent on doing everything it can to make the climate worse. It‘s intent 

and insistent on doing everything it can to handicap industry in the sense that it makes it more difficult 

for industry to get the kind of employees it needs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — This is a particularly important point because there is a lot of competition for skilled 

tradesmen all throughout Canada. We have to compete though we have some rather difficult other 

circumstances. I refer to the harshness of our weather and what some people think of sometimes as the 

lack of interesting scenery that we have to offer people ready at hand. I can‘t for the life of me 

understand why this Government isn‘t bending every possible effort to do the things which will help to 

overcome some of the geographical and other handicaps, why it isn‘t ready to do everything possible to 

build up the kind of climate which will attract here and keep here the best qualified of our workmen. 

That‘s one way in which it could help industrial development very considerably. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, there are some surprising things happening. We know something tonight as 

to where some of the advice on which this legislation is based has come. You know, when I was a kid in 

short pants I learned a little ditty that went something like this: 

 

You can tell the man who boozes by the company he chooses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, you can tell something 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1647 

about a Government by the advisors it chooses. Tonight we‘ve learned that one of its trusted advisors 

with respect to labor legislation is one Ralph Purdy. The other evening we learned that one of its trusted 

advisors with respect to university matters was one Stan Atkinson. When you have a Government, Mr. 

Speaker, that goes to somebody like Mr. Ralph Purdy for advice on labor matters and goes to somebody 

like Mr. Stan Atkinson for advice on university matters, you get a great big question mark about the 

welfare of this province when the Government takes advice from people like those two gentlemen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to raise what seems to me to be an even broader question. I 

think it is time that we took stock in the Legislature and in the Province. I think it‘s time we took stock 

to see all of the various groups of people whom this Government seems to be against. I think it‘s time 

we took stock, that we counted up a whole big list of people whom this Government seems to be worried 

about, whom this Government seems willing and anxious to handicap, and whom this Government from 

time to time has threatened and sometimes punished in one way or another. 

 

The first and obvious group, of course, is the group whom this legislation affects – men and women in 

Saskatchewan who work in our factories and in our shops, in our mines and other places, who are 

combined together in the organization of trade unions. I‘m not going to go back over the list because my 

colleague from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) has already done that. He listed a very considerable 

number of legislative Acts which have been designed to short-change and to handicap union 

organizations. He listed a number of other activities which have been designed to have the same effect. 

 

Let‘s look at some of the other groups who have fallen under the unhappy glare of some Members 

sitting in the Government. We have had, for example, this year, Mr. Speaker, several people over there 

including some Ministers, speak out in sharply critical words about the Saskatchewan Farmers‘ Union. 

They‘re marked down in this Government . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Thatcher: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Leader of the Opposition is 

straying from this Bill. Now what‘s the Farmers‘ Union got to do with The Trade Union Act which we 

are now discussing. With respect I would ask you to keep them in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I must agree that the whole debate ever since it started is wandering an awfully 

long way from the principle of the Bill. I except the Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) because 

he got on the principle of the Bill and stayed pretty closely to it. I would ask other Members to do the 

same. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, my words have been directed towards assessing the impact and the effect of 

the principle in this Bill and the principle of this Bill as it interprets the attitude and the actions of the 

Government. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1648 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And I say, in order to get the full measurement of this Bill, we have to put it along with a 

number of other activities which form the whole parcel of activities of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I suggest that in its attitude to the two groups I‘ve spoken of - we can add the University 

and we can add the teachers group – we have a long list of people in this province whom this 

Government is ready to handicap and has attempted to handicap. An organization of any kind which is 

going to speak with some industry and energy for a widespread group is going to earn the displeasure of 

this Government and be subjected to punitive measures. I want to submit, Mr. Speaker, that these are not 

just isolated groups. I want to suggest it is not accidental that the Government has mounted this kind of 

campaign and in this Bill, this is my point, intensifies this kind of campaign. This Government does not 

want to see strong organizations of people because it knows that as people‘s organizations grow 

stronger, its political life grows shorter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, legislation is of course always important, but the laws in themselves are 

only part of the story of determining what the effect of legislation will be. It is important to have laws 

correctly drawn so that they are clear, so that they can be administered according to the intent of the 

words in the book. But it takes much more than just an adequately and clearly written statute to 

guarantee that a law is going to be useful. There are at least two other important aspects to determining 

whether or not legislation is going to be useful, no matter how well it may be written. 

 

One of those aspects is whether or not the legislation is understood. Another aspect is whether or not the 

legislation is accepted to a considerable extent by those people whom it is going to affect. I want to 

suggest, Mr. Speaker, with the degree of opposition that is evident from trade union groups in the 

province this law can‘t really work well. The Minister is the authority for saying that there are a number 

of employers who also oppose it. This law which is bad to begin with is introduced against the wishes, 

almost unanimous, I would think, to judge from the mail that I am getting about it, of the trade union 

groups. This proposed legislation against the wishes of a number, according to the Minister, of 

employers can‘t really work. It can only create harm and I hope that the Government is prepared to 

listen to the request that it not be proceeded with at this time, that it not be proceeded with at least until 

it is referred to the Government‘s own Committee which has been set up. Surely it is a matter of just 

ordinary common sense and courtesy that that course of action would be followed by the Government. 

 

Now there are other things, Mr. Speaker, which I submit the Government should be introducing at this 

time and which would advance the aims which the Minister (Mr. Coderre) claims 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1649 

he had in mind when he was introducing this legislation. Before I go to that, Mr. Speaker. I want to read 

the opinion of one person to whom I would think the Government ought to listen in this regard. This 

legislation proposes some new controls, some additional controls. It proposes some additional 

curtailments of some of the traditional and respected rights of trade union groups. The question before 

us, I think, is this: does curtailing responsibility as well as rights in this way add to or subtract from the 

danger of industrial unrest in this province? 

 

I want to read a comment by Mr. Bernard Wilson. Mr. Wilson is the Assistant Deputy Minister of 

Labour in Ottawa of the Government of Canada. He‘s described by the Canadian Press as being a 

leading labor relations specialist in Canada. I submit that the Minister of Labour would be well advised 

to listen to somebody who is called a leading labor relations specialist in Canada rather than listen to Mr. 

Ralph Purdy. He would be doing a much greater service to his own ambitions to be a great Minister of 

Labour and to his own Government and his own province if he would seek out the advice of some 

people who have an established reputation. He would make a much better contribution and a much more 

lasting contribution, if he would look at the advice of some people who have had experience in this field 

and who are listened to widely by people all across this country. Well, Mr. Wilson was writing in the 

Canada Labour Gazette last year and what he said, I submit, disputes, contradicts in every way the 

wisdom of that which the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) and the Government of Saskatchewan are 

now proposing in this House. Mr. Wilson said among other things, this: 

 

Certain controls now provided in labor legislation might better be removed than new controls added. 

 

And I want to commend that to the Minister of Labour. He is trying to advance industrial welfare in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. He suggests that this can be done by imposing new Provincial Government 

authority. He suggests this can be done by restrictions on the rights of labor unions to organize and 

manage their own affairs. Here is a man who is described as a leading labor relations specialist in 

Canada saying, ―Certain controls now provided in labor legislation might better be removed than new 

controls added.‖ I ask the Minister of Labour to listen to that statement instead of introducing this 

legislation now. He would be doing his province and his ambitions a much greater service if he were to 

withdraw this legislation now. And he would be doing a still greater service, if following that, he would 

repeal the Bill imposing compulsory arbitration of a few years ago. Mr. Wilson went on to say: 

 

More confinement of labor leads to more unrest, not less. 

 

And I ask the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) to look at that, to think about, at least listen to it. ―More 

confinement of labor leads to more unrest, not less.‖ Yet this Government is tonight insisting that the 

debate be completed on a measure which provides more confinement of labor. It is insisting on plunging 

headlong down a trail which leads to more labor unrest, not less. One has to wonder why it is so insistent 

in moving in the wrong direction. Mr. Wilson went on to say that ―many of the suggestions to curtail 

labor unrest ignore the basic rights and freedoms of both labor and management.‖ Here we have the 

Government insisting on pushing ahead, to impose legislation which is going to ignore, according to an 

expert like this, the 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1650 

basic rights and freedoms of both labor and management. He points out that it ―was difficult to control 

one factor in the economy while allowing others to remain free,‖ that ―we have not reached the point 

where the wages of labor can be controlled while rents, profits and interest rates remain relatively free.‖ 

And I ask the Minister of Labour to note that statement. 

 

If he were doing his job instead of introducing legislation like this, he would be supporting programs to 

remove some of the basic problems of labor unrest in the Province of Saskatchewan. If he really wanted 

to get at that job, then I think he would be impressing his Government to do something about 

implementing the recommendations of the Batten Commission. He would have been pressing his 

Government to do something about at least holding in check the cost of living. He would at least have 

been encouraging it not to, by its own activities, increase the cost of living. As all of us know one of the 

main difficulties causing the industrial unrest is this increasing cost of living. The Minister of Labour 

should be urging things like that and making a real contribution to industrial stability in the province 

rather than disturbing it and disrupting it, as this legislation will do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — If he wanted to make a real contribution, he would have been pushing his colleagues in 

the Government so that we have enough space in our technical institutes so that young people wanting to 

be trained to get into the skilled labor force wouldn‘t have the doors slammed in their face. A Return 

tabled in this Legislature a little while ago indicated, I think, something like 700 Saskatchewan people 

who couldn‘t get courses they wanted because there wasn‘t enough room. Instead of advancing 

repressive legislation of this kind, the Minister of Labour should be pressing for that kind of activity. If 

he wanted to make a contribution to ensuring industrial welfare in this province he would be thinking 

about the position of working people faced with losing their jobs because their industry is going to be 

closed down. We have already had reference in this Legislature to the closing down of a couple of 

refineries in the Province of Saskatchewan. We need laws, Mr. Minister, which say that in cases of this 

kind the people who work there are going to have a guaranteed period of notice before the plant is 

closed down. We need Government programs which say to these people that, before that plant closes 

down or immediately after, you will have a chance to get retraining so that you will be able to get a job 

in some other occupation, without disrupting and destroying a good part of your life. If the Minister of 

Labour really wanted to do something about creating a healthy industrial climate in this province he 

would be doing things like that, he would be bringing measures like that into the House instead of 

legislation of the kind which he has brought in, which, as I said earlier, was conceived in haste and 

shaped in confusion. Once again, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is a mixture of impudence and 

incompetence. It is legislation that ought not to be put before this House. Certainly it is legislation that 

ought not to be passed by this House. And I add my voice to those who have already urged the Minister 

to withdraw this confused and impudent legislation before it does more harm to the reputation of this 

Government, before it does more harm to the industrial future of this province. 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1651 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to oppose this Bill, I deliberately waited hoping 

that some of the Members on the other side might enter into it. It seems that none of them with the 

exception of the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) is prepared to stand up and support it. I look at the 

Member for Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth). He comes from a city riding. He hasn‘t risen to support it. I 

look at the Member from Regina South West (Mr. McPherson). He sits in his seat. I look at all those 

Members over there, the Member from Estevan (Mr. MacDougall). Yes, another man from the labor 

force, he sits there and says nothing. They sit there and it seems to me with their eyes and ears and 

mouths shut, ready to vote Yes without ever really listening to reason. 

 

I rise to oppose this Bill with a heavy heart. Most of my life I have been a farmer and I have fought for 

the rights of all human beings. I fought for the right to speak or not to speak, the right to organize, the 

right to assemble and to speak as one‘s conscience says to speak. 

 

In 1948 and 1949 I worked, not as a farmer, but in Sudbury for International Nickel. This is a period of 

my life that I will treasure all my life. Not that I enjoyed my work there. In fact I detested it, but it did 

teach me several lessons. I first learned what a wonderful life it was on the farm. I learned a bit of the 

problems of the working man in industry. I learned the lesson that if you were going to get a pay cheque 

full size the next week, you were going to have to work every day whether you were feeling tough or 

whether you weren‘t. If you were sick the next week‘s pay cheque was a small one. I learned too while 

in Sudbury the necessity of a strong union. I talked to those people who had worked there before the 

days of a union and who had fought to get a union, fought for the right to assemble and the right to 

speak as one voice. I listened to the men talk about how the company union tried to wreck them, how 

they spied on them, how they got fired because they dared to try to form a union. 

 

Another lesson that I learned while I worked in Sudbury was that the problems of the man who works in 

the factory or in the mine, in the smelter or wherever he works, or she works are really no different than 

those of myself, a farmer. It was here that I learned that all of us have only one real opponent and that‘s 

corporate enterprise. All of us are dependent on one another. 

 

An old great philosopher once said that the only difference between a free man and a slave was that the 

free man can withhold his labor. Through most of my life I have been one of the minority of one kind or 

another. Through all of my grown life I have fought for the rights of a minority. Through the years I 

have learned not only the desirability but the necessity of people working together, standing together and 

fighting together. 

 

I think of the fight in my own community through the late '30s and the '40s to organize our own co-

operative. I think of all the things done by our opponents to stop us. I remember the strings that were 

pulled to try and stop us. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1652 

I learned also that by united effort we could achieve what we desire. I personally am proud to be the 

Member of a political party which was led by the then Premier Douglas who brought in in 1944 the most 

advanced labor legislation on the North American continent, yes, and by a caucus of nearly all farmers, 

38 of them. They knew that decent working conditions, a decent standard of living for the laboring man 

meant a better living for the farmer. When the laboring man has a decent wage he buys and he buys the 

products of the farmer. As a farmer and as a citizen I will oppose this legislation to the end. To me it is a 

disgrace to our society and it is a disgrace to this Legislature. 

 

Ever since 1964 I have watched with heavy heart the erosion of the rights of the individual by this 

Government. Piece by piece it has been chipping away at the rights of the individual. I have watched the 

divide-and-rule tactics of this Government. I have watched it divide communities, teacher against 

trustee, teachers against the community, labor against management, farmer against laborer. 

 

I say it is the Liberal party of this province that is out to make our province a class society. This 

Government knows that this is the only hope. It knows that, if labor and teacher and taxpayer and farmer 

and small businessmen unite, it is done for. So it set out to keep them apart. It stirs up dissension, it is 

going to castrate good labor legislation. It set out to make it harder for people to organize. It passes 

legislation so that strikes can be broken. Why, I ask you? I‘ll tell you why. It‘s the payoff for its 

corporate friends who ask for such legislation – the Manufacturers Association, the mining companies, 

the Chambers of Commerce and their friends. This is the reason that the Minister of Labour stands up 

and brings in this awful legislation. 

 

He always talks how he defends the right of the worker. He sounds as though he thinks the workers‘ 

enemy is the union. How blind can he be? I ask him. The union is the worker, all the workers banded 

together. The Minister says he is the supporter of the co-operative movement. If he is he knows the co-

operative movement is a band of people sticking together for the common good and the labor union is no 

different. It is a group of people banded together, working together for a common good. I know that 

many Members on the other side of the House cannot understand this, but I did have thoughts at one 

time that the Minister of Labour might. I have always respected the Minister but for the life of me I can‘t 

understand how the Minister can stand in his place and bring in a Bill like this Bill. Before I would do 

that I would resign the portfolio. I then could face the world with no shame and I could use a mirror 

when I shave in the morning. I say again this legislation is a disgrace to this House. 

 

The Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) so eloquently pointed out the evils of the 

legislation and I have no intention of dealing with it clause by clause. But I do want to reiterate what he 

has said about the new Section which will make refusal to unload merchandise by other carriers illegal. 

He cited the example of the Mexican fruit pickers of California in the pamphlet put together by 11 

priests in this city. I am proud to associate myself with these dedicated men and with the Mexican fruit 

pickers. I spent some time in Southern California down through the Salten area. I saw how these people 

have to 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1653 

live, the conditions that they have to work under and who are their masters. They are not fruit farmers 

that these people work for. The fruit farmers have been swallowed up long ago by a few large fruit 

companies. Incidentally these are the same fruit companies that control the fruit industry in Guatemala 

and the fruit grown there. And here we have in Saskatchewan a Government that will pass legislation 

that will betray the workers not only of Saskatchewan but laboring people everywhere. I watched 

Mexican fruit laborers picking carrots with a white man as a foreman. Every time one straightened his 

back he was cursed by that foreman. I saw it and I heard it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning that I have spent a lifetime fighting for the underdog and I will 

continue to do so whether they are here in Saskatchewan, or in Africa or in California or anywhere else 

in the world. This Liberal Government and the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) at every opportunity 

endeavor to smear the working man and the labor unions. Every time there is an increase in prices, labor 

is blamed for it. 

 

I was interested to read in the last issue of The Dome Magazine of the Civil Servants of this province, 

the March issue of 1969 on page 35, and I want to quote from that article. Everybody is talking about 

labor pushing up the price of things we buy and I am going to quote from page 35 of The Dome and the 

heading is, ―$57.85 is a New Car Labor Cost.‖ I will now read the article: 

 

Until recently the U.S. Government was unable to get information regarding the cost of manufacturing 

a car from the automobile manufacturers. Now, however, the U.S. Senate investigators claim that 

thanks to the help of Ralph Nader, the fearless author of ―Unsafe at Any Speed‖, they have come up 

with what it really costs to build a car. 

 

It is reported that one example, the Ford Galaxy, cost $1,360.38 to build. The most amazing part of the 

report on the breakdown of manufacturers‘ cost was that labor cost per unit in the car factory averages 

$57.85! Every time the auto manufacturers raise the price of cars it is certainly not because of 

increased labor costs, because in most cases the annual car price increase is more than the total labor 

cost of manufacturing the car. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just another example of how labor is not the criminal. When one looks at the profit 

sheets of the industry, one finds who is the criminal. Actually the productivity of the labor force is 

greater than ever before in the history of man. The Hon. Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) 

referred to the news broadcast of today reporting that the Woods Commission has been tabled in the 

House of Commons. Another thing that was mentioned over the news is that the Woods Commission 

says that there is no evidence that collective bargaining contributes in any way to the increased costs of 

living. I say again that this Government is passing this legislation to satisfy its corporate masters. It has 

been brought in to erode the rights of the individual. It is being brought in to satisfy the lust for profit. It 

should be thrown out of this Legislature. It is a shame and a disgrace to the democratic process. I will 

oppose it with everything I have as long as I have breath. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1654 

Mr. Coupland (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words in support of this Bill. 

After sitting here listening to this, I don‘t know just what you would call it, that we have been listening 

to for the last while in this Legislature. The Members Opposite seem to think that this is anti-labor 

legislation. I say it is pro-labor legislation. I say this because with this legislation the actual worker will 

have a say whether he wants to go back to work or not, or whether he has to sit by while some labor boss 

is running around the country and his family is suffering. You know, Mr. Speaker, it is sort of a biased 

argument that comes from the other side of the House, because we know these fellows are married to the 

labor unions. This is why these arguments come from across the way and they don‘t want any legislation 

passed that may infringe on the labor bosses. I would like to say that as far as I am concerned, I am 100 

per cent in favor of this Bill, because it is a Bill that will protect the actual worker and the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. I will support this motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the Hon. Member from Meadow Lake 

(Mr. Coupland) that he read the history of the labor movement from the Industrial Revolution in the old 

country and through the United States and Canada before he makes statements that he has made at the 

present time. 

 

Mr. Weatherald (Cannington): — From the 18th century. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Any Government, Mr. Speaker, that is contemplating legislation of the kind and 

character of the Bill now before us in Bill No. 35 would do very well and would be very well advised to 

take a long hard look at the accomplishments of the Swedish Government in its relationship with both 

the employer and the employees. I think most of you are aware that I had the privilege and good fortune 

of visiting Sweden last summer and of seeing first-hand the result of these policies as between labor and 

employer, as they work for the good of the nation as a whole in that country, and of Sweden‘s success in 

bringing the worker and the employer to the wage discussion table. Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize 

that the wage discussion table is not necessarily a bargaining table. The Swedish Government has 

accomplished the feat that so many of our anti-labor people say could never be done, of placing 

responsibility on both the employer and the employee, not only the responsibility but the privilege of 

sitting down together and sitting down with representatives of the Government. The result is that strikes 

in Sweden are virtually unknown, but not outlawed. I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that they are 

unknown but not outlawed. 

 

Another thing that I want to emphasize is that there is no waiting for six months or a year after a contract 

has run out until everyone‘s nerves are frayed and tempers are hot, before they sit down to the 

discussion table and before new agreements are drawn up. Sweden, as I have said, placed both 

competence and responsibility in both the wage earners and the employers. Wages and profits are 

discussed and set, not by arbitration and not by fighting such as we have witnessed here in 

Saskatchewan for the last four or five years, not by the mailed-fist approach, but they are discussed 

according to and set according to the 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1655 

level of the economy of the country. Because of this responsibility on both parties they have come to an 

understanding. This I believe, Mr. Speaker, is the one greatest factor in Sweden‘s success in the 

economic and the fiscal policies of that country. The wealth is spread more evenly throughout the 

nation. Instead of being piled up in large bank accounts it is constantly on the move through the entire 

nation. I am going to say right now, Mr. Speaker, it was a joy to experience the lift and the buoyancy of 

Sweden‘s economy. And remember that that little country over the last 20 years has developed policies 

such as this until they have taken second place in the world of today as regards the highest standard of 

living. We Canadians held that up until two years ago. They have now, with about 7 million people and 

a terrain that knows nothing about production for quantity that we know, been able to raise the standard 

of living of their people higher than we Canadians enjoy. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the policy of the present Government in Sweden is responsible more than their 

economic policies as I said a moment ago, for the wellbeing of her people and for the buoyancy of her 

economy. If this Government and the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) compare what the Governor of 

North Dakota had to say along with the success of the Swedish Government, surely they can see there is 

a better and a more democratic, a more successful approach for the Government, employers and 

employees than we have represented before us in Bill 35. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I plead with the Government to withdraw this Bill and try a new and a different, but not an 

untried method of bringing the bargaining people to the table where they can discuss these wage 

policies, wage standards, wage levels always in connection with the economy of the nation as a whole. 

 

Sweden attracts and holds the best of her brains, the best of her minds. These people find scope for their 

ability. They find a place to work and to improve the economic level of the country that they love and 

have no desire to leave. I ask this Government; can you do less? I would welcome policies such as I 

mentioned that are used in Sweden that would bring to this province, to this country, the same kind of 

economic buoyancy, the same kind of a happy relationship between employer and employee. As a 

farmer I have always maintained that labor is the agriculturist‘s best friend. If labor has buying power, 

Mr. Speaker, the farmer doesn‘t have to worry too much. In order to prove that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — . . . I would just like to go back to a situation prevailing during the last World War when 

beef was at the highest price level so far as the produce concerned that we have known. It was not the 

quantity of beef that was being shipped overseas that brought about strong prices. It was the fact that 

never in the history of labor did they have the wherewithal to purchase beef in the quantities that they 

did during those years. And never was the beef industry on a sounder foundation sofar as the producer 

was concerned. 

 

Repressive legislation, Mr. Speaker, such as Bill 35 defeats these fundamental and basic factors in a 

sound, buoyant economy such as I saw in Sweden, the privilege that I won‘t forget for 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1656 

a long time. I plead with this Government instead of using the strong-arm approach to let us try and 

create a better understanding between labor and management and Government. 

 

I shall vote against this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Will the Member answer a question before he takes his 

seat? 

 

Have I been misinformed by the statistics that Sweden has the highest alcoholism rate and the highest 

rate of suicides in the world, the Sweden to which you refer to so frequently in your speech? 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, it might be a little higher than some others but very, very little. Nothing 

that the policies have anything to do with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, I have just a few comments to make on this Bill. 

 

First of all, I am rather surprised that the Bill is attracting the attention and the concern of the Members 

opposite that it has. Now I am not an expert on labor union matters, but I do respect fairness to all 

parties involved in any dispute. When I look at this Bill, in Section 3, where they are saying it shall be 

an unfair labor practice for a trade union or a group of employees for any reason whatsoever to refuse to 

take delivery of goods from an independent carrier – these people are not in dispute with that individual 

carrier – I don‘t expect that the individual carrier‘s rights should be interfered with in a dispute 

involving two other parties. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, when I look at Section 4 where after 30 days on strike another vote can be held, 

I have known people involved in strikes that have lasted longer than 30 days and I know that many of 

these people would have welcomed an opportunity to reconsider their position at the end of 30 days. 

Now this is a free vote, Mr. Speaker. It can be called by the trade union, it can be called by the 

employer, it can be called by the employee or the employer. The majority of the people concerned will 

vote and their decision will hold. I think that is fair play. Mr. Speaker, in listening to some of the 

comments offered, it seems that they are trying to build some huge case on something relatively 

insignificant. I think the fact that several speakers have gone down to California and referred to the 

Mexican grape pickers to help their argument and couldn‘t use anything a little more concrete or a little 

more personal as far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned, is an example that I think that it is in 

pretty poor taste that they have been showing on Bill 35. 

 

Now again I only want to make my feelings clear on this matter. I read and studied the Bill. I had an 

opportunity to talk even to Members opposite on this Bill and I am convinced that this Bill means fair 

treatment, not only for the trade union and the employers, but for all of the people in the 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1657 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Speaker, I rise for the first time in this Assembly and I 

do so tonight against the advice of my doctor. However, I feel that I have to get on my feet to say a few 

words in regard to what some of the Members opposite have said this evening. I refer first to one of the 

comments made by the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) when he said that those of us on 

this side of the House hate labor. 

 

I would like to assure him that I personally, and I think that I can speak for everyone of my colleagues, 

have as much of the laboring man‘s interest at heart as anybody sitting on that side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hooker: — I say so because today I am a farmer. However, I wasn‘t always a farmer. I would say 

that I spent more time carrying a lunch bucket than 95 per cent of those people on the other side of the 

House. I know what it is to get up in the morning, take your lunch bucket and go to work. I know what it 

is to be without work. I know what it is to ride a freight train from one place to another. It hasn‘t always 

been that easy with me. I want to tell you one thing about labor unions. 

 

I think I probably held a labor union card long before anybody over on the other side of the House. 

There might be one or two individuals, but no more. In 1937, and you people here know what conditions 

were like in 1937, I was in Seattle, Washington and at that time it was hard to get a job. Some of you 

may wonder why I happened to be in the United States. Well to qualify that I will say this. I was foreign 

born of American parents and I had dual citizenship up until I voted in Canada and then I became a 

Canadian. I had worked in California for years before this and I was in Seattle and jobs were hard to get. 

I went out on my own to find a job. I went to a sheet metal factory and I asked the foreman if he had a 

job for me. He asked me a few questions, wanted to know where I came from and I told him. He wanted 

to know what I did before and I said, ―I had been on the farm but things were dry and I was looking for 

work.‖ He said, ―Sure I will give you a job.‖ He said, ―Have you got a union card?‖ And I said, ―No.‖ 

Well he says, ―I am very sorry this is a closed shop. I can‘t hire you.‖ But he said, ―If you can join the 

union come on back and I will give you a job.‖ So I said, ―Where is the union office?‖ And he told me 

where it was. I went down to the union office and I asked to join the union. Do you know what they told 

me? They said, ―Are you working?‖ I said, ―No.‖ ―Well how do you expect to join the union if you are 

not working?‖ And I said, ―Well this is a fine how-do-you-do. I have a job that I can‘t have because I 

don‘t belong to a union, but I can‘t join the union because I am not working. Where does that leave 

me?‖ He said, ―Figure it out for yourself.‖ And you people over there tell me that the unions give people 

the right to work. I was deprived of the right to work by a union. From there on I went over to British 

Columbia and got a job with a pulp and paper mill. While I was there, there wasn‘t a union when I first 

started to work. During the winter the union organizer came up from Vancouver. He went around talking 

to different individuals and we had a meeting. I went to that meeting. It 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1658 

was all cut and dried and the first thing that we knew we were in a union. 

 

I had a friend whom I had known before I went there, who was, I would say, a little deeper color than 

just pink, he was plum red. I happened to be at this house this night when this union organizer was there. 

And do you know what that fellow came out and said? I heard it with my own ears. He said the only 

reason that this union is organized at this time is to have these people ready for Socialism when we are 

prepared to give it to them. Now that is the type of union that they had there. I lost my job in that mill 

because of that union. The union said that the last man on was the first man laid off. That company kept 

me on all winter and fought with the union and finally came and said, ―Well, we are sorry but we will 

have to let you go.‖ The union said that the last man on is the first man off. He said, ―We have tried. We 

have spent a lot of money on you, teaching you how to run the machine and now we have to let you go 

and keep some of these other people on. You know how good they are.‖ And I said, ―Yes, I would have 

fired them the first week I was here if I had been the boss.‖ 

 

Another thing that I would like to say is that it doesn‘t take long working in an establishment to find out 

who is carrying his weight. When that union was formed every one of those fellows, that I said I would 

have fired the first week, turned out to be shop stewards. Now I haven‘t anything against the working 

man. I didn‘t have anything against that sheet metal man that I would have been working along with, but 

I certainly have something against the organization of those people who were running that union that 

deprived me of the right to work. I had nothing against the fellows that I was working with in Powell 

River but I certainly didn‘t appreciate the fact that I had to lose my job because I belonged to the union. 

So you may say that I am against labor unions. I am to an extent. I am not against the working man, but I 

am against some of these labor bosses. 

 

Now we just went through a debate yesterday where the people in this House were condemning the 

United States. They were condemning the United States for this, that and the other thing. But I didn‘t 

hear one person on the other side of the House say one word about the money that is going out of 

Canada into the labor unions in the United States. Not one word! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hooker: — Another thing when we were talking about the damp wheat, I heard the Members in the 

back row get up and talk about the congestion at the terminals in Vancouver, how much money the 

farmers will be losing because of demurrage. I didn‘t hear any of them saying anything about 1966 when 

they had a strike out there at the Coast. I happened to be there. I was down on the waterfront. They were 

saying that there were 19 ships in the harbor that couldn‘t get wheat. In 1966 there were 65 ships in that 

harbor and there was all kinds of wheat at the terminals, but because these people went on strike they 

couldn‘t load the boats. I was in one of the terminals talking to one of the men from the Board of Grain 

Commissioners, I looked down and saw a boat sitting there. I remember the name very plainly. It was 

the Grecian Flame. I said, ―How long does it take you to load that boat?‖ ―Well, that particular boat has 

been in this terminal many times. If we load it with straight grade we can load 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1659 

it in two days.‖ He said, ―If we have to change grade it takes three days.‖ He said, ―That boat has been 

sitting there for 13 days and it wasn‘t filled yet.‖ I went down and went on that boat. It had a big tube 

coming down. There was a man sitting there and a man sitting over there with a hold half the size of this 

room. There was a stream of wheat coming out of that spout. I could have put more wheat in with a 

seven inch wheat auger or shovelling it myself – that is up until last year. One fellow would pull it over 

on this side and the other fellow would pull it back. This went on until the Harbour Commission closed 

the harbor and the longshoremen were out of work. 

 

Nobody knows and I tried to find out from the Canadian Wheat Board what that cost the Canadian 

farmer. That strike alone. I couldn‘t find out. I guess that it wasn‘t in the public interest and I don‘t think 

it was in the public interest because, if the farmers had ever found out what that strike in Vancouver in 

1966 cost them, the strike this year would have been peanuts. 

 

I resent the fact that people label me as somebody who is against the laboring man. I am certainly not 

against the laboring man, but I am certainly against you fellows that put yourselves out as laboring 

bosses. I am telling you another thing that if it wasn‘t for the laboring bosses probably we wouldn‘t have 

so much trouble with labor. A lot of these people are satisfied but you fellows won‘t allow them to be 

satisfied. We have places right in the city of Regina that don‘t have a union. They have what they call an 

employees‘ organization. They pay fees, yes, but they pay it into their own organization. They bargain 

the same as any other union does. Every year they go to the management and say . . . 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Fun is fun and all that, but I am wondering when the Member is going to make some 

reference to the piece of legislation that is under consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! I have listened to this whole debate and it has ranged very widely. I think 

that the point of order from that side of the House is very well taken. 

 

Mr. Hooker: — I haven‘t been to Sweden yet, Mr. Speaker. I am staying on the North American 

continent. Right now I am in the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I might add that I will grant the same freedom, the same human liberty, and the same 

right to speak and say their minds to all Members of this House. Now you have all ranged all over the 

map and that is the way you are going to stay until the thing is over. 

 

Mr. Hooker: — But I was talking about this organization right here in Regina that pay their money to 

their own organization. They use their money to put on Christmas parties for the families. They use their 

money to put on days during the summer when they take their family out to barbecues. Now I imagine 

these people have as good working conditions as the fellow who is working in a union shop. I am not 

denying the fact that labor unions haven‘t done a lot of good. But I say that sometimes they go 

overboard 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1660 

and they are doing a lot of harm. I think that this legislation that we have before us right now is 

protecting the fellow that wants to go to work. 

 

I assure the Members on that side of the House that I am going to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to take part in this debate, notwithstanding the remarks of 

the Member for Touchwood (Mr. Meakes). 

 

First I want to say that there is no intention in Section 10A of this Bill to abrogate the rights of the 

working man but to add to his rights. Where a strike continues for 30 days the union, the employer, or 

any employee, can apply for a vote to be conducted to see if the strike should continue. What can be 

more democratic than that? 

 

The scourge of the new and enlightened free enterprise world is strikes and everyone will tell you that. 

Strikes cost the economy millions of dollars. They add to the cost of living, they demoralize the worker, 

they cripple the financial means of the employer and they deny the government millions of dollars in 

taxes. I say to this House that we don‘t want big capital or we don‘t want big labor in our economy. We 

want production for the economy and good wages for the workers. All this Section does is put 

reasonable limits on the actions of the labor unions. How this Act betrays the workers is beyond me. It 

helps the individual worker if he has the assurance that he can call for a vote to see whether a reasonable 

settlement can be made and he can go back to work. This piece of legislation and Section 10A in 

particular is what the majority of the people of Saskatchewan want. This is an agricultural country and 

you just have to think of the great prolonged strike of the J.I. Case Company in 1947 that lasted for 27 

months. It almost bankrupted the Case Company. Most of the workers left to find employment 

elsewhere and it did bankrupt thousands of Case dealers in the United States middle west and Canada. 

Farmers couldn‘t get machinery at a vital time when they needed it following the war. 

 

Legislation such as this would have terminated the Case strike in a matter of days. There is no piece of 

legislation more necessary right across Canada than is contained in Section 10A. The trouble with the 

Members opposite is that their thinking on labor and unions has never changed since the days of Eugene 

Debs. Everyone in this House is proud of the role that the unions have played in raising wages and 

working standards for the employees. But the working man has come a long way and enjoys in this 

province and in this country one of the highest wage rates in the world. What the working man wants is 

not lost working days and reduced pay cheques but more working days and bigger pay cheques and 

cheaper goods. The biggest scourge of the country is union-dominated strikes like the grainhandlers‘ 

shoremen‘s strike and the Seaway workers‘ strike, which awarded almost a 35 per cent increase and 

created a precedent three years ago that forced up wages and prices all along the line. What this Bill 

does is put reasonable restraints on labor union bosses and frees the independent worker to think for 

himself. The Bill will free the working man from the strait-jacket he 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1661 

finds himself in today. 

 

Now the other Section on hot cargo, I don‘t intend to speak about it because it is not a subject with 

which I have any particular knowledge. I am as enthusiastic as the Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch 

(Mr. Hooker) who rose, as he said against his doctor‘s orders, to deliver what I considered was a moving 

speech because this is what he felt in his heart this country wanted. I am very pleased to be able to take 

part and support Bill No. 35. 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Will the Hon. Member permit a question before he takes his seat? 

 

Mr. Heggie: — No. 

 

Mr. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, we have done a great deal of speaking on this side of 

the House and we had wanted to solicit comments from the other side of the House on this Bill. We are 

fortunate now to have had one or two comments from Members opposite. We certainly would have liked 

some more comments of the type that we have had from Members opposite. We may get them yet. I 

certainly hope that every Member over there speaks and gives his view on this Bill. I hope that they do 

illustrate their views on this Bill. I hope that they illustrate that they haven‘t been following the debate, 

if they comment as the Member for Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) did, because he evidently wholly 

missed the point of the allusion to grape pickers. The comment there, Mr. Speaker, was not that anyone 

had to go to California to bring this problem to bear, but that under the legislation brought in by the 

Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) it was entirely possible, if grapes came into the Safeway store in the 

Northgate Shopping Centre in Regina by Soo Freight Lines, and the employees of the Safeway store 

declined to unload those grapes, they would be guilty of an unfair labor practice and might be fined or 

imprisoned. And that‘s at the Northgate Shopping Centre and not in California. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The further comment was that, if clergymen such as the ones mentioned by the 

Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek), persist in suggesting that we ought not to buy these 

grapes, they themselves might be guilty of an unfair labor practice, as counselling a breach of contract, 

and this is as I read the Act. What he was saying was that this legislation could be read as imposing 

penal sanctions on half a dozen clergymen in Regina. And the Member for Last Mountain (Mr. 

MacLennan) sees no more relevance in that than the grape pickers in California. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — He obviously wasn‘t following the argument. Now, Members opposite have made 

some rather remarkable comments. I thought the Member for Notukeu-Willowbunch (Mr. Hooker) made 

his remarks in a very sincere way, but I think that he sincerely illustrated the fact that he himself has had 

some unfortunate, as he would view them, experiences with trade unions and accordingly he does not 

like trade union organizations. He felt it unfortunate 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1662 

that seniority rules should apply, that the fact that he was hired last meant that he had to fired first when 

the lay-off comes. This is the bedrock of seniority. However unfortunate it may work out in an 

individual instance, it has been found to be the bedrock that organized workers have had to rely upon in 

order to protect themselves from management favoritism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Members opposite may think that it‘s a deplorable principle, but it‘s written into 

every contract negotiated by every one of those gentlemen over there on behalf of Crown corporations 

and on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. And I am rather surprised to hear a Member opposite 

launch an attack, however disguised, on the principle of seniority as included in a trade union contract. 

 

I was also in referring to the comments of the Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch and for the Member 

for Hanley (Mr. Heggie) distressed at their one-sided view of strikes. It may be that the increase granted 

to the Seaway workers was excessive, but this wasn‘t granted by anybody but a Liberal Government at 

Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — They must have thought that it was a proper increase. They must have thought that 

this was reasonable. They had the full power and weight of the Parliament of Canada to send those men 

back to work if it was not a reasonable increase. Now, sure, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the Seaway 

workers wanted to get an increase and the fact that after mature consideration the Government of 

Canada decided that that increase was the right increase, hardly proves that the unions abused their 

position. There was, as I say, the full weight of the Parliament of Canada to turn back any abuse which 

may be found in that situation. Then there was suggestion about the grainhandlers‘ strike. Well, we‘ve 

already heard the comments of relatively impartial people on that, namely, Mr. Mackasey and Mr. 

Olson, insofar as the Lakehead grainhandlers‘ strike was concerned. They said that at least half and 

probably more of the fault lay with the companies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am not suggesting that trade unions by their actions don‘t precipitate strikes. 

Obviously they do. It is their weapon against unreasonable actions by management. And it is entirely 

possible that in any given strike it may be more than half the union‘s fault, but it is equally entirely 

possible that it may be more than half the company‘s fault. And this fact seems never to be recognized 

by Members opposite. Each of those persons who have spoken in attributing the tie-ups to a strike have 

then made the next mental jump and attributed the strike to the unions. Now I suggest that there is no 

more reason to attribute a strike to unions than to management. It takes two to tango, as they say, and 

unless the Member has analyzed the particular facts in a particular case, it is grossly unfair of him to 

ascribe to the trade union the entire fault of a work stoppage resulting from a labor dispute or a strike. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1663 

Mr. Blakeney: — This is what they have done again tonight, and they have done it with respect to 

strikes where the best independent analysis – and this is true not only of the grainhandlers‘ strike at the 

Lakehead but at the one in Vancouver in 1966 – indicated that at least half of the fault lay on the side of 

management. Now if this isn‘t true, if Members feel that these strikes were the fault of trade unions, 

please, and I implore the Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) and the Member from Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) or whoever else is going to speak in this debate, to stand up, take one of those disputes, 

analyze the issues and say that in his view it was the union‘s fault. Let him say that Mackasey is wrong. 

Let him say that Olson is wrong. But I think that‘s not fair. I think that the best evidence is that there 

was fault on both sides and that this is one of the prices which we pay for a free collective bargaining in 

a free society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — The farmers can‘t . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, if you say the farmers can‘t afford freedom, then I think that you misrepresent 

the views of the farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Farmers are as much dedicated to the principles of a free economy in the sense of 

every person having a right to work or not to work, to labor or to withhold his labor and to sell his 

product or to withhold his product as anyone else in this economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Weatherald: — . . . starve to death . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, obviously farmers can starve to death by that method, and obviously workers 

can starve to death by going on strike. And don‘t think a worker decides to go on strike just for the fun 

of it because, as the Member for Cannington (Mr. Weatherald) rightly says, they can starve to death that 

way. And they don‘t undertake a strike lightly. To suggest somehow that a strike is just a little frolic that 

organized workers engage in now and then in order to break the monotony of a steady 50 weeks of 

work, I think grossly misrepresents the thinking of the vast number of trade unionists in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think, Mr. Speaker, it‘s altogether too evident that Members opposite do not keep 

any sense of proportion as to the amount of time lost by strikes in this province. In Saskatchewan, my 

figures indicate, there are about 20 days of lost time per man per year. And of this, 29 minutes of these 

20 days is due to strikes and 19 days and 7½ hours is due to accidents or sickness or unemployment. If 

Members opposite would devote as much time to endeavoring to solve the problems of industrial 

accidents or sickness or unemployment as they do 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1664 

trying to tilt at this windmill of lost time due to strikes, this province would be very much healthier in its 

economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal I want to say but I want to turn my attention to some 

of the points in this Bill. I want to deal with Section 10A first because it was mentioned by the Member 

for Hanley (Mr. Heggie), and because it seems to me that he has either not read the Section or does not 

appreciate its import. What does this Section say? It says that where a strike has continued for 30 days, 

the trade union or the employer or an employee may ask for a vote. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What‘s wrong with that? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I will tell you in a moment what‘s wrong with that. Firstly, as for the trade union 

having a right to ask for a vote, I‘m glad to see that in there, but it is somewhat superfluous. A trade 

union can poll its members at any time. 

 

Mr. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — And does! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And does if they wish to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — All right, we know how, all right. The next question is, the employer can poll the 

employees. He can cause them to be polled. All right. I read the whole of this Section and I saw no 

countervailing Section which allows the trade union to have the shareholders of the company polled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I saw no Section there which allows the trade union to ask for a vote, and after all it 

takes two to settle a strike. 

 

Hon. Mr. Guy (Athabasca): — Takes two to tango! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That‘s right as the Member for Athabasca so wisely quotes me. It takes two to tango. 

I want to say that it seems to me that, if we give the employer the right to go into the internal 

management of the union it is surely only fair to give the union the right to go into the internal 

management of the company. You will say, ―Well, that‘s just playing with words,‖ and in part, that‘s 

true. And it‘s true in part because a company is not normally a democratic organization. Shareholders 

normally follow in a completely docile way the directions of the board of directors. So that maybe it 

doesn‘t matter whether the union can precipitate a poll of the shareholders, although I think a fair section 

would have provided that. But, what by inference then is this Section saying about trade unions. It is 

saying that they are not undemocratic, that they are in fact democratic, that their members are in fact 

able to control their management, unlike a company. 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1665 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And how this contradicts the statements about labor bosses which are so frequently 

and insistently made by Members opposite. But, Mr. Speaker, I want Members to look at this Section 

and to see what it says because what it says is this. It says that after 30 days the employer can cause the 

employees to ballot on the basis of the employer‘s final offer. Now you would say, if the employees 

voted for that, there was a settlement. That‘s what has been implied by every speaker who stood up over 

there, that this is the way to settle strikes. Well, I want somebody over there to read me where in that 

Section the employer is in any way bound to enter into a contract with the employees if they do vote for 

that settlement. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do you think . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, I don‘t. I think he‘s got the union over the barrel then. I think he knows. I think 

he knows the limit. I think he has undercut, at this point, the leadership of the trade unions and he is 

under no obligation whatever to settle on those terms. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald (Attorney General): — Now who‘s trusting . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I think that I don‘t in the course of a labor dispute trust either side. Quite 

frankly, I don‘t. I have been advising people on both sides of labor disputes and as a matter of fact I‘ve 

advised more managements than labor in labor disputes. And after a labor dispute has gone on for 30 

days, there‘s a certain element of no-holds-barred that enters into the picture. If you expect me to rely 

upon the goodwill of an employer who has had a strike on his hands for 30 days to enter into a contract 

on the basis of his last offer, when he‘s under no legal obligation to do so, and when he‘s just won a vote 

which has undermined the union leadership, then you‘re asking me to rely on something which I think 

no trade unionist in this province ought to be asked to rely on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If, Mr. Speaker, the Members opposite will put into this Section and, if this is offered, 

then the employer shall be bound to enter into a contract on that basis, that will help it a bit. At least 

there will be some little measure of reciprocation. But I want you to look at that Section and see just 

how one-sided it is. It in effect says that the employer can cause a vote of employees but not that the 

employees can cause a vote of the shareholders of the employer. Oh, no. It provides that there shall be a 

vote in which the employees commit themselves formally and by majority vote, so that their ability to 

take a bargaining position after that is effectively killed, but it commits the employer to nothing. It 

commits the employer to nothing. What employers will do will be to find one employee and have that 

employee ask for the vote. Then there will be a vote and the employer will be in the happy position of 

being in no sense bound by this. 



 
March 26, 1969 

 
1666 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Would you be happier if this was in the Bill? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I would be a good deal happier and I would know that there was some little 

recognition that you ought to make labor legislation reciprocal in its burden. But I have seen what the 

Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) brings into this House on his own hook and I can see that this is 

completely and totally a one-sided section. And how else can I reach any other conclusion but that this is 

a piece of legislation aimed at trade unions and at working people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It‘s all very well for the Member for Meadow Lake (Mr. Coupland) to say that this 

gives certain rights to employees, but all it does is give them a right to disclose their minimum position 

to the employer, without the employer being in any sense obligated to disclose his position to the other 

side. That‘s the old game of someone playing cards with his friends but the only thing is is that the 

friend‘s cards are face up on the table and his are close to his vest. And this is a nice little bit of balance 

which the Minister of Labour brings into this House and asks us to say that that is fair and reasonable 

labor legislation. 

 

Mr. Snyder: — Ralph Purdy special! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That strikes me, Mr. Speaker, as very much a Ralph Purdy special. And Mr. Ralph 

Purdy, as I think we know, has the distinction, as I last checked the record, of having his public relations 

company struck off the record and . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Isn‘t he back on? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, no, he‘s back on the record. I‘m going to say that he was struck off the record 

and restored to the record more times in less time than another other company in Saskatchewan I know. 

In fact he has been on the edge of legality for seven or eight years now. I only wish he would approach 

the edge of sanity in this approach to these problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the other Section of this Bill that I wanted to comment on at this 

time was the Section 2 of the Bill dealing with independent contractors and I would like to know what 

this Section is all about. I would like to know and I would have wished the Minister had explained in 

some rational way what this is all about, because certainly independent contractors now cannot be 

included in a bargaining unit, unless the independent contractor has so little independence that the 

Labour Relations Board decides that they are employees. Now let‘s be very clear on this. There‘s no 

right to certify at this time independent contractors unless at the same time they come under the effective 

direction and control of the employer, and only so-called independent contractors, and I say ―so-called,‖ 

who are 



 

March 26, 1969 

 

1667 

under the effective direction and control of an employer, can now be included in a bargaining unit. 

Surely if a person, while he may be called an independent contractor, is so effectively under the control 

of an employer as to his direction, as to the time in which he works, as to the way in which he works, 

that the Labour Relations Board appointed by the Government opposite, which has no particular tender 

feelings for trade unionists, decides that these people are so lacking in independence that they are in fact 

employees; if these people must not be excluded from the rights of trade unionism, what in heaven‘s 

name is a Trade Union Act for? What in heaven‘s name, Mr. Speaker, is The Trade Union Act for? 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. 


