



















































Hansard: March 25, 1969


1473 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

36th Day 

 

Tuesday, March 25, 1969 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o‘clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Wildlife Insurance 
 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Barrie) if he would give some consideration to some type of extension of wildlife 

insurance through the ordinary channels. There is still a lot of swath out and there will be a lot of 

damage this spring by ducks. I have had several letters and some representation from people all around 

the Northwest, the Wilkie area. I think that it is only fair that at least for those who had insurance last 

fall it should be extended to the spring and possibly there should be some provision made for this 

untimely spring harvest. 

 

Hon. J.R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources): — I will be pleased to discuss this matter with the 

Minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office who is the Minister for this particular 

Act. 

 

Comment on AGRA 
 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to bring to the attention of the House an item 

in the Department of Industry and Commerce‘s pamphlet called ―Saskatchewan the Growth Province.‖ 

The heading is ―AGRA Listed on Toronto Exchange.‖ It says that its shares of AGRA vegetable 

products in Nipawin were accepted for listing by the Toronto Stock Exchange as of December 31, 1968. 

 

The article says further that AGRA is the second Saskatchewan company to have its shares accepted for 

listing by the Toronto Exchange. I want to point out to the House that both these industries were started 

in the 20 years of so-called Socialist stagnation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I can only say that the former Minister, the Member, 

as usual has his facts wrong. AGRA was financed almost entirely since this Government took office by 

SEDCO loans and we are very pleased that it is one more expansion which is now, as I say, listed on the 

Toronto Stock Exchange. 

 

Mr. Willis: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that this would probably come up so I took the privilege of 

bringing into the House the annual report of the Department of Industry and Information 1964 when the 

Premier sat on this side of the House. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1474 

Mr. Thatcher: — It was almost bankrupt when we took it over . . . 

 

Mr. Willis: — This is a list of new companies which came into production during . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! If the Member has a question he wishes to ask he will have to come to 

the point and ask the question. 

 

Mr. Willis: — I wish to ask this question of the Premier as to whether or not this reference to AGRA 

vegetable oil producing rapeseed oil, rapeseed meal in the 1964 Saskatchewan Department of Industry 

and Information is correct or incorrect. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I would only say that all the expansion took place once we got rid of the Socialists. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 16 - Anti-Ballistic Missile System 
 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition) moved, seconded by Mr. W. E. Smishek (Regina North 

East): 

 

That this Assembly expresses its concern that the proposed construction in North Dakota and Montana 

of an antiballistic missile system would represent a threat to world peace as well as a particular danger 

to the people of Western Canada and especially Saskatchewan, and urges the Government of Canada 

(a) to refuse to participate in such a program; and (b) to use all the means at its disposal to convince 

the Government of the United States that the said proposal would be an escalation of the nuclear arms 

race and a consequent further threat to world peace. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this motion asks the Assembly to express its concern about the proposed 

construction in North Dakota and Montana of an anti-ballistic missile system. I should perhaps say the 

extension of the system with the new installations located at these points. We ask that this concern be 

shown because in our opinion this extension does represent a threat to world peace. In addition it 

represents a particular danger to the people of Western Canada and especially Saskatchewan since we 

are right in the flyway. 

 

On the basis of these concerns the Resolution asks that we urge the Government of Canada not to 

participate in such a program. Furthermore we ask the Government of Canada to use all its influence to 

convince the Government of United States that this proposal would indeed be an escalation of a nuclear 

arms race and a consequent threat, a further threat, to world peace. 

 

As I understand it, Mr. Speaker, the proposal is that there would be installed a few miles south of the 

Canadian border some anti-ballistic missile bases. This system is sometimes referred to as the Sentinel 

or The Safeguard System. In part its purpose is to protect the larger system of ―minute-men bases‖ and 

these ―minute-men‖ are of course prime weapons of offence. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1475 

One of the bases is to be at Grand Forks in North Dakota which is 90 miles south of the Canadian 

border. The other is to be at Great Falls, Montana, which is 115 miles south. The reason for the choice of 

location I gather was so that these missiles could operate over what is called ―a relatively uninhabited 

country.‖ And that, Mr. Speaker, means, in part at least, Saskatchewan. I don‘t suppose that the 

President of the United States has been reading the population reports for Saskatchewan since 1964. He 

might on that basis come to the conclusion that we are relatively uninhabited in this part of the world. 

Those of us here will take issue with this statement. 

 

These bases will be used to launch missiles which will intercept other missiles. These other missiles 

presumably would have been launched by the Russians or the Chinese and they will carry atomic, 

hydrogen bombs if you like. Some of the intercepting missiles which are called Spartans have a range of 

about 400 miles. Others with a lesser range are called Sprint. As a result the interception would take 

place over parts of Western Canada and more specifically over Saskatchewan. Now it is argued by some 

that the interception would take place at such a height above the earth that there would be no danger to 

those underneath. At the same time, however, there are a number of very reputable scientists, including 

past advisors to Presidents of the United States, who say that the flash resulting from the interception 

would blind people on earth, that people would suffer from burns, that fires would be set and 

atmospheric contamination would occur. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the installation presently being discussed appears to be just the forerunner of an 

even larger system Defence Secretary Laird is quoted in The Leader Post of March 20 as saying: 

 

If we find that this missile promises sufficient advantage, we will substitute some improved Spartans 

for the standard Spartan. 

 

Now the standard Spartan has an explosive power equivalent to two million tons of TNT. What the 

improved Spartan has, I am sure I don‘t know. It does, however, seem clear that the standard Spartan is 

considered by some as simply the down payment on a more substantial system. This suggests that we in 

Saskatchewan are going to be part of the testing ground for this new base. We are there, let there be no 

doubt about it. 

 

Let me try to anticipate some of the opposition to this Resolution which may be expressed, Mr. Speaker. 

A few days ago when I raised the question about this in the Legislature, I was told by the Premier in 

effect that this was none of our business. Admittedly the Legislature can‘t pass laws in this regard. 

However, there is nothing to prevent us from initiating some discussion about it. Indeed there are many 

arguments which favour discussion in this Legislature. Certainly public information and public 

discussion which may create more awareness of the problem are of great importance. Nobody in this 

House will of course claim or be expected to claim any profound and detailed military or scientific 

knowledge about it. We do, however, have access to the ideas and thoughts of the people who can 

properly claim such detailed and specific knowledge. Hopefully we may make some contribution, to this 

great problem by talking about it here in this Legislature. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1476 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Oh, bunk! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The Premier says, ―Oh, bunk‖ and that of course is usually his attitude about that sort of 

thing. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I said, oh humm. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Oh, humm. Oh, come! Very well. It all adds up to the same thing, the Premier is 

disinterested and opposed to the discussion of this sort of thing in this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We have nothing to say about it. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I agree. That is one of the great regrets - that the Leader of a political party in this 

province should sit there and say that he has nothing to say about a problem of this kind. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Why don‘t you talk about something that we have something to say. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I happen to be on my feet . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It is a waste of time. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Waste of time! There it is. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Waste of time! A complete waste of time. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Waste of time! There it is. That is exactly the attitude which one expects from the 

Premier of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! If the House is to waste its time, then let us do so in an orderly fashion. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if this is a waste of time, then I for one am pleased to be the instrument of 

wasting some time in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — With respect to discussion in public, let me read a part of a statement by Senator 

McGovern. Senator McGovern, as will be recalled, was one of the nominees before the Democratic 

party for the position of candidate for president of that country. Speaking at a public discussion in which 

he took part, he had this to say: 

 

One of the shortcomings in our defence decisions has been that they have often been made by 

so-called experts without 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1477 

the light of day focused on them. 

 

For a good many years I have been more and more sceptical of the decision-making processes under 

which we commit enormous amounts of money to highly doubtful military gadgets. Even some of the 

loftiest advisors to our defence establishment have over the years demonstrated that they are long on 

theory and short on common sense, compassion and the concern for human interest. 

 

I would hope that the Premier would note some statements of that kind. He refers to another participant 

in this discussion by the name of Dr. Rabi. He says: 

 

If we succeed at long last in building a theoretically airtight defence structure, but in the process create 

the kind of allocation of resources that neglects our most acute domestic problems, we may discover 

that we have built a shield around a value system no longer worth protecting. 

 

It seems to me to be important that we should in this Legislature take note. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a second kind of opposition, in addition to that we are wasting time in talking about this 

sort of thing in the Legislature, may be that this expresses an anti-American point of view. I have just 

quoted the opinion of a very substantial American citizen to the contrary. Let me refer to a number of 

other very influential voices in the United States which in recent days have taken a position comparable 

to that which our Resolution proposes. I can refer to Senator Fulbright, the chairman of The Foreign 

Relations Committee in the Senate, to Senator Stuart Symington the former Secretary of Defence in the 

United States, to Senator Church of Idaho and to a number of distinguished United States scientists. To 

some extent these comments were summed up by Senator Gore. He was quoted on Friday night news 

saying that the ABM was ―a defence in search of a mission.‖ One might have added, or one might have 

paralleled that by saying that it is ‗a missile in search of a mission.‘ 

 

I have looked, Mr. Speaker, for some comment from the Republican Governors or ex-Governors, friends 

of the Premier, but I find that they have not commented in opposition to this position. I find, as a matter 

of fact, that Senator Goldwater has supported installation of such bases. Perhaps this constitutes part of 

the Premier‘s objection to discussing this matter in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to some of the questions which have been raised and some 

of the opposition which has been stated by leading United States figures. There is first of all the question 

raised in the Globe and Mail of the 13th of March of this year. This is a question as to who will make the 

decision to launch these missiles. The Globe and Mail says that the decision to launch the missiles 

would perhaps be made ―by computers, not men‖ according to testimony before the Senate of the United 

States this week. It quotes Dr. Kistiakowsky, who was a science advisor to former President 

Eisenhower, saying that ―many people could be blinded because of a decision cranked into a computer 

years before or because of a decision made by a junior 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1478 

officer.‖ The position is summed up by Dr. York who told the Senate group that the power to make 

certain life and death decisions is passing from statesmen and politicians to more narrowly focused 

technicians and from human beings to machines. He added, ―The direction that we are going is not 

toward the ultimate weapon but toward ultimate absurdity.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether we talk in the Saskatchewan Legislature or elsewhere, this kind of 

dehumanization of society is certainly something that is of concern to all of us on a very far-reaching 

basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A second question that is raised is whether in effect missiles of this kind do make any 

contribution to defence. May I refer to an article in the Christian Science Monitor of the 11th of March. 

It reports on some of the comments of Senator Stuart Symington, the former Secretary of Defence of the 

United States. He says this: 

 

I don‘t think the ABM will work. But even if it does work, I don‘t feel that it is essential to the defence 

of the United States. 

 

Senator Symington‘s position is backed up by the statement of Dr. Wiesner. Dr. Wiesner was a former 

science advisor to President Kennedy and is presently a science advisor to Senator Ted Kennedy. Dr. 

Wiesner argues that the ABM concept is already obsolete. In doing this, the article says, he joins forces 

with three scientists who have served before him as scientific advisors to presidents, each one of whom 

is opposed to the ABM. 

 

A third question raised is: where is the pressure coming from to proceed with this development? I return 

to a quotation from Senator Symington. He was asked, ―Did he feel that the military industrial complex 

was heavily involved?‖ The Senator replied that ―the ABM made him more apprehensive about the 

military industrial complex than anything that had happened‖ since he had come to government. He is 

joined in this kind of concern, or he is supported in it, by this information which comes from the 

magazine Business Week. That article pointed out that ―some 15,000 companies would produce the 

hardware and support services for the system.‖ They are talking about the larger system admittedly. The 

article adds that ―most of the work will be done by corporate giants.‖ Western Electric Company 

Incorporated, the manufacturing arm of American Telephones and Telegrams, is referred to as one of the 

prime examples. 

 

There is further support for this question of the answer to the question, who is producing the pressure, in 

the New York Times. It says this and I quote: 

 

American capitalists are extremely intrigued. It may mean tremendous profits for American 

companies. 

 

Senator Dr. Joseph Clark of Pennsylvania is quoted as saying this: 

 

The vast new defence pork lunch wagon, maybe the biggest ever, has begun to roll and the investors in 

the stock market know it. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1479 

What is happening, Mr. Speaker, is plainly that here is exploitation of national insecurity and 

exploitation of fear. The old truth is still with us that to keep fear alive means money in the bank for 

some of our large corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quote again from Senator McGovern in this same vein. He called the decision ‗a 

surrender to mounting political pressure from military-minded senators and congressmen and generals 

and armament manufacturers and their supporters.‖ He sums it up by saying ―it would be a national 

blunder of major proportions.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, our particular concern at this point is of course raised by the events and the statements in 

Ottawa last week. The Leader Post on March 20th carried an article headlined, ―Government Mulls 

Joining U.S. Missile System.‖ The Prime Minister is referred to as pointing out that if in the judgment of 

the Government the counter-missile system is a regrettable though necessary step, then we will have to 

decide if we will participate in the system. On the other hand the Prime Minister is referred to as saying, 

that if the situation appears to escalate the danger of nuclear war then, ―We will condemn it and we will 

tell the United States we disapprove.‖ These matters, I suggest, to this Legislature indicate reasons, 

cogent and urgent reasons, for public discussion in our province and for discussion in this Legislature at 

this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now there are two main aspects to the problem and to the proposed Resolution. One has 

regard to the particular danger to Saskatchewan people. We will become part of the testing ground at 

least. In the event of the grim, ultimate reality we will be directly under the intercepting point. 

 

George Ignatieff, Canada‘s chief disarmament negotiator, formerly our representative at the United 

Nations, is quoted as saying that ―the ABM decision puts Canada in a more dangerous position than any 

other country.‖ The Right Hon. gentleman from Prince Albert in the House of Commons, Mr. 

Diefenbaker, drew attention to this in the House of Commons. His suggestion was that the site should be 

moved further south. 

 

If our concern could be confined to just the effects on Saskatchewan people directly, then that 

suggestion would have some added interest. However, our concern can‘t be confined to just what might 

happen in Saskatchewan. It can‘t be because there is a second and a greater danger. That danger rests in 

the answer to the question of whether this development would escalate an armament race. It is our 

opinion, it is one of the reasons for the appearance of this Resolution, that such a development would 

escalate the armament race and we feel that we should take a position in opposition to that. 

 

In support of the contention that it would add to the speed of the armament race, let me quote a 

statement by former Defence Secretary McNamara. He was talking about the total missile system. He 

said in September 1967 this: 

 

Were we to deploy a heavy ABM system throughout the United States, the Soviets would clearly be 

strongly motivated to so increase their offence capabilities as to cancel out our defence of advantage. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1480 

He adds: 

 

It is futile for us (meaning USA and USSR) to spend $4 billion or $40 billion or $400 billion and at 

the end of all the spending, at the end of all the deployment, at the end of all the effort, to be relatively 

at the same point of balance on the security scale that we are now. 

 

I add a further comment from Senator McGovern who says that what ―we ought to be interested in is 

reducing both the costs and the hazards of the arms race.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The present proposal which is being considered does neither. Our Resolution argues that 

both ought to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come now to the question of what we can contribute in this Saskatchewan Legislature. As 

I have already indicated I think we have a responsibility to attempt a contribution at least. 

 

As previously stated I admit we have no direct legislating function. We can‘t pass any laws which can 

have an effect on this. But that is not our whole function nor is that our whole responsibility as 

Legislators. It is true that in a narrow, legalistic constitutional view of our responsibility we can wash 

our hands of it and say that the responsibility is not ours. That is what the Premier is advising and urging 

that we should do. On the other hand in this Legislature we are a part of the machinery by means of 

which Canadian decisions are made. We do represent part of the machinery which formulates public 

opinion and which processes that public opinion into laws and practices which become the disciplines 

under which we live in this country. Surely if anything is indivisible it is world peace. Surely we 

shouldn‘t expect discussions of world peace to be limited by political jurisdictions. As a minimum we 

can hope to create some interest in discussion of this all-important topic. The value of that, I again 

remind you, was mentioned by Senator McGovern in a quotation I used earlier. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there is the effect which this has on our domestic ability. Canadian 

participation in the arms race determines in part the extent to which we achieve or fail to achieve many 

of our national objectives. The extent to which the Canadian tax dollar can be freed from NATO 

obligations or NORAD obligations or added similar obligations, adds to our ability to provide homes, to 

guarantee educational opportunities, to advance the health and welfare of all Canadians. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I say that, in part at least, the achievement of essential domestic objectives depends on 

the capacity and the willingness of Saskatchewan people acting through the Saskatchewan Legislature 

and the Saskatchewan Government. We cannot be disinterested in developments which limit or extend 

our capacity as a Legislature and a Government to meet the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

With respect to these needs I want to refer to a recent article in the United Church Observer. It is by 

Charles H. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1481 

Forsyth who is secretary of the United Church Board of Evangelism and Social Service. This is the 

Observer for March 15, 1969, to which I refer. Many Members of this Legislature will remember that 

this position is one which was previously occupied by the Rev. Ray Hord. Many of us in Regina knew 

him well because he was a minister in our city and in our province for a number of years. Dr. Forsyth 

has reference to the extent to which military-defence procurement distorts our economy and I refer to 

this in the context of my earlier remarks. Those remarks were that one reason for being interested in this 

was that an expenditure of this kind would prevent us from reaching desirable and even essential 

domestic objectives. 

 

Dr. Forsyth pointed out that thousands of Canadians have their jobs tied to the defence hardware 

business. He commented that we live off our capacity to destroy. More particularly he pointed out large 

areas of unmet needs in our society. His reference was to a housing report that leaves its job half-done, 

―a housing report that offers little or nothing to millions of Canadians who earn less than $5,000 a year.‖ 

He reminded us of lakes and rivers polluted. He reminded us of ―the opportunity gap in Canada between 

rich and poor which is growing wider, not smaller.‖ He pointed out that we spend ―more millions of 

dollars betting on horses than we are prepared to bet on people through retraining and education.‖ He 

urges that we should dissent from an educational system ―which spends far more per capita on the have 

children than the have not.‖ He added this very important paragraph: 

 

We should reject the notion that the health care needs of our citizens can be met by a private plan 

approach. Medicare is a human necessity for thousands of families. 

 

Those comments, Mr. Speaker, are relevant here because, as I said before, our capacity to do many of 

these things is limited and can be further limited by the proposals which the Canadian Government is 

now at least considering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Legislature is involved in all those matters to which I have had 

reference. All of them have been discussed during this session. In each and every one of them the 

Government sitting opposite has said it can‘t do the job because it hasn‘t got the money. It said it hasn‘t 

got the money because it can‘t get enough from the Canadian Government. One of the reasons the 

Canadian Government isn‘t able to provide money on a more ample basis for these things is because of 

our commitments to the defence-armament program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a larger and more potent and more compelling reason for discussion of this 

problem in public forums in Saskatchewan. Regardless of what we may do to meet such domestic 

problems there is one essential question to be answered first. That question is: are we going to have the 

time and the opportunity to take care of these problems? I am not referring to time before this 

Legislature prorogues. I refer to time before mankind may prorogue, Mr. Speaker. Because given a 

nuclear war, let there be no doubt about it, mankind will prorogue. The curtain will fall on this 

Legislature, on the Parliament of Canada and all other parliaments. There will be no one to applaud as 

the curtain falls. There will be no one even to turn off the footlights much less to write the epilogue. 

 

Now there is a shifting of opinion, of thought in Canada as 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1482 

to how Canada can help to prevent such prorogation. One spokesman in this respect is a Member of the 

Federal Cabinet and I refer to some of the comments and positions taken by the Hon. Mr. Kierans. My 

reference is particularly with respect to his position on NATO and NORAD. May I refer here to the 

recent issue of Macleans. The premier referred to some of the material in the yellow pages in this just 

the other evening. I could have hoped that he would have gone further and read the article a few pages 

on by Pauline Jewett. Pauline Jewett was formerly a Liberal Member of Parliament at Ottawa. She is, I 

presume, one of those whom the Premier would categorize as a Socialist in the Liberal party at Ottawa. 

 

In this article Pauline Jewett draws attention to what she considers to be a wrong assumption. She 

questions the assumption that the Soviet Union constitutes THE great threat to world peace. She goes on 

to raise the question of some of the other, and, in her opinion I understand, even greater threats. Her 

references are to the hostility between black and white people in this world. Her further references are to 

tensions arising out of poverty and famine and illiteracy in many parts of this world. She points out that 

NATO and other defence alliances are ―terribly isolated from these and like problems.‖ She quotes Mr. 

Kierans with respect to our membership in NATO when he says that this membership ―determines the 

scale of resources we can direct towards the rest of the world . . . and it shapes their attitude toward us.‖ 

 

May I return again to the article by Charles Forsyth. He reports that in 1965 the nations of the world 

spent $140 billion for arms. They spent $116 billion for education. They spent $46 billion for public 

health. He adds that these are issues and situations that ―cry out for clear, passionate speaking.‖ Mr. 

Speaker, I think this Legislature must be interested. I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have a responsibility to 

encourage a desire for clear passionate speaking on matters of this kind by Saskatchewan organizations 

and Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now the recent United States proposal to which my Resolution draws attention, the pending decision by 

the Government of Canada, to oppose this proposal or to take part in this possible development in 

continental armaments-defence, underlines and emphasizes the urgency for thought and discussion. The 

location of this installation, a relatively few miles away from here inexorably and inevitably marks 

Saskatchewan as the location of part of what could be the world‘s last battle. May that time never come. 

All of us will join in that hope. In the meantime we will be part of the testing area. 

 

I want to comment for a moment on some of the basic requirements which are necessary in order to 

advance, or to at least give some more hope, for world peace. It is because I think we, in this Legislature 

can do something about that, that this Resolution is before the Legislature this morning. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that if we are going to have world peace it is necessary to rid 

ourselves of the delusion that war is a possible arbiter in settling the differences between nations. 

Associated with this delusion is the sense of security which comes to some people from the possession 

of the ultimate weapon, poised, pointed and ready to trigger the world‘s last battle. In support of that 

position may I quote from George F. Kennan‘s book, Russia, The Atom and The West.‖ 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1483 

George Kennan was a former United States Ambassador. At one point he says this: 

 

The beginning of understanding rests with the recognition that the weapon of mass destruction is a 

sterile and hopeless weapon. 

 

He adds that this sterile and hopeless weapon cannot in any way serve the purposes of a constructive and 

hopeful foreign policy. ―The true ends of political action,‖ he says, ―is to affect the deeper convictions of 

man. This the atomic bomb cannot do.‖ He says that, ―the suicidal nature of this weapon renders it 

unsuitable both as a sanction of diplomacy and as a basis of an alliance.‖ To further quote from George 

Kennan, he warns that: 

 

a defence posture built around the weapon suicidal in its implications can serve in the long run only to 

paralyze national policy and to drive everyone deeper and deeper into the hopeless exertions of the 

weapons race. 

 

The Resolution which is before us warns against this ―hopeless exertions of the weapons race.‖ May I 

add some more comments to support that point of view. I comment again from Dr. Wiesner, a science 

advisor to former President Kennedy. Dr. Wiesner suggests an alternative to this ―hopeless exertions of 

the weapons race.‖ Instead of extending the missile system he says: 

 

Why not get the same effect by cutting down on the number of offensive missiles? That is the 

alternative and I think it would work. 

 

He adds: 

 

We could say to the Soviets, ―We‘ll cut down a little more if you will cut down a little more. Let‘s see 

whether we both can‘t race in the other direction and see who can count the most empty holes on the 

launching sites ten years from now.‖ 

 

The other comment I make because this is the point at which we are talking, about the possibility of 

speeding up the arms race and the warning against it. It‘s from a Dr. Sherman who is another scientist. 

He says: 

 

I don‘t think it makes much sense to blame either the Russians or ourselves for the escalation. Both 

sides have contributed to the heating up of the arms race. Escalation of arms leads to escalation of 

intention and crisis in various parts of the world. My strong feeling is that ABM will heat up not only 

the arms race as such but the world situation in general. 

 

It is our concern and the concern of this Resolution that this ―heating up‖ of this arms race and world 

tension in general moves us closer to the horrible point of another and a total and a final war. 

 

The second requirement for world peace I submit, Mr. Speaker, is that before real disarmament can be 

achieved there must be psychological disarmament. There must be an ending, at least a decreasing, of 

hysterical hate in the world. Installations of the kind that are under consideration do in my opinion 

encourage 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1484 

rather than diminish the hysterical hate in the world. They exploit our feelings of insecurity. They 

exploit the fear that is rampant in the world in these days. I think that these installations encourage this 

hysterical hate in both of those two large nations, who so largely bestride the world and devote so much 

energy to upstaging each other psychologically and otherwise. Let Canada say and say with passion and 

emphasis that ―the world cannot continue to wage war like physical giants and seek peace like 

intellectual pygmies.‖ Let‘s say in the words of Norman Cousins, President of the World Association of 

World Federalists, speaking about some other psychological and real armaments build up, let‘s say that 

action of this type ―is plainly inconsistent with the requirements for maintaining human civilization.‖ 

Let‘s be advised again by Ambassador Kennan who says: 

 

To believe that a strategy of mutual threats with ever more destructive weapons can, in the long run, 

prevent a nuclear war, and that a society following this road could preserve its democratic character is 

more realistic than the aim of universal controlled disarmament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are two requirements for world peace, I think there is a third one. The third 

requirement is that there must be massive economic aid to those areas of the world where the main 

realities of life are death by starvation or at least deprivation by poverty to an extent that we refuse to 

believe. Admittedly Canada‘s record in helping this situation has improved. Frequently we state our 

intention of doing more. Dr. Forsyth in the article I quoted from before points out that Canadian defence 

expenditure amounts to some three per cent of the gross national product of Canada. He points out also 

that for world development we managed less than one per cent. He makes this observation, ―Collective 

security must be grounded . . . not on overkill capacity . . . but on economic and social mutuality.‖ If 

Canada participates further in this proposal then we put reliance on overkill. Then our ability to advance 

real collective security is restrained. The hope behind this Resolution is that we can build collective 

security, that we gain allies by building people. We can do it by doing those things that save lives and 

endow them with all human potential rather than prepare to destroy lives. 

 

A fourth requirement for world peace is to demonstrate, better than we have done, our ability to solve 

our own domestic problems, some of our shortcomings in this, some of these failures I have already 

noted. For Canada, and even more for a lot of other nations, solutions to domestic problems are 

hindered, impeded and even prevented by our investment in military defence measures. As a minimum 

effort we should try to decrease not increase the present three per cent of gross national product 

dedicated to military defence purposes. Let there be no doubt about it, a Canada of maximum 

opportunity for human growth and development, a Canada with its doors open much wider to people of 

other nations, could increase our influence for world peace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I submit that the final requirement for a world of peace dedicated to the pursuit of sanity 

and sensitivity in all their forms must be for us to move closer to the ideas and the ideals of world 

government. In this respect a minimum and an immediate objective must be the preservation and 

strengthening of the United Nations. Every time that we lend moral or tactical support to the extension 

of the military power of 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1485 

individual nations we carve off part of the potential of the United Nations. Already alliances such as 

NATO and its counterpart represented by the Warsaw Pact, as well as arrangements such as NORAD 

strike dangerously close to the heart of the United Nations idea and the hope it represents. This present 

proposal now under consideration edges closer to the vital organ of that essential organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have tried to demonstrate some of the military effects as they are related by people who 

are close to them. I want to emphasize that it is more than military effects which we need to consider in 

this respect. I have tried to demonstrate the severe effects on the capacity of our country and our 

province to meet our domestic problems as we ought to meet them. But greater than all of these I submit 

is the effect on individuals, personal effects and psychological effects. I suggest that the greatest effect 

here is on our young people. I put forward before in this House the argument that we need to try harder 

to understand young people. You know sometimes we may be inclined to forget that young people today 

for the most part can‘t remember a time when there wasn‘t a serious war going on some place in the 

world. After the Second World War, Korea, and then Vietnam, in the Middle East, all the others. War, 

threats of wars - a psychological war that has been going on for their entire lifetime. I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that a major reason for the alienation of young people today has been the huge expenditure on 

military things which goes on in almost every nation. A major reason for the alienation of young people 

is all that this huge expenditure on military things implies for their future. They question this 

expenditure, not only from the point of view of the effectiveness of the money. They question, many of 

them, the morality of this kind of expenditure. Mr. Speaker, the annual expenditure of $140 billions for 

arms is surely one of the great obscenities which this society of ours has written on the walls of the 

world. It‘s our position, Mr. Speaker, that Canada should use its influence against this proposal. It is our 

position that we should not participate in one more stage of that which has been called the negative 

dynamics of the weapons race. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, my first remarks are those of congratulations 

and commendation to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) for introducing this Resolution and 

giving me the privilege of seconding it. May I also congratulate him on his remarks which were so 

salient at this time and which he presented so ably and so powerfully to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my Canadian citizenship was largely chosen for me by my parents. They emigrated to 

Canada from Poland mainly for these three basic reasons: (1) First, they came to Canada to escape the 

oppressive dictatorships of both the extreme right and the extreme left, which enslaved many of the 

Central European nations for many decades. (2) They wanted to leave behind the serious privation that 

plagued them and the working class population of Central Europe. They came to this country when I 

was only a child, four years old, to seek a better future for themselves and for their children. (3) Above 

all, they left their native land especially to escape the horror, destruction and brutality of war. They came 

to Canada, this new land, to seek peace. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1486 

Mr. Speaker, my father spent seven years in military uniform. First he was conscripted to serve for three 

years in military training and just before being due for discharge, World War I broke out and he spent 

the next four years on the battlefields of Europe. He was seriously wounded. At the same time he 

contacted malaria and for many weeks he lay in hospital unconscious. World War I left scars on his 

body and an indelible impression on his mind, an impression of fear and hate of war. 

 

Ever since, I can remember as a child, he talked and still does, about the horror of war and how wrong it 

is to kill. He taught me to respect life and to realize that life is so short and so precious that there should 

be no room for hate and war, that our place in life as humans is to love, help, and live in peace with our 

fellow man. 

 

It is because of this teaching and experience of real poverty that made me choose to be a Social 

Democrat. Social Democrats have consistently condemned war and those who threatened peace, 

regardless of their political philosophies, whether they be of the far left or the right, Communists or 

Fascists, or capitalists. We abhor war and any escalation of military weaponry, whether it be for the 

so-called defensive or offensive purpose. 

 

If we have learned anything, Mr. Speaker, since the beginning of World War II, it is that for every 

scientific achievement in defensive systems, the next military expenditure is the manufacture of those 

weapons of war that will nullify the defence and render it useless, and so the arms race continues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, up to now we in Saskatchewan were in a position to sit on the sidelines and remain passive 

or be critical observers, but as of March 14th the picture has changed immensely. Mr. Speaker, I believe 

that the decision by the President of the United States of America to locate anti-ballistic missiles near 

the Canadian border to the right and to the left of Saskatchewan is of major importance to the 

deliberations of this Assembly. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I should like to go on record as stating that nothing 

we have talked about here in recent years is of greater importance, because our very survival is at stake. 

 

It may be true that we, as a Province, are powerless to reverse the unilateral decision of our supposed 

ally, but surely we can make our views strongly known to the Government of Canada. The action of the 

United States of America must be condemned as selfish, ignorant and dangerous to Canada, to 

Saskatchewan and to the entire world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first two sites are scheduled to be constructed near our border. (Someone just 

mentioned Russia, Mr. Speaker, I will come to that.) They will be aimed in such a way as to achieve 

interception and detonation in the skies above the Prairies. Overnight, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 

been transformed from a reasonably secure, mid-continental province dedicated to the human task of 

feeding and sustaining a hungry world to ground zero in the no man‘s land between the two great super 

powers. No part of the world has been placed in a more vulnerable position than we in Saskatchewan as 

a result of this decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why should Saskatchewan be selected for the dubious honour of being tomorrow‘s first 

battleground in the intercontinental missile duel? In the words of the United States‘ 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1487 

militarists, ―because this is an isolated area‖ where the bugs can be worked out of the system, for our 

good, our honourable neighbours decided, my friends, that Saskatchewan should be the bug house. It is 

assumed that we are too few in number to be significant, We will be the guinea pigs in the deadly 

experiment with ever more terrifying instruments of destruction. 

 

While the sophisticated commentators and politicians of Washington and Ottawa may tell us confidently 

that the ABM system is merely a sop to the military-industrial complex, a new boon to keep 

employment up and the profits rolling, the ABMs are now our real neighbours, Mr. Speaker. And they 

are more than just a lurking weapon of ultimate total destruction. Before they are even located in their 

bunkers, they attack that part of Canada‘s foreign policy which is so important to the wheat farmers of 

Saskatchewan. The ABMs are an escalation of the arms race, the cold war, the atmosphere of fear and 

suspicion that will make it more difficult to conclude wheat trade agreements with the Soviet Union and 

China. 

 

The location of these ABMs on our border, therefore, is more dangerous than the strategists and our 

Prime Minister have yet acknowledged. For their presence will doubtless be a further symbol of 

Canadian subordination to United States‘ paternalism, to Canadian complicity in the arms escalation, 

and these weapons will threaten the mere steps that we have made thus far to establish the kind of real 

trade relations so necessary to the Saskatchewan farmers on the one hand and to world peace on the 

other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these deadly weapons are being constructed and aimed with the same rationale of security 

that was used by the Soviet Union in the case of the Cuban missiles. Let us not be deluded into thinking 

it is the people of Saskatchewan who will benefit from the system. They will be 90 miles away from our 

home and we are the indirect target. Whether or not they are fired, they are an immediate threat to the 

welfare of the people of Saskatchewan. We must not enter into any kind of national approval of such an 

escalation of the international hostilities, whatever language of defence is used to conceal the reality, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The world has never been the same since the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, 

1945, and killed some 64,000 people. Three days later the second bomb was dropped on Nagasaki, 

August 9, 1945, and killed 39,000 people. People are still dying from radiation burns caused by these 

bombs. The atom bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki were mere firecrackers compared to the 

current 20-megaton thermonuclear warhead packing the equivalent of 20 million tons of TNT. That is 

more than 20 tons of TNT for every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan in one bomb. Mr. Speaker, 

back in 1963 the stockpile of nuclear weapons was equal to 50 tons of TNT for every man, woman and 

child on earth. That figure has escalated greatly since that time. 

 

Canada compromised its position as a peace-loving nation when it agreed to accept nuclear warheads on 

our soil when it allowed the Americans to install the Bomarcs. It was a most regrettable day when on 

January 12, 1963, the former Prime Minister, Lester B. Pearson, then the Leader of the Opposition, said 

and let me quote: 

 

The Canadian Government should accept nuclear warheads for its forces overseas and in Canada. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1488 

After being elected on April 8, 1963, he accepted the American gift of nuclear weapons and made 

Canada a more dangerous place to live in the event of war. 

 

Prime Minister Trudeau seems to be working from even a more hopeless premise. He apparently shrugs 

his shoulders and says, and let me quote from the newspaper of the other day: 

 

Canada for one would be destroyed in any nuclear rocket exchange between the United States and the 

USSR. 

 

Well, Sir, I am not prepared to give up hope or to give up the fight. I know that I have a lot of friends 

who share my belief and share my hope. They are very much opposed to United States‘ installation of 

the Sentinel Missile System. They are very much concerned that the ABMs will seriously threaten the 

peace of the world and will escalate the nuclear arms race. Let me quote from one of their recent books, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just yesterday there came into my hands a book entitled, Anti-Ballistic 

Missile, Yes or No. It is ―A Special Report from the Centre for the Study of Democratic Institutions.‖ 

The evidence that is presented in this book, a cursory examination shows overwhelmingly why we 

should oppose the anti-ballistic missile system. I commend it as good reading for every Member of the 

Legislature. Mr. Speaker, quoting from some of the well-known people in the United States, here we 

have former United States Vice-President Hubert Humphrey saying this: 

 

Today‘s offensive missiles with their improved penetration aids probably could overcome the ABM 

system as now visualized and the offensive improvements that its deployment is bound to stimulate 

certainly will render the system obsolete before it can be made operational. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

ABM will intensify rather than restrain the arms race, worsening instead of improving United 

States-Soviet relationships. 

 

This is the immediate-past Vice-President of the United States of America. 

 

Let me quote from George McGovern, the person that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) has 

already referred to. Senator McGovern has been deeply involved in the whole issue of the ABMs. He 

says this: 

 

It would be a national blunder of major proportions, militarily, politically, and diplomatically for the 

United States to deploy a defensive missile system on the basis of our present knowledge about the 

ABM and about the international situation, into which we propose to inject this dubious new 

armament system. 

 

I am convinced that the proposed ABM would be obsolete before it could be constructed. I read the 

evidence to indicate that the Soviet Union could very quickly overwhelm such a system with 

considerably smaller investment in their offensive capacity. This, after all, is precisely what we have 

done in recent years in respect to the very limited ABM system we think now is being deployed 

around Moscow. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1489 

I believe that an ABM deployment by the United States would actually decrease our security and our 

capacity to conduct an intelligent and rational foreign policy. It would do this not only because it 

would be easily penetrated by the Soviet Union at less cost, if they so choose to do, but also because it 

would lead to a further escalation of the arms race and the worsening of the Soviet-American relations. 

 

The political heat on the President and on the Department of Defence to deploy the ABM did not 

suddenly appear in 1967. For more than a decade pressure has been directed in the most intensive 

fashion against President Eisenhower, later against President Kennedy, and throughout his 

administration against President Johnson. All three chief executives, different as they were in political 

background and orientation, staunchly resisted the demands, first for NIKE-ZEUS, then for the 

NIKE-X system. The important point is that, if they had surrendered earlier those systems would now 

be totally obsolete and worthless to us. We would have only wasted $30 billion or $35 billion for our 

efforts. 

 

Why, then, are the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommending that such vast sums be spent and why has a 

majority of the Congress already approved this decision? Curiously, the debate over construction 

seems almost irrelevant to the actual decision-making process. I have been actively involved in the 

debate on the ABM from the very beginning. I was much impressed when Senator Stuart Symington, 

the former Secretary of the Air Force, who at one time was considered sympathetic to the ABM, 

explained in great detail why he now believes the system is militarily ineffective and would represent 

an enormous waste of public funds. This, by any definition, was informed, expert testimony, and I 

have waited for an effective rebuttal by the ABM proponents. It has never come. 

 

So, let us face it, the anti-ballistic missile system is little more than a gigantic make-work welfare 

project sponsored by the military-industrial complex. I charge that this kind of artificial and 

unimaginative public spending degrades rather than strengthens our society and that it does so to an 

extent that more than offsets the highly questionable military advantages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is the position of the former Secretary of Defence for the United States of America, 

Robert McNamara. No one has more clearly summarized the case against a full-blown ABM system 

than did former Secretary of Defence Robert McNamara when he said on September 18, 1967 and let 

me quote: 

 

Every ABM system that is now feasible involves firing defensive missiles at incoming offensive 

warheads in an effort to destroy them. But what my commentators on this issue overlook is that any 

such system can rather obviously be defeated by an enemy simply sending more offensive warheads or 

dummy warheads, than there are defensive missiles capable of disposing of them. This is the whole 

crux of the nuclear action-reaction phenomenon. 

 

Then Mr. McNamara added: 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1490 

Were we to deploy a heavy ABM system throughout the United States . . . 

 

(And keep in mind that it is the heavy system that is being discussed here now and not the phony, 

so-called thin China-oriented Sentinel system). 

 

. . . the Soviets would clearly be strongly motivated to so increase their offensive capacity as to cancel 

out our defensive advantage. It is futile for each of us to spend $4 billion or $40 billion or $400 billion 

and at the end of all the spending, at the end of all the deployment and at the end of all the effort, to be 

relatively at the same point of balance on the security scale that we are now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me remind this Assembly of the remarks of the well-known United States senators 

when they questioned Melvin R. Laird just last week. Here are some of their remarks: ‗Far less of a 

shield than a sieve,‘ said Democratic Frank Church. ‗Not a convincing case,‘ said Chairman Albert 

Gore. ‗Every witness outside the Pentagon knows it‘s not much good,‘ said Arkansas Senator Fulbright. 

chairman of the parent Foreign Relations Committee of the United States. ‗Cockeyed,‘ was the comment 

described by Stuart Symington of Missouri. 

 

The question of Canada‘s position in the program figured prominently in last Friday‘s hearings. Laird 

told the committee that the United States of America has a working agreement with Ottawa on the 

deployment of anti-ballistic missiles, but ran into sharp questioning from Mr. Fulbright. Laird said that 

Canada ―has been kept fully informed of the program,‖ but at one point said he did not want to 

jeopardize the agreement with Ottawa by delving too deeply into the question. Fulbright replied, ―You 

answered. You said that if they don‘t like it, they can lump it.‖ Laird said although consultations 

between the two countries had taken place, there was never an understanding under which Canada could 

veto the sites of the anti-ballistic missile. ―I don‘t think we should put this kind of veto power in the 

hands of our Canadian friends,‖ said Mr. Laird. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our country that he is talking about and he tells us that we should have no right to say 

anything, that we should have no right to veto, that they have the right to decide what they will do with 

our people, with our land, with our air, with our skies. Mr. Speaker, but some may say that these are not 

experts. Well, Sir, the truth of the matter is that every reputable scientist in the United States of America 

agrees that the ABMs pose a serious threat to the United States of America and Canadian security. They 

will achieve nothing by way of defence but will merely escalate the arms race. Among them are such 

distinguished men . . . 

 

Mr. D.C. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — . . . the Hon. Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) says nonsense. I would 

suggest to the Hon. Member that he take some time, that he read some of the reports that were appearing 

in the newspapers, day after day, in the last 10 days. I commend to him this document and others that 

have been presented. If he reads them and he tried to rationalize and he tried to think he would not be 

making such statements as nonsense. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1491 

Mr. Speaker, among some of the distinguished scientists that have made their positions known are: Dr. 

Ralph Lapp, a physicist, Professor George Kislcakowsky, a chemist. Both of them, Mr. Speaker, and 

take note, both of them worked on the creation of the first atom bomb. They agreed that the ABM 

interception will not stop nuclear fallout, the blinding, killing and burning of people. The views of such 

people as Jerome Wiesner, scientific advisor to the former United States President Johnson, must be 

acknowledged here in this debate. He is strongly opposed to the installation of the ABMs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in announcing his decision to start construction of the ABMs at Grand Forks, North 

Dakota and Malmstrom Air Force Base in Montana, President Nixon was advised that the Soviet Union 

has started and stopped construction of any antiballistic missile system. Mr. Speaker, let me quote from 

the I.F. Stone‘s Weekly and here is what he says: 

 

The Pentagon‘s experts two years ago expected the first Chinese ICBM shot before the end of 1967. 

Laird will have to scrape up a pretty fervent Maoist to find someone ready to believe the United States 

of America in danger of being held hostage by China. 

 

He goes on: 

 

Laird‘s discussion of the relative anti-missile spending of the United States and the USSR was equally 

fantastic. Laird was asked on Face the Nation program, ‗Can you tell us what the Russians‘ 

anti-ballistic missile situation is? How many cities? How fast a deployment? Has it been speeded up or 

slowed down? How do they compare?‘ The answer, as provided less than a month ago by Clifford‘s 

last posture statement, is that construction has been curtailed on the ABM around Moscow, the only 

place where the Russians began to build one. ‗It is the consensus of the intelligence community,‘ 

Clifford reported, ―that this Galosh system,‘ as it is called, ‗could be seriously degraded by currently 

proposed United States weapons system.‘ ‗Indeed this Russian ABM,‘ Clifford stated, ‗resembles in 

certain important respects the NIKE-ZEUS system which we abandoned years ago because of its 

limited effectiveness. It is, in other words, obsolete.‘ 

 

Mr. Speaker, Clifford was one of the right-hand men to former Defence Secretary Mr. Robert 

McNamara. 

 

From all this knowledge and opposition of the many United States senators and congressmen, one can‘t 

help but conclude that President Nixon has been forced into making this decision by the military 

industry. This decision is nothing less, Mr. Speaker, than military brinkmanship. 

 

Let me also advise this Assembly that, as Mr. Nixon announced his decision on the ABM on March 14, 

that same day, Mr. Speaker, press reports show and let me quote: 

 

The nuclear non-proliferation treaty has been ratified by the Senate and the United States diplomats 

expect Moscow will soon follow suit. 

 

I am completely convinced that the installation of the 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1492 

Sentinel Missile System near our border poses a serious threat to world peace. It endangers seriously the 

security of Canada and especially Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the United States of America has no right to unilaterally capture our skies and place our air 

in complete danger and our land in serious jeopardy. I don‘t want my country and my province, Mr. 

Speaker, to be used as a testing ground, as a bug house, in the event of a nuclear war. If that decision is 

to be made, it should be made by Canada, and not by the United States or the Soviet Union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge the Members of this Assembly to unanimously endorse the Resolution presented by 

the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). Mr. Speaker, Prime Minister Trudeau is today meeting 

President Nixon in Washington, D.C. Let us send this Resolution unanimously supported by this 

Assembly to Prime Minister Trudeau, care of the Pentagon. Let us strengthen his hand in any 

discussions or any negotiations with the President of the United States. Mr. Speaker, let us do this for 

the sake of humanity, for the sake of the preservation of life. I am pleased to second the Resolution and 

support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, for many years Members on this side of 

the House have resigned themselves to the fact that sometimes during the session we must sit and listen 

to the anti-American views of our friends opposite. They attack the American politicians, they attack the 

American corporations, they attack the profit motive of free enterprise. This year is no exception as we 

have just listened to another in a long line of anti-American speeches by the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd) and the MLA from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). Surely the red star has arisen again 

today in this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

In 1965 we listened to one of the Members for Saskatoon (Mr. Link) embarrass our province by 

referring to our friendly State of Montana to the south as a Fascist-type state. In 1966 Members opposite 

placed a Resolution on the Order Paper regarding the war in Vietnam and their remarks placed all the 

blame on the United States. I think particularly of Mr. Link‘s statement on page 1,718 of the Debates 

and Proceedings, 1966, when he said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are however some real discouraging signs at the present time, the most obvious of 

course is the rapid build-up of the military forces in Vietnam and a further escalation of the war. The 

war is becoming more and more an American war. 

 

Nowhere did the Member suggest that the provision of airplanes and armaments by Russia had anything 

to do with the escalation of the Vietnam war. In 1967 the Member for Kelsey, Mr. J.H. Brockelbank, 

moved a Resolution re the abandonment of violence and war, and again the United States came in for far 

more than its share of criticism, with no mention being made of Russia, China or other Communist 

nations and their responsibilities. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1493 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, was the first year that I can recall that we did not have a resolution of this kind 

on the Order Paper. On thinking back perhaps this was unfortunate as one recalls that, in place of 

presenting their anti-American sentiments in the House, Members opposite showed their sentiments in a 

more tangible form, by organizing and financing an anti-American demonstration last summer which 

ended with the burning of the American flag and which brought disgrace to every person in this 

province. I wonder when Members opposite will realize that we cannot live in splendid isolation. In this 

day for all intents and purposes, our defence, in fact our very survival is tied to the strength of our 

neighbours to the south. 

 

The Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) who has left the chamber said that we should sit by 

and offer critical observation or passive criticism. His reference to the supposed allies, his calling our 

American friends selfish, ignorant and dangerous, I submit, Mr. Speaker, was an unwarranted attack on 

the friendship between our two countries that has existed for many decades. I would remind all 

Members of this House we were pleased enough when the United States came to our rescue in two 

World Wars. We didn‘t tell them then that we didn‘t want their supplies, their technology, their 

assistance, their support, their ships. We didn‘t tell them then that we didn‘t want their young men and 

women to die on our behalf. The United States of America learned the hard way that they could not live 

in isolation but had to become an integral part in world affairs. 

 

Now we have Members opposite who condemn them for trying to make the Western Hemisphere a safe 

place for the survival of freedom and democracy. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) has 

suggested that the construction of anti-ballistic missiles system is a threat to world peace and urges the 

Government of Canada to convince the Government of the United States not to proceed in this regard. 

We all regret the necessity of continuously upgrading our defence system. We regret also that 

Saskatchewan, and Canadian soil and people are sometimes involved. But there is no alternative if our 

country is to be adequately defended. Canada‘s position today is not clear. As was mentioned, our Prime 

Minister is meeting in Washington with President Nixon and I am sure that we can be confident that 

these two great leaders will come up with a solution that is in the best interests of all. I would remind the 

Leader of the Opposition that this is a part of a system in which we are already involved, whether we 

like it or not, the Dew Line, the Mid-Canada Radar Line, the Pine Tree Line in which Canada and the 

United States freely participated under the NORAD Agreement, are all part of a system of protection 

from outside attacks and more specific protection against Russia whose main line of entry to North 

America is through Alaska and Canada‘s North. 

 

With advances of technology the systems have become to some extent obsolete. This new proposed 

anti-missile system will bring us up to date in our defence of North America. It is strictly a defensive 

measure and therefore in no conceivable way can be construed as an escalation of the nuclear arms race 

and a threat to world peace. In fact if we did not maintain our defence, it would increase the threat to 

peace as Russia and China would then be tempted to attack our weakened positions. The aggression 

shown by both these communist countries recently shows their attitude to an eventual world domination 

has not changed. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1494 

I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition and the Member for Regina North East 

(Mr. Smishek) would agree that the construction of an anti-ballistic system in the United States would 

be no more threat to peace and escalation of the nuclear arms race than the construction of such a system 

elsewhere in the world. I see that he is nodding his head in agreement. I would refer Members to the 

Readers Digest of December 1968 to an article from the United States News and World Report of 

September 9th entitled, ―Spies in the Sky‖. This article referred to the vigilance of amazingly sensitive 

devices which gather intelligence from space. It gave some examples of their achievement. The first one 

mentioned was the positive evidence of the start of anti-ballistic defence systems in Russia. Now the 

Member from Regina South East (Mr. Baker) may be lulled into thinking that these are not being built, 

by some of his friends who wish him to think so but surely to goodness this is enough proof and we 

know enough of the Russian philosophy to know that they are not going to be caught asleep at the 

switch and hopefully the United States won‘t be either. 

 

Surely if the anti-ballistic defence system in Canada and the United States is a threat to world peace, a 

similar system in Russia would also be a threat to peace. The Leader of the Opposition nodded his head 

a moment ago. Why then didn‘t he include Russia today in his remarks? One can only conclude his 

failure to do so is because he is far more sympathetic to Russian plans to rule the world than he is to the 

United States attempt to prevent it. 

 

The second piece of intelligence that came through these spies in the sky was the confirmation of the 

expansion of rocket production that has now brought Russia‘s land-base missile strength up to or 

exceeding that of the United States. That shows more than ever that the United States and Canada need 

an adequate anti-ballistic missile system. The Member for Regina North East suggested our ABM 

system would motivate Russia but it appears from this article that they were far more motivated before 

when opposition was considered to be weak. 

 

Because the Leader of the Opposition has singled out the United States of America for his attacks as the 

only nation threatening world peace, and because his motion would in effect say, ―Leave the door open 

for Communist aggression,‖ we on this side of the House cannot accept this Resolution. Before I sit 

down I am going to read an amendment, seconded by Mr. Barrie (Pelly), that I will place before this 

Legislature when I have finished my remarks. I am going to move that this Resolution be amended as 

follows: That all the words after the word ―Assembly‖ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

1. expresses its confidence in the ability of the elected Governments of Canada and the United States 

to jointly plan and implement an adequate defence policy for our Continent and its people; 

 

2. re-affirms our deep and abiding friendship for our American neighbor and our sincere regret at the 

irresponsible action of certain elements in burning an American flag; and 

 

3. regrets that world peace is threatened by recent socialist imperialist aggression in Czechoslovakia 

and elsewhere throughout the world. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1495 

Now in introducing this amendment, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that the Leader of the Opposition, if he 

believes in his motion, will be unable to support this amendment. His views and his support for 

anti-American and pro-Communist forces are well known to Members of this Legislature. We recognize 

also that some of the old guard among the front benchers are so steeped in anti-American philosophy 

that they will be unable to support it. But I do hope that the young back benchers, who claim to be in 

tune with the ‘70s and from whom the future leaders across the way will no doubt be chosen, will see fit 

to support the amendment rather than the motion. I would remind the Members opposite that they can‘t 

support the motion and the amendment. 

 

The amendment will give Members opposite the opportunity to do three things. First of all, it will give 

them the opportunity to support a defence agreement mutually agreed upon between Canada and the 

United States. As I mentioned earlier, the Prime Minister and President Nixon are presently discussing 

this and we can be sure that what they agree on will be in the best interests of both countries. 

 

Secondly, it will give Members opposite the opportunity to condemn the actions of the irresponsible 

people who burned the American flag last summer. You remember that I have mentioned in several 

earlier debates in this Legislature that we would like to have them stand on their feet and be counted in 

this regard, one way or the other. I realize that by so doing Members opposite will be voting against the 

actions of some of their own NDP supporters and members of their own political party. However, I am 

sure that the people of Saskatchewan will feel much better if at least they know that their elected NDP 

representatives were not part of this disgraceful event. It is true that Premier Thatcher sent a note of 

apology to the United States for this action but I think it is only fitting before this Legislature prorogues 

that all Members be given the opportunity to show their disapproval of this type of action between 

friendly neighbours. 

 

Thirdly, this amendment will give Members opposite the opportunity to condemn Socialist imperialist 

aggression in Czechoslovakia, and in other areas throughout the world. The people of Saskatchewan 

were dismayed at the NDP Convention last summer, you were concerned enough to send a telegram to 

Prime Minister Trudeau against United States training flights in Canada, but you were not concerned 

enough about Russian aggression in Czechoslovakia to condemn them by a resolution. Now we on this 

side of the House are charitable enough to believe that it was an oversight on the part of the NDP 

Convention and particularly the MLAs that were present. Therefore, we know you will welcome the 

opportunity afforded by this amendment to show the people of Saskatchewan that you are opposed to 

Soviet Socialist aggression in Czechoslovakia and all other forms of Socialist aggression throughout the 

world. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, we wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition for this motion, we had given 

up hope that Members opposite would make their views known in regard to the events that I have 

mentioned and particularly regarding the burning of the American flag and their attitude to Russian 

aggression in Czechoslovakia. Thanks to his motion, and my amendment, we will now have the 

opportunity to see exactly where Members opposite stand in this regard. I would hate to suggest that the 

Members opposite are swayed by the events that take place through resolutions and actions of the NDP 

but one can‘t help but wonder 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1496 

when you pick up the paper this morning and you find on the front page of The Leader Post that there is 

an anti-ABM group protesting in Ottawa. And when you go down the print you find that the protest was 

organized by Terry Campbell, a freelance writer and broadcaster and president of the Ottawa South New 

Democratic Youth organization. It seems that wherever the New Democratic Youth leads them, the old 

members appear to follow. So, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Smishek: — You‘re weak! 

 

Mr. Guy: — You‘re looking pretty weak! We‘ll see how you vote on this amendment, whether you‘ve 

got the courage to stand up in this Legislature and say that you were in favour of burning the American 

flag, whether you were in favour of supporting Russian aggression in Czechoslovakia. Thanks to your 

Leader, you‘re going to have that opportunity either today or very shortly. If you vote against this 

amendment, you will never be back on that side of the House or in fact you will never be in this House, 

period. No, Sir! Thanks to your Leader you‘re going to get the opportunity to be counted and we‘ll be 

waiting and the people of Saskatchewan will be waiting to see whether you are going to support the 

action that you carried out last year. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment, seconded by 

my seat-mate, the Minister of Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) that Resolution No. 16 be amended. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Heggie: — (Hanley)Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to take part in this missile debate. I 

must add that I welcome, with reservations of course, the American move to defend collectively the 

United States and Canada. 

 

Firstly, it is really an exercise in futility to have this debate because there is really very little that we as 

citizens of Saskatchewan can do about it. This is a Canadian affair, it is a joint Canadian-American 

affair, it is a world affair and something which we are pulled into, not because we want to be there but 

because this is the way the facts are. Our Prime Minister, the Hon. Pierre Elliott Trudeau, is in 

Washington at this very moment discussing this very ABM program as a top priority item on the agenda. 

I presume that he is there representing all the Canadian people and that the deliberations he will have 

with President Nixon will be in the best interests of Canada and of North America at large. 

 

Now just what is this ABM system? It was first discussed by President Johnson. He is not now in office. 

A decision has to be made by President Nixon. Now after all, this is not new to North America, North 

American defence, we have had NORAD with us for at least 12 years and this was a system whereby 

Canada and the United States, using the advanced technology and the military hardware of the United 

States, could take part in the joint defence of this Continent against aggression. But at that time it was 

designed to intercept manned bombers coming over the North Pole from Russia and/or China. Although 

it strikes us as a very important thing, it is really an extension of the NORAD system. It is an extension 

of the defence of North America. If it was right for us to take part in NORAD defence in 1955 and 1956, 

then it is just as correct that we follow it up in 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1497 

1969. Everyone knows that the advance of technology has almost ruled out the manned bomber as an 

exponent of military aggression. In its place have come missiles and perhaps even missiles from space 

stations. These are the facts of life which we have to face up to. All it really is is an improved system to 

combat Russian or Chinese missiles. Why after all, we had for many years on Canadian soil the Pine 

Tree Line, the Dew Line, and the Mid-Canada Line. These were a radar defence against manned 

bombers and were just as much a part of any military defence system as the ABM missile system now 

under discussion. 

 

Now I really don‘t care what the Leader of the Opposition, the Hon. Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) 

says. I am quite sure that my family and many others will sleep better on Saskatchewan soil because we 

know that we have friends in the United States, who have the military power and the will to resist Soviet 

and Chinese aggression. I wonder if the Hon. Mr. Lloyd really appreciates what a heavy load of 

responsibility that President Nixon has on his shoulders. It was his decision to say Yes or No and 

President Nixon on the best advice possible said, Yes. How much safer would we have been if he had 

said No? There would still be Soviet and Chinese missiles ready to wing their way to North America 

whether we like it or not. These are the facts of life. It would be most desirable to have universal world 

peace. The Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) made a long exposition of why he was in 

favour of world peace, and I think everyone here would subscribe almost wholeheartedly to it. Everyone 

here earnestly desires world peace, on both sides of the House. We fought two global wars to guarantee 

world peace. The Great War and the Second World War were to make the world safe for democracy and 

the wars to end all wars. But since the end of World War II, the world has been constantly at war on one 

or more fronts. There was the Greek Civil War. There was the Berlin Airlift in 1948 which came close 

to being a war. Then there was the Korean conflict. There have been three Arab-Israeli wars in 20 years. 

There is the Vietnam War not yet concluded. There was a civil war in the Congo where thousands of 

Africans were killed. The Nigerian Civil War is still going on. There was the India-Pakistan War. There 

was the invasion of Czechoslovakia by the Soviets which was an act of war. 

 

I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition has watched the television programs that come over the 

networks each year on November 7th on the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. If he did, he 

would see giant rockets on transports being wheeled through Red Square and an exhibition of military 

hardware that makes you shudder to look at it. But if he thinks that the United States, as a protector of its 

own self-interest and protector of Canada and the free world, is going to sit back and watch the build-up 

of military hardware in Russia, I think that President Nixon would be falling short of the duties cast 

upon him as President and leader of the free world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — It used to be that Great Britain on whose Empire the sun never set was more or less the 

protector of world peace and imposed the Pax Britannica. Now that position since the end of World War 

II has shifted to the United States. We don‘t even see Prime Minister Wilson as the Leader of a Labour 

Government cutting short the moves of the United States to strengthen NATO 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1498 

or to protect North America from Communist attack. All that Mr. Smishek, the Hon. Member for Regina 

East, says is true about the horrors that his father and family went through in Eastern Europe, no doubt 

he is not overstating the case at all. He said that his family came to Canada to escape these things. But 

the facts of life are that the spectre of war has now become global and is not confined to Eastern Europe 

or to the Balkans. The aeroplane, the missile, and space science have changed all this. I say here and 

now that the Opposition says that, because there are certain senators in the United States who have 

opposed the ABM system, we here in Saskatchewan should pass a Resolution seconding their stand 

against it. I say that it is a good thing that we have senators in the United States who can stand up in a 

free democracy and oppose the system and bring all the factors to bear, so that the public understands 

exactly what is happening. Any war which would impose the Communist system on us would certainly 

be the end of any opposition to whatever the Government decided to do. So we have Senators Fulbright, 

Symington, and Church taking every opportunity to stand up and oppose what in their opinion they feel 

is wrong. But the President, on the advice of other senators and the advice of his military and civilian 

staff, is fully aware of the responsibility that lies on his shoulders. After much agony of thought and 

mind, I am sure he will come to the conclusion that this is the safest and best thing that he can do for the 

protection of North America, Canada and the free world. 

 

Now in conclusion, I just want to sum up and say that the whole ABM system is not offensive, as the 

speakers on the other side have tried to say, but is part of a defensive system which has been in vogue 

almost since the end of World War II. The other missiles that these oppose are Russian and Chinese. 

They have them and they have the ability to launch them from nuclear-powered submarines, even if they 

didn‘t launch them from the mainland of the Soviet Union or China. They have the ability to launch 

them and we must have the ability to resist them. I fear with all Members the terrible result which can 

come from a nuclear explosion and fallout, but I ask: what is the alternative? If there is a war where 

missiles are used we are all going to be in it, whether we like it or not. The protest seems to be that the 

missile sites are so close to Canadian soil at Grand Forks and at Great Falls and that this in some way is 

different from what it was before. Well I am not speaking for the Government in this particular instance, 

but I speak as a representative of 5,500 voters. I would say that, after consultation between our Prime 

Minister and the President, it was felt that for the better protection of Canada another site be built on 

Saskatchewan soil to repel any invasion from the north, I would welcome them in the constituency of 

Hanley. 

 

All of this doesn‘t detract from the fact that there are forces working for world peace. There have been 

concrete steps taken in the direction of the control of nuclear power, the confining of nuclear weapons to 

a selected number of powers rather than spreading them throughout many nations. There has been 

progress made, progress such as commercial air flights between North America and Moscow and the 

fact that the Russian hockey teams play hockey with world teams, both in Europe and in North America, 

and the fact that the nations meet at the Olympic Games with their athletes. There are long-term effects 

which are working towards world peace. Any of us who have lived and remember what happened in the 

Stalin era in Russia and have compared it to the Khrushchev regime and the Brezhnev regime, will 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1499 

agree that there has been a great change in the outlook of the Soviet Union. It is nervous about its 

defence and its system - I am not apologizing for it but this is probably the way they see it - and they 

want to protect it. At the same time I feel that there is a certain amount of yearning for a better standard 

of living among the Russian people and for world peace. It is a matter of bargaining from a position of 

strength that the United States has taken this stand and I am glad that we are a part of it. These other 

forces that are motivating peace ought to have time to work themselves out. I for one have perceived - 

and I think my perception is correct - that it won‘t be too many years before there is a real good rapport 

between the Soviet Union and the Western world as the standard of living improves. Then there is less 

to be quarrelsome about. The real enemy may be at this moment not the Soviet Union, but the great 

Republic of China with its 700 million people. Certainly you can read from the edition of Time 

magazine on March 21st under a heading, ―Moscow versus Peking offensive diplomacy‖. That article 

summarizes just what the problems are between the Soviet Union and China so there is always hope 

that, if we can bargain from positions of strength, time in itself will bring Soviet thinking more in line 

with Western thinking and that this may be in the end the greatest guarantee of world peace. Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) has brought forth his 

amendment changing the content of the Resolution as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition and I 

am very, very happy to be able to speak in favour of the amendment. When it comes in this House for 

final vote, I will give it my support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few words to this debate. I am a little 

surprised to see the Resolution on the Order Paper. What kind of nonsense is it to say, if a man picks up 

a shield to keep another man from hitting him over the head with a club, that he is escalating a war. I 

think it‘s ridiculous. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — I listened to the amendment with some attention and in it is mentioned the flag burning 

episode that we heard about last summer. We all abhor the obscenity of war but we also abhor the 

obscenity of burning a flag of a friendly nation. I want to say that Members opposite often, usually 

perhaps, seem quite willing to fight to the last American. They‘re not very willing to risk anything for 

the defence of the Continent or the defence of things that we intend to defend. 

 

I will vote for the amendment, I can‘t vote for the Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I will announce, standing on my feet and giving 

my reasons therefor, how I intend to vote on this Resolution and on the amendment. I trust the Member 

for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) will do me the honour of doing the same, standing up in his place 

and giving his reasons for how he proposes to vote. And if he intends not to enter the debate, I would 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1500 

respectfully ask him not to interject little comments during the course of my remarks, if that isn‘t too 

much of an imposition on him. 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris Estevan): — I‘ll wait and see what you say first. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things I want to say about this motion. There is in 

the main motion a great deal that I can support and in the amending Resolution moved by the Member 

for Athabasca (Mr. Guy), some that I can support. I want first to address a few remarks to the Member 

for Athabasca and the most unfortunate way in which he introduced his remarks. I never cease to be 

amazed at his ability to breach at least my standards of good taste. He did it again this morning. Once 

again he began an attack on the former Member for Saskatoon, Mr. Link. Once again he attacked a 

Member who isn‘t in this House to defend himself. Once again he recalled that black day in this House 

when Members on that side of the House tried to embarrass a new Member of this House on the basis 

that he was somehow insulting the United States. Once again the Premier stood up - we recall that day - 

and moved in this House that the House be adjourned because of a matter of urgent public business all to 

embarrass the Member for Saskatoon, the new Member for Saskatoon (Mr. Link), all to suggest that 

somehow he had no right to comment upon the United States, that Member for Saskatoon who was the 

most distinguished war hero who ever sat in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, at no time have we ever had a George Cross winner sit in this House so 

far as I am aware and the Premier decided that he was going to stand up and embarrass this person 

because he had commented on Fascism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I felt it was contemptible then and I said so then. It‘s contemptible now . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It‘s contemptible now and I think the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) shouldn‘t 

have raised it in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — What regiment were you in? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Red herring, red herring! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — That‘s right. Red herring they say. I‘d like to know how the Saskatoon Members 

name got into this debate and if it is a red herring for me to raise then how much redder a herring was it 

for the Member . . . 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1501 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I‘m sure however that every herring is red to the Member for Athabasca. He probably 

doesn‘t eat fish on the ground they are all red herrings and he has nothing to do with things red. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Member for Athabasca has the greatest capacity to see red in almost any 

situation. There must be only two colours in the spectrum for him, red and white. 

 

Mr. Guy: — You‘re red and we‘re white! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Now, I also want to express regret that he should have found the occasion to make 

some derogatory remarks about the previous Resolution moved by the former Member for Kelsey, Mr. 

Brockelbank. I think anyone who sat in on that debate will recall that that was one of the most 

thoughtful and thought-provoking debates that we have had in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — It was not in any way contentious. It was not in any way anti-American, 

notwithstanding the comments of the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). I thought it was most 

unfortunate - and I choose the word with some care - that he should have selected this time, when the 

former Member for Kelsey was not here, to express those comments on it. I‘m sure that the Member for 

Athabasca would have been far too careful to criticize the remarks of the Member for Kelsey when he 

was here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Brockelbank was only too able to look after the rather picayune comments which 

were ordinarily directed at him by the Member for Athabasca. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Member for Hanley (Mr. Heggie) has suggested that our real enemy may be the 

People‘s Republic of China. I wonder if we shouldn‘t hark back to the comments made by the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and suggest that the real enemy is not the People‘s Republic of China or the 

Soviet Union or the United States. The real enemy is the state of the world in which we find our world 

divided between a world of haves and a world of have nots, and the real enemy is the dissension which 

is now rampant in the world between the white and the non-white races. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

the comments of the Member for Hanley are exceedingly well taken in suggesting that the day is very 

close when the people of the Soviet Union will see eye to eye with us on many, many things. Indeed 

they are part of the have world. They‘re not as affluent as we are but they are part of the have world and 

they are part of the white world. And they are, as much as we, caught up in this web where we find 

ourselves at odds with two-thirds of the world who are dark-skinned and hungry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to direct my remarks to a few of the 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1502 

comments made by the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) before I turn my comments to his motion. 

 

He made the point that we were pleased to have the United States come to our rescue in two World Wars 

and I, of course, concur in that statement. And I mean no disrespect to the United States when I say that 

we would have been more pleased if they had come in earlier. I mean no disrespect to the United States 

in saying that in the Second World War they stayed out until they were attacked. And presumably if that 

was proper conduct for the United States, it would be equally proper conduct for Canada in any 

forthcoming war. I am not necessarily suggesting that that ought to be the pose for Canada, but I think 

that it‘s a little difficult for people who hold up to us the actions of the United States as being thoroughly 

desirable, to then suggest that, if anyone takes even a quasi-neutralist pose, they are somehow being 

disloyal to, or unfriendly to, the United States or its allies. I think that we‘re all aware that during the 

First World War and the Second World War the United States maintained a position of almost strict 

neutrality. They were a supplier of goods but they were not in any sense engaged in arming to fight the 

enemies whom they subsequently found themselves at war with. I am not necessarily commending that 

point of view to Canada. I am saying that, if Canada did take that point of view, it could hardly be 

labelled as reprehensible by those who support the position taken by the United States in the last war. 

Consistency would prohibit them from suggesting that it‘s appropriate for the United States in one 

instance to take a neutralist stand until attacked and inappropriate for Canada to take a neutralist stand. I 

happen to believe that Canada ought not to take a neutralist stand. I happen to believe that Canada ought 

to be actively seeking world peace, but I suggest to the Member for Athabasca who has commended the 

stance of the United States in World War I and World War II that that argument is unavailable to him, if 

he wishes to criticize those who take a similar stand with respect to Canada in any prospective conflict. 

 

The comments of the Member for Athabasca in his suggestion that there is no alternative to an ABM 

system indicates that he was in no sense listening to the remarks of the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) 

and the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). Certainly many, many military experts in the 

United States, including Senator Stuart Symington and Senator McGovern, and many other influential 

people indicate that far from there being no alternatives there are a good number of alternatives to an 

ABM system. 

 

Secretary of Defence McNamara, who presumably has some idea as to what the alternatives are to the 

United States, steadfastly opposed an ABM system and still does. In the face of that, it‘s a little difficult 

to say that there are no alternatives. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn my attention in some detail to the motion of the Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy). It starts, and I will want to deal with it seriatim starting with number three, then 

two and one, if I may. 

 

It regrets that world peace is threatened by recent Socialist imperialist aggression in Czechoslovakia and 

elsewhere throughout the world. And I of course regret that the world peace is threatened by recent 

Socialist imperialist aggression, if these two words are not a little bit of a mouthful and descriptive of 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1503 

it, in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere in the world. I regret any aggression in the world. I regret Socialist 

imperialist aggression, if that‘s the word he wants to apply to it, in Czechoslovakia. I regret aggression 

when it happens at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba. I regret aggression when it happened of an internal nature in 

Greece. I regret any type of aggression of that nature, and I, therefore, am going to suggest to the 

Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) that he ought to join with me in regretting that world peace is 

threatened by recent aggression in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere throughout the world without 

bothering to express regret only Socialist imperialist aggression but express our regrets for all 

aggression. And I fancy Members opposite will agree to that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, we had our motion which we thought was topical because it dealt with a 

specific matter that happened last week and last month. Now this, as we‘re well aware of, happened last 

year. We think it is not particularly topical because nothing is going to happen. There‘s no way that we 

can convey any message to the Government of Canada which will in any way affect the Czechoslovak 

situation. But since Members opposite seem to want to record their opposition and our opposition to 

aggression in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere, were happy to join with them in regretting that aggression 

in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere. 

 

Now, I look at paragraph number two, ―reaffirm our deep and abiding friendship for our American 

neighbor and our sincere regret at the irresponsible action of certain elements in burning an American 

flag.‖ And I certainly reaffirm our deep and abiding friendship for our American neighbour. 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — That‘s the only . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, is another comment from the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. 

MacDougall) which I trust he will put together with his other comments and give us the benefit of his 

full thinking. Or perhaps that was his full thinking in the course of this debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, there is of course no prospect of us being other than friends with the 

United States. I am very pleased to class myself as a friend of United States. Like most people I suppose 

in this House I have a great number of friends and relatives in the United States. I have indeed more first 

cousins in the United States than I have in Canada, and it would be rather difficult for me to take a 

position of other than deep and abiding friendship for our American neighbour. Now, as to our ―sincere 

regret at the irresponsible action of certain elements in burning an American flag,‖ I want to say that I 

regret that an American flag was burned. I want to say that I regret that and I‘m perfectly happy in 

saying it. I shared with those people the view that it was perhaps unfortunate to have Saskatchewan as a 

practice bombing range. I would want to have joined with them in our expression of regret that the 

Government of Canada had so arranged that Saskatchewan would be a practice bombing range. But 

having done that then I would 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1504 

have expressed real regret that that concern would be expressed in the form of burning an American 

flag. I think that it was an irresponsible action to burn an American flag. The people who did it had what 

I felt were good motives because they were expressing a view, but the manner in which they chose to 

express it was, in my view, irresponsible. And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I find myself able to reaffirm 

our deep and abiding friendship for our American neighbour and our sincere regret of the irresponsible 

action of certain people, certain elements if you want to use that rather emotive word, in burning an 

American flag. 

 

Now then we come to the first paragraph, ―expresses confidence in the ability of the elected 

Governments of Canada and the United States to jointly plan and implement an adequate defence policy 

for our continent and its people.‖ Express confidence in the ability in the Government of Canada to plan 

a defence policy, Mr. Speaker, I can‘t express my confidence in the Government of Canada headed by 

Pierre Elliott Trudeau to plan anything. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I want to make it clear that I most profoundly do not have confidence in the 

Government of Canada headed by Pierre Elliott Trudeau. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: —I want to say that I believe that the Government of Canada should be embarking on a 

wholesale scheme of foreign aid for needy countries, and I see Mr. Trudeau not doing that, and I 

certainly have no confidence in a Government which cannot see the merit of that action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am asked to express confidence in the Government of Canada in defence planning. 

This is the Liberal Government which in 1962 was against Bomarcs and overnight, overnight with no 

change in fact but only a willingness to seek votes where it thought there may be votes, changed to 

policy without any convention, the then Leader of the Opposition changed this policy on his feet, to be 

in favour of Bomarcs. Now, I think this makes nonsense of any alleged defence planning. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — They were there. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We had a position where the Liberal party was totally opposed to Bomarcs and the 

next day we had a position where the Liberal party was totally in favour of Bomarcs. I can easily expect 

that tomorrow we‘ll have a position in which Pierre Trudeau will be against ABMs or for them. I don‘t 

know what his policy is and the day after he will be the other way. And I‘m asked to express confidence 

in this planning. Well I have no confidence in them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1505 

Mr. Blakeney: —I‘m asked to express confidence in the military organization of the Government of 

Canada. After reading of the fiasco of the Bonaventure! After reading that they have no concept of what 

a navy is for! They wouldn‘t know how to paint a ship for less than $1 million and they wouldn‘t know 

how to billet its crew for less than $1/2 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — And I‘m asked to have confidence in this man and confidence in his ability to 

plan the defence of North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I‘m asked to have confidence in the defence policy in the Government of Canada. 

May I ask whose defence policy? Mr. Cadieux‘s defence policy? Mr. Kierans‘ defence policy? Mr. 

Sharp‘s defence policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . Tommy Douglas‘, that‘s for sure! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Alright, at least Tommy Douglas says the same thing as David Lewis which is a great 

deal more than can be said for Cadieux and Kierans. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I am asked, I am seriously asked, I am asked to express my confidence in the 

ability of the elected Government of Canada to plan a defence policy. It hasn‘t been able to plan one in 

its Cabinet as yet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — What do you know about it? Defence expert . . . on the 

payroll? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am not a defence expert. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Well, you sound like one this morning. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, I want to say that I have a good deal of sympathy with the position taken by 

Mr. Kierans and I would have thought that, if Mr. Kierans was the Government of Canada, then perhaps 

I could express some confidence in its ability to plan, but I have then to think of Mr. Sharp and he 

appears to disagree with Mr. Kierans. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Are you against dialogue? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am not against . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1506 

Mr. Heald: — You don‘t have that in your party. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No one is against dialogue but I am against expressing confidence in the ability of 

mere dialogue to produce policies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If I am asked to express confidence in the Government of Canada‘s ability to plan our 

defence policy in consultation with the United States. I at least ought to have available to me the views 

of the Government of Canada on defence, and that I don‘t have. The Government of Canada has 

expressed no views. Not even on NORAD. I don‘t know whether Mr. Trudeau is in favour of NORAD 

or against it. I don‘t know whether Mr. Trudeau is in favour of NATO or against it, and yet the Member 

for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) is asking me to repose my trust in Mr. Trudeau as a planner of defence policy. 

Now I suggest that that sort of thing makes nonsense, makes nonsense of this Legislature. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I indeed want to vote against it and in order to make it awfully clear just what I‘m 

voting against so as I won‘t be accused of voting against the things I‘ve just said I‘m in favour of, I am 

going to move a subamendment and it‘s going to be as follows. Mr. Speaker, I want to move a 

subamendment, seconded by the Member for Swift Current, Mr. Wood, as follows: 

 

That the amendment moved by Mr. Guy and seconded by Mr. Barrie be amended as follows: 

 

That paragraph (1) be deleted; that the words ―socialist imperialist‖ in paragraph (3) be deleted; and 

that paragraph (2) and (3) be renumbered (1) and (2). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don‘t like those words . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Not at all, I will speak to this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think the sense of the 

amendment is perfectly clear. I find myself unable to express confidence in the elected Government of 

Canada as a planner of defence policy, since it has been in office - is it eight or nine months now? - and 

it has not been able to come to grips with the question of whether it ought to be in NATO, whether it 

ought to be in NORAD or the position of any of Canada‘s defence forces. And I think that it is quite 

preposterous to ask any intelligent person to express confidence in its ability to plan defence. Maybe a 

year from now we will be able to express that confidence. I think we cannot now, and I respectfully 

suggest that we delete that from the motion as being such as will make it difficult for the House to 

express its views on these other very important issues. 

 

Now, on the second paragraph about the burning of the American flag, I find myself in the unlikely 

position of being at one with the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1507 

Mr. Blakeney: — So I leave that paragraph untouched. In the third one, I express regret at the invasion, 

the aggression in Czechoslovakia, I don‘t want to confine my regret to Socialist imperialist aggressions, 

I want to express my regret for all aggressions, and therefore, I have deleted those words but leave in, 

Mr. Speaker, leave in, the words which say: ―by recent aggression in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere in 

the world‖ so as to take in other acts of aggression. I could have added Fascist and other emotive words, 

but I simply wanted in as dispassionate a way as possible to join with the Member for Athabasca in 

deploring aggression in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere, in deploring the unfortunate incident about the 

American flag but disassociate myself . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You‘re alone on that flag deal . . . 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — . . . but disassociate myself from the caricature of expressing confidence in the 

Trudeau Government‘s ability to plan defence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But it hasn‘t as yet been able to convince Mr. Kierans. Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The debate continues on the subamendment. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I‘m not surprised that the Hon. Member 

from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) said he is against the present planning of the Federal Government in 

regard to the defence of our country and of this continent. This is not a new stand for the Socialists 

opposite. This stand started back in 1937 and 1938 and was led by T.C. Douglas, then an MP down in 

Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — And he‘s on record very clearly in the House of Commons debate as opposing every 

step that the then Government took to try and arm this country and get it ready to fight what was obvious 

to anyone, Nazi aggression in Germany and Fascist Italy. But he and people like him, and I suggest 

some of the people are still in this Legislature, in the Socialist movement across this country, fought and 

undermined every motive and every move that the Federal Government took and people who saw the 

light and were convinced that we should be ready to fight the Germans and fight the Italians. They 

fought it and they underplayed it and they undermined the defence efforts. As a result, what happened? 

we came into that war vastly unprepared and it cost hundreds of thousands of lives of young Canadians 

and young Englishmen, young people all over this world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an amazing thing. It was an amazing thing, yes, it was a Liberal Government and 

they were unprepared and they were supported by T.C. Douglas and people like that 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1508 

and they listened to them. But you know when the Socialists opposite suddenly - the old CCF led by 

T.C. Douglas and those people, Coldwell and the rest of them - you know when they suddenly became 

enthusiastic about that war? Oh, they didn‘t mind if the Nazis came over. T.C. Douglas said it is a joke. 

Who are they going to fight? Who are the Italians going to fight? You know when they suddenly became 

serious about that war? When their friends, the Russians, were attacked in 1942, that‘s when they 

became serious about the war. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, it is always an amazing coincidence that they are always on the side of 

who? Mao Tse-Tung, Brezhnev, Kosygin, and even Castro, North Korea. If the Americans drop some 

bombs over in North Vietnam, terrible thing, they parade and they come outside of the Embassy and 

they have resolutions at their conventions and so on, tearing the Americans apart, downgrading them. 

But North Vietnam, what did they do? They can do anything they want, they can bomb children, they 

can burn, they can raid, they can pillage, they can rape and never a word, never a word. I have said in 

this Legislature year in and year out, I‘ve watched the papers year in and year out, I have waited to see 

any NDP or CCF convention stand up and go after the Russians, when? When they invaded Hungary, 

was there one word? Not one word from T.C. Douglas or the NDP or CCF party federally, not one word 

from these conventions. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Rubbish! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Then what happened in Czechoslovakia? The same thing. Did they gather up and make 

a resolution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — They never did, not one thing. They never raised one until it was all over and they were 

shamed into it. Finally, finally, in this House, the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) gets 

up and in an effort to paper over the cracks and in an effort to downgrade the terrible anti-American 

speech that was made by the Hon. Member for Regina East (Mr. Smishek), what does he do? He says, 

―We admit that we abhorred the burning of the American flag.‖ But did he say it at the time? Did he 

raise his voice or did any Members opposite raise their voice and say to these young hooligans who went 

out and did that that they shouldn‘t have done this, that this was a disgrace? Never raised their voice. 

Mr. Speaker, you know it might have some value if these people hadn‘t been hoist on their own petard. 

They thought they would bring in a little resolution and as always get us used to these kooky resolutions 

is the fairest thing and the kindest thing we can say about them. There isn‘t anything this House can do 

about them. During the closing days of the House we got used to these kind of kooky resolutions being 

brought in by the Opposition. That is the kindest thing we can say. What is the unkindest thing? The 

unkindest thing is that they almost bordered on treason. That is the unkindest thing that some might say 

about these kind of resolutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) brought in an amendment. Suddenly you could 

see by the look on their 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1509 

faces consternation, and they said, ―What are we going to do? We finally have got to stand up and be 

counted.‖ Dead silence from the back benchers, the usual stupefied silence from the front benchers and 

finally the little Regina Centre hopeful leader (Mr. Blakeney) - I don‘t know whether he was running for 

the leadership of the national or the provincial party today - stood up and made some kind of a plausible 

out. ―This we will support and that we will support, but we won‘t support the national policy.‖ 

Incidentally when he was on his feet, did he say whether his party would agree or disagree that we 

should get in or out of NATO. I never heard him say it. Why didn‘t he when he was on his feet say, ―We 

support NATO, we support NORAD, we support any kind of an alliance that will hold the Russian 

Socialists or the Communist Socialists in China or in Cuba or wherever they are at bay.‖ Never a word. 

He says, ―Oh, they can‘t make up their mind in Ottawa.‖ They have their minds made up in Ottawa, they 

are still in those alliances and I tell you today that after next Tuesday or next Wednesday they will still 

be in those alliances because any decent God-fearing Canadian who is ready to defend their country 

knows . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — In closing, Mr. Speaker, I will support the amendment brought in by the Member from 

Athabasca. Again I want to say that this House, this session, this Legislature, has many important things 

to do. Of all the resolutions brought before this House which we have absolutely nothing to do with, this 

Resolution and typical ones brought in almost every session, waving the red flag, has got to be, if not the 

nuttiest, certainly one that would tear down support for our Premier, our Prime Minister when he is 

down trying to negotiate in Washington right now and needs the support of the country. But as usual the 

Socialists opposite wave the red flag, tear down the Americans and show their true colours every time 

they stand up in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The House recessed from 12:30 p.m. to 2:30 p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. T.M. Breker (Humboldt): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to the Members of 

this Assembly, 54 students from grades seven and eight in the Speaker‘s gallery from the Laurier school 

in Annaheim. Annaheim is a small village, it is without a highway, without a bus route and without a 

railway. These people in that area have accepted the things that they themselves cannot change. 

However, they are not lacking in changing the things that they themselves can change. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Breker: — Annaheim is the home of Doepker Industries, the originator of the hydraulic 

harrow-draw bar and the hydraulic rod-weeder. It has installed water and sewer last year and this little 

village and the community it serves, stands and grow as a testimonial to the people‘s initiative, their 

pride in their community, and their willingness to preserve their community life. The students are 

accompanied by their teachers, Mr. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1510 

Thiessen and Mr. Holtvogt, and the bus driver, Mr. John Grunsky. It is my hope that their excursion to 

Regina will be educational and an enjoyable highlight of their school life and that the authorities 

responsible will continue to make possible further trips in the future. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly resumed the interrupted debate on Resolution No. 16. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speakers as the seconder of the subamendment, I would like to 

say a few words, and I will endeavour, Sir, to keep them as strictly as possible to the subamendment 

which is before us. I‘m just not too sure that the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) 

did that too strictly in regard to the words that he said shortly before we adjourned for dinner. He said, as 

I recollect, Mr. Speaker, that we on this side of the House and the Democratic Socialists had not come 

out against Russian aggression in Czechoslovakia at the time it took place. Well, I think that the 

Members opposite when they refer to any difficulties in the British economy, that incidentally are not 

any fault of the present Administration there, they like to term the British Government as the same as 

ourselves and I for one am quite pleased to accept that position that we are of the same political stripe as 

the present Government of the United Kingdom. Here I have in my hand a copy of the Regina Leader 

Post for August 21, 1968, the same issue that carried the news of the Soviet invasion, or what you may 

call it, into Czechoslovakia. It says here: 

 

Britain today condemned the invasion as a flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter and said 

this is a tragedy, not only for Czechoslovakia but for Europe and the whole world. A statement issued 

by Wilson said he has asked that Parliament be called into an emergency session to discuss the crisis. 

Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart also hurried back from a holiday trip. He told reporters. ‗It is very 

serious news indeed.‘ 

 

Now I don‘t gather from that that the Government of the United Kingdom was slow in deploring what 

was done by the Soviets in their aggression against Czechoslovakia. Now, you may say, Mr. Speaker, 

that reading this item from The Leader Post in regard to the United Kingdom‘s position doesn‘t say very 

much in regard to the stand of the Saskatchewan New Democratic party in this regard. But I have here, 

Mr. Speaker, an organ which I think is well recognized as a spokesman for the New Democratic Party in 

Saskatchewan. I don‘t think I need to say more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — And on the back page of this, the August 28th issue, which was the first issue that would 

be put out after - well, I believe the paper was printed on the 21st, which was the day of the actual 

aggression, but the publishing business being what it is, it is absolutely impossible for anything to be 

said in the paper of that date. At the earliest possible moment on August 28th we have this editorial, 

‗Tragedy compounded‘: 

 

Peace-minded people the world over were shocked and bewildered by the military intervention in 

Czechoslovakia 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1511 

by the USSR and other members of the Warsaw Pact. The dreadful situation in Vietnam is now 

compounded by the dreadful situation in Czechoslovakia. In both places the hawks appear to be 

rending the entrails of the helpless rabbits. The super powers involved in both places appear to be 

trying to prove that might is right. When Hungary was invaded by the Soviet troops in 1956 it was 

argued that the rebellion there had been aided and abetted by outside influences such as the American 

CIA, and Hungary had been under the influence of a Fascist government at the time of the Second 

World War. But the situation in Czechoslovakia is quite different. This country has always shown a 

determination to be independent and to cling to democratic ideals. It is ironical as well as tragic that 

such a country should first have been betrayed by the Nazis in 1938 and now by the Communists in 

1968. As this is written we do not have as much information about the total situation as we would like. 

Whatever further facts may come to life we feel that the USSR‘s action towards Czechoslovakia has 

been a horrible mistake. We cannot see how it can serve any useful purpose from anyone‘s point of 

view including that of the Russians themselves. It seems likely that such actions will seriously set back 

any possible chance of a peaceful settlement in Vietnam and it will certainly hinder the chances of 

having a peace-minded candidate elected as President of the United States. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — I submit, Mr. Speaker, that this puts the position of the New Democratic Party in 

Saskatchewan very plainly on record with regard to the position we took concerning the aggression in 

Czechoslovakia. And there is certainly no reason why we should not take this position because after all 

we are Democratic Socialists and we are proud of the name. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — And this is what the people of Czechoslovakia were endeavouring to become. They were 

working towards a Democratic Socialist regime in that country when the Russian juggernaut rolled in 

upon them. We see no reason whatsoever, I can‘t understand the thinking of the Members opposite that 

would think that we would take any different view than to condemn the Communist invasion of this 

country at that time. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that we have made it plain in the past and this amendment 

which we now have before us, as spoken to by the Hon. Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney), 

also makes it very plain in this House what our position is in this regard. There is no reason and there is 

no excuse for Members opposite to say that we are condoning the action that was taken there. 

 

I would like to say something further in regard to the part about the burning of the American flag last 

summer. I‘m sure that Members on this side will concur in the fact that it was very poor taste indeed. A 

flag is a symbol of a nation and a flag stands for all the people of a country. I think that this abuse of the 

flag of our good neighbour to the south was not very well taken. I‘m sure that there is none on this side 

of the House that would condone such an action. We are quite prepared to go along with that part of the 

amendment that has been 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1512 

proposed by the Hon. Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) in that regard. 

 

But I do think that the Hon. Member for Athabasca cannot be very serious in expecting us to voice a 

vote of confidence in the Ottawa Government. If a vote of confidence were proposed in Ottawa in regard 

to the general administration of the present Government, it would be opposed by every Member of the 

Opposition, Conservative, Social Credit, or what have you, and the New Democratic Party. You can‘t 

expect the Members of this Opposition to take any different position to that. In regard to their policy 

concerning defence, I think this is doubly true. I was just reading the other day - it may be a small matter 

but it is not so small - that the morale in the navy at this time is exceptionally low due to the actions and 

due to the way that the matters have been handled by the present Government. If this is a good way to 

carry on the defence of a nation, I am sure I cannot see it, and I‘m certainly not in a position to say that I 

am prepared to give it a vote of confidence in this type of work. 

 

We‘ve had some experience in the Public Accounts Committee of this House this winter and we have 

also read with a good deal of interest the actions and the proceedings in the Public Accounts Committee 

at Ottawa. Their findings in regard to a certain aircraft carrier and certain hydro planes certainly do not 

tend to give us confidence in the way that the Government there has been carrying on the defence of our 

nation. In regard to NATO or NORAD, I really can‘t blame the present Government especially for 

taking their time in expressing their position in regard to these things. I think it is a serious matter and a 

position which has to be given some thought, and I believe that some study is being given to it. I may 

say, Mr. Speaker, that the time for coming forward in saying where they stand on these things is 

certainly drawing very close, and we should be looking forward to the time when the Government at 

Ottawa is going to be able to come out on record and say where it stands on these things. Certainly this 

is true, Mr. Speaker, that if this House, the Members opposite, or if the Government at Ottawa expects 

us to give them a vote of confidence in regard to their position on these things, we have to know what 

that position is. I do not think that the Hon. Members opposite can be serious, if they think that we are 

foolish enough or dupes enough to give a vote of confidence to the Government at Ottawa in regard to 

its position on defence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wood: — I do think, Mr. Speaker, that the subamendment that we have before us, as it was spoken 

to by the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney), sets out very well our position in regard to 

these matters. I am sure that I will support the subamendment and I would ask all Members of the House 

to do the same. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, for a large country with a small population in regards to 

our size, it would probably take our entire Federal Budget to provide an adequate defence with a type of 

ever-changing models of weapons. As our province is 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1513 

geographically located on the main air stream between the United States and Asia, we should welcome 

this defence because in defending themselves - the United States - they are also defending us. I agree 

that we should have something to say in these matters and believe that we are. The Federal Defence 

officials are doing this. Mr. Speaker, I am very disgusted to see a motion like this, which the Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) moved. No greater harm, I believe, can be done to the peace and security of 

our country than by the action and by the speeches of various people sponsored by the NDP this past 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am concerned as much as anybody in our country in regard to our defence. I commend 

both the Governments of Canada and the United States in this proposed construction of an anti-ballistic 

missile system. I thank God we have such a powerful nation as United States close to us to help protect 

us. I will wholeheartedly support the amendment prepared by the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, the amendment to the Resolution which 

was proposed by the Minister of Public Works contains three sections and it really does three things. 

 

Mr. Wood: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Members 

stick to the subamendment as you set out. It is not that I object to the Hon. Member speaking to the 

amendment as he starts out to do. But if he does that, it will elicit replies from this side and before you 

know it we are into a discussion of the whole matter and not sticking to the subamendment . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question before the House is strictly on the subamendment. 

 

Mr. Forsyth: — Mr. Speaker, what I had proposed to do is deal with the items covered by the 

subamendment, but I can only do this by referring to the amendment at the beginning of my speech. I 

certainly will end up speaking on the subamendment. But the amendment expresses really, to my mind, 

the only belief that we have to live by, and that is the belief that intelligent men possessed of both 

good-will and power can arrive at reasonable solutions to the problems of mankind. What is happening 

right at this moment is that the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of Canada are 

meeting in Washington. If we can‘t have faith in that kind of negotiation then there is very little that we 

can have any faith in. 

 

The second thing that the amendment does - and this is also done by the subamendment - is to condemn 

a senseless movement of violent protest that is becoming almost a trademark of our times and which 

reached its peak in our province with the destruction of the American flag at Naicam. 

 

A third thing which the amendment does and the subamendment also does is to acknowledge the 

world-wide nature of the problems which concern all peace-loving men. Now because the 

subamendment 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1514 

faces up to only two of the aspects of the question and leaves out a very important aspect, I cannot 

accept it as being adequate. I will support the amendment and not the subamendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Subamendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 21 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd Meakes Michayluk 

Wooff Berezowsky Brockelbank 

Kramer Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Dewhurst Snyder Kwasnica 

   

NAYS — 31 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher Coderre Radloff 

Howes Larochelle Weatherald 

Boldt MacDonald Mitchell 

Steuart Estey Gardner 

Heald Hooker Coupland 

McIsaac Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Barrie Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

Grant   

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I want only to add a few brief words seeing that 

the subamendment has now been defeated and we are now faced with the proposition of being obliged to 

do something with this extraneous material that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) dragged in by 

the tails, so he wouldn‘t have to vote on the original Resolution. This is precisely what it is, Mr. 

Speaker, extraneous material, another red herring that the Minister of Public Works drags in so expertly 

every time there is a situation involved where there‘s a serious matter to be voted upon. 

 

I think the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) has put the case exceedingly well for our 

Members as has the Member for Swift Current (Mr. Wood). There are two portions or two aspects of the 

amendment that the Minister of Public Works brought to this House that I think Members on this side 

will have no difficulty in supporting. The aspect which in part heaps condemnation on those who were 

involved in the flag burning, I think, is one which we have no difficulty in supporting because we on this 

side of the House divorce ourselves entirely and completely from this kind of action. I personally and 

I‘m sure no one on this side of the House was acquainted with those who were involved. Certainly the 

inference that there was some organized attempt on our part to have something to do with this is 

completely erroneous. The other portion of the amendment which the Minister of Public Works offered 

condemns aggression, and we on 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1515 

this side of the House of course find this like motherhood, equally easy to support. We condemn 

aggression whether it is in Israel or Egypt or Czechoslovakia or Hungary or wherever. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, we then find ourselves in a position where it would be necessary, if 

we supported this amendment to heap blessing and congratulation on the Federal Government and 

certainly this is something that no one on this side of the House has any intention of doing. 

 

I think I have made my position clear with respect to all three aspects of the amendment which the 

Minister of Public Works brought forward. For my part, Mr. Speaker, I have no intention whatsoever in 

voting on this amendment, neither for nor against. I can‘t in any way support a portion of that 

amendment which heaps congratulations on the Federal Government. I know as far as I am personally 

concerned that I intend to remain in my seat when the vote is taken and I hope my colleagues on this 

side of the House will refrain from voting on this, because it has been an exercise in futility with respect 

to the kind of material that the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) has interjected into a very serious 

matter on this day. I intend not to vote on this motion in either case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. I.H. MacDougall (Souris-Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of thing we might expect from 

the Members opposite. I‘m a little surprised and amazed, though, that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) would pick up a dead-horse issue like this one. It‘s a typical NDP type of motion because they 

are very famous across Canada for picking up dead-horse issues and flogging them to death. You can 

pick up anything you like. There will be a discussion on Vietnam and Biafra, and they will send 

delegations over there and all this kind of nonsense, things that we can‘t possibly do anything with in 

this House. I think that the motion in the first place was a good bit of nonsense for the Leader of the 

Opposition to get some publicity in the press. However, it may not turn out the way he wanted it. I 

didn‘t expect much more from the Member from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) when he got up to 

speak. He follows the red line pretty carefully and pretty consistently and I‘m almost convinced that 

Beeching helps him write his speeches. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the most anti-American group of people that ever sat in the House in Regina. And I 

suppose anywhere in Canada. Is it any wonder that we have trouble getting industry, Mr. Speaker, to 

come into Saskatchewan when one hears all this anti-American propaganda that comes from the mouths 

of the Members opposite? The men with the money down in the States are ever fearful that it might 

happen by accident that these fellows may get elected again in Saskatchewan and of course they are a 

little hesitant to invest here. We have to defeat these people at the next election and badly, for once and 

for all. We will just wipe them completely out so that the Americans will lose their fear of another 

Socialist regime in this province. The NDP are forever kicking dead-horse issues. They kick unceasingly 

at our neighbours to the south and it just turns my stomach. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1516 

Mr. MacDougall: — And I have a stomach that‘s big enough to turn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — There was one thing that came out of this debate, Mr. Speaker, we smoked out 

two of them. We smoked out the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) who is looking for the 

leadership of that party. He waffled this way and that way, and he snaked this way and that way, and he 

reminds me of the American senator who spoke on the issue of whiskey. He said: 

 

If and when you say whiskey, you mean the devil‘s brew, the poisonous scourge, the bloody monster 

that defiles innocence, yea, literally takes the bread from the mouths of children. If you mean the evil 

. . . 

 

I‘ve got it here on a piece of paper: 

 

. . . drink that topples the Christian man and woman from the pinnacles of righteous, gracious living, 

to the bottomless pit of degradation and despair, shame, helplessness, hopelessness, then certainly I am 

against it. But, if you say whiskey, and you mean the oil of conversation, the philosophic wine, the 

stuff that is consumed when good fellows get together, that puts a song in the hearts and laughter on 

the lips and a warm glow of contentment in their eyes. If you mean the Christmas cheer, if you mean 

that stimulating drink that puts spring in the old gent‘s step on a frosty morning, if you mean the drink 

that enables man to magnify his job and happiness and to forget, if only for a little while, life‘s great 

tragedies and heartbreaks and sorrows. If you mean that drink, the sale of which pours into our 

treasuries millions of dollars which are used to provide tender care for our little crippled children, our 

blind, our deaf, our dumb, our pitifully aged, to build highways, hospitals and schools, then certainly I 

am in favour of it. 

 

And that is exactly what the Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) was doing this morning. He 

found himself waffling back and forth because when he goes to his friends to try and get the leadership, 

he‘s going to have to stand up and make a statement. And when he stands up he will be able to say that 

well, I went this way, I went that way and I went another way. And that‘s what he did. Mr. Speaker, I for 

one am going to support the amendment. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker. I have listened to the Hon. 

Members in this House today on both sides. I listened to our Leader (Mr. Lloyd) and the Member for 

Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) who brought in a proposition which I think was very serious and 

important. And I thought that for once the House would take the matter seriously instead of trying to 

bring forth red herrings and making jokes of the whole situation. You heard Members saying they 

welcome American defence. Well, if you take that attitude and are quite prepared to have another nation 

fly over your country and run your country for you, then why should you not say the same thing to the 

Czechoslovakians because they too were in a certain pact. They are members of the Warsaw Pact and 

they too 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1517 

should have welcomed the Communists coming in and protecting them, as you suggest we should be 

welcoming the Americans coming in, to protect us. Mr. Speaker, my folks, the same as has been pointed 

out by the Member from Regina East (Mr. Smishek), came to this country because they wanted to live in 

a free country and that‘s why we are here now. And because we are free here, that‘s why I have been 

proud to sit in this Legislature and to be a citizen of this province and to be a citizen of this country. I am 

quite prepared to see us defend our land and if the time comes to fight for this country, I am quite 

prepared to encourage my sons to do so. But I cannot agree for them to fight for either one kind of 

imperialism or another kind of imperialism. 

 

When it is mentioned in this House by Hon. Members opposite that the Prime Minister is negotiating 

with the leader of this nation to the south of us, that‘s fine. But I would say this to the Members of this 

Legislature that the Prime Minister would probably like to know just how Canadians feel about this 

whole situation, and he would like to know how the governments of the provinces feel about this whole 

situation. And we should be serious enough to take the matter into hand and study it and give him the 

right answer. I said 15 years ago that I was not so much afraid of the attack by the Soviet Union against 

Canada or attacking the United States, because it wasn‘t Canada that would be attacked. It could only be 

great powers fighting each other because of different ideologies, each wanting to conquer the other and 

Canada would have been the battleground. The Americans themselves said so at that time. I mentioned it 

in this House. It was said what‘s 20 million people in Canada when you can save 200 million in the 

United States of America. Well, my friends, I am not prepared to sacrifice either myself, my children or 

my grandchildren in order that the Americans can survive and live. I think we have the greatest country 

in the world and I want to live and survive right here with my children in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now there seems to be some lack of understanding of what it‘s all about, what this 

whole situation is all about and why the Americans are putting up these machines of destruction here in 

Canada for defence or whatever you want to call it. I can only refer you to some of the people that 

apparently know what it is all about. I would like to refer you to a report on page 8 of the Socialist 

Commentary from Great Britain, and they are not Communists. I quote . . . 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — What did you say the name was? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Socialist Commentary, the Labour party in England. They are very good friends of 

the Americans and I would hope that you wouldn‘t consider that they are the friends of the Communists 

who went and overran Czechoslovakia. The author of this is Malcolm Keir, it sounds like a Scotch name 

and he says: 

 

What went wrong with the Great Society . . . 

 

He is referring to the American society and I think it is worth taking a few minutes of our time. I am 

sure the young people 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1518 

up there are listening because they are interested in the Great Society. Here is what he says: 

 

How the military managed to take over the war and make it into their own image is a question that 

disturbs many Americans. For it does nothing to diminish the conviction of those like Theodore 

Draper of the Hoover Institute of Strategic Studies that America today is in danger not only to herself 

but to the whole planet. Its military power has become the government of the United States, etc. 

 

I don‘t need to read the rest, you have it right there. This is what we are afraid of. Here is a great 

imperialistic power who‘s concerned with its own survival because of the political philosophies that they 

have. They don‘t care whether they overrun Canada or Mexico or any other country, just as the 

Communists on the other side don‘t care whether they overrun Czechoslovakia or any other country that 

steps in their way. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Which do you think is the worst, Bill? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Me, I think they are both equally bad and I have said this on different occasions. In 

spite of the fact you said that it has never been brought up in this House, it‘s only a week or two ago 

when I talked about the Ukrainian question in the USSR. They are no different. Both are imperialists 

and they are prepared to join hands and not go to war against each other. They will try and divide this 

world up into two sections and that‘s it! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Point of order. 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to ask the Member for Prince Albert Cumberland East a question 

if he would permit it. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — What‘s the point of order? What have I done wrong? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thought the Member from Hanley rose on a point of order but he rises to ask the 

Member a question. The Member can accept the question or not as he chooses. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Well if he gets up on a point of privilege, I‘ll answer the question, Mr. Speaker, 

but he‘s telling me I‘m out of order. 

 

Mr. Heggie: — I didn‘t say you were out of order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, no, it was I who said the Member from Hanley rose on a point of order and I 

thought that he did. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — And as I said, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that we in Canada are innocent. 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1519 

Mr. Speaker: — What is the point of order? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I would hope that a judge, a magistrate would know what is order 

and what isn‘t order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — If he wants to ask a question let him get up and ask it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It is a well-known fact that a point of order has to be taken into consideration 

immediately. Now let‘s hear the point of order from the Member from Hanley. 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the Member who is on his feet a question. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Asking a question isn‘t a point of order. 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Well all right then, on the point of order, the Member from Cumberland East is making 

a comparison of the friendly relations between the United States and Canada. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have the right in this House to make any kind of comparison and 

the Hon. Member opposite doesn‘t have to agree with me. I don‘t see any difference between capitalist 

imperialists and Communist imperialists, and the people of Czechoslovakia know that too! If they were 

so fond of the capitalists why didn‘t they ask them to come in, but they preferred to stay under the 

Communists there and try to work out their own destiny. Don‘t forget about that. This is just another red 

herring that you bring up because you refuse to vote for a good resolution which is of benefit to 

Canadian people and Saskatchewan people. Read this about the bad situation. This is exactly why we 

have this situation here now with these ABM machines being established in Montana. 

 

And here is what it says in another article taken from the library in ―The World Today‖ on page 60: 

 

Tactical preparedness, stronger force postures, force modernization and the implementation of new 

strategic concepts hinged upon Czechoslovakia‘s active participation in Pact planning and operations. 

From the viewpoint of Soviet hard-liners NATO‘s military posture was being constantly improved by 

new developments in United States‘ strategic forces. 

 

Now don‘t tell me that it is only the Communists who are improving strategic forces and making better 

armaments for war. The Americans and the Canadians are doing it according to this article. Do you want 

that? 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You bet! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — You want that? You want to conquer the whole world? 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1520 

Well, there are people like myself who don‘t care about conquering anybody. We want to live in peace. 

God help this country if you are going to defend it the way you propose to do. The air above this country 

belongs to the Canadian people. But you are prepared to let enemies - it doesn‘t matter who they are - to 

come and fly over and contaminate the air. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They are not our enemies. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — They are not your enemies today but they were your enemies in 1837. We are still 

an independent country. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Our enemies are the Communists and Socialists. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that maybe I could say something that was serious enough 

so that the hon. friends opposite could respect and consider the same but from the interruptions heard 

from the opposite side, I think it is absolutely useless. They don‘t have respect for the responsibilities 

they have in this Legislature. They have no patriotism for this province and country and so I will say no 

more. Certainly I won‘t support this kind of an amendment that they brought in. The motion was good, 

the amendment was not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I have a few comments that I would like 

to make on this Resolution and the amendment involved. I think the best thing about this Resolution is 

that it has finally forced the Members opposite, the Socialists, to admit and to discuss the burning of the 

American flag and to finally attempt to absolve themselves of any blame. I would like to refer and point 

out again that this was the New Democratic Party Youth Committee that did so, and I am glad to hear 

these people stand on their feet and finally try and divorce themselves from it. 

 

The second thing that disturbs the Members on this side of the House about the original Resolution of 

the Leader of the Opposition is its anti-American texture. In every single Resolution brought into this 

House, since I have been a Member in five years, regardless of what kind of problems exist in the world 

it always has to have an anti-American flavour. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Pro-Russian. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of that Resolution about burning the American flag brings 

me to the other Resolution that the young New Democrats passed. It said that they supported the Viet 

Cong in the establishment of a Socialist regime in South Vietnam. If they are really interested in peace 

in the world, I would like to ask each one of them what is the most important single problem facing the 

world today. It is the problem of Vietnam. The Americans have willingly de-escalated, they have 

willingly stopped bombing and yet the Viet Cong, despite their word in the agreement, have now 

instituted the most massive rocket attack on defenceless cities and defenceless women and children ever 

before in the history of the South 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1521 

Vietnam War. Yet not one of them would stand on their feet and move a resolution in this regard. 

 

The second argument I would like to review very briefly the arguments of the Member from Regina 

Centre (Mr. Blakeney). First of all he referred to the fact that he couldn‘t support this Resolution 

because it expressed confidence in the Liberal Government. Mr. Speaker, this is not the way I read this 

Resolution. It expresses confidence in the ability of the governments of Canada and the United States to 

jointly plan and implement an adequate defence policy for our continent and its people. It does not 

discuss the Conservative government, the Liberal government, the NDP government or any government, 

it merely endorses the principle of discussion and negotiation. Surely, Mr. Speaker, that cloak is not 

enough for them to try to sit down and abstain in this Resolution. 

 

The next thing they tried to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that one of the basic issues was not necessarily the 

issue of war instruments, but the issue of the black against the white, of the poverty-stricken against the 

rich or the affluent. Mr. Speaker, if that is the case why do they not stand on their feet and pay the 

greatest compliment to the American people, because never in the history of mankind has one nation 

been as generous to its fellow man as have the Americans. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Look at their foreign aid policy. Look at the Marshall Plan. Look at the 

organization of the American states. In every single corner of the globe the American people have 

contributed more to the raising of the level of the standard of living in the underdeveloped countries than 

any other single organization or state in the history of mankind. A thousand times more than the 

Russians or the Socialists in any country and, of course, Mr. Speaker, it is the greatest vindication of free 

enterprise and the capitalistic system. 

 

I only want to make one other comment and that was the comment of the Member from Regina Centre 

in relation to the federal government‘s attitude toward foreign policy. Of all the political parties that I 

have ever seen that would condemn a party for a review, a study and a commission to ascertain what 

Canada‘s future role in foreign policy should be, it should be the Socialists. Because on every single 

point and on every single resolution in this House that has come forth they have recommended a study 

or a commission or a review. We could have spent every single dollar of this year‘s Budget and next 

year‘s Budget just carrying out the studies of that political party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I will certainly support the amendment and I certainly do not accept the 

Member from Moose Jaw‘s abstention because of the first portion of that amendment. It certainly does 

not in any way do anything but endorse the principle of discussion and negotiation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I have one or two very short comments as 

the result of the comments of the Member for Moose Jaw North 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1522 

(Mr. Snyder). If I heard him correctly I think he said that he didn‘t know these people that were involved 

in the flag burning, that the members of the NDP didn‘t have anything to do with it, and if that is what 

he said and that is what I understood him to say, I would just like to remind Hon. Members of the 

Legislature that, according to The Leader Post of July 19th, 1968, and I am reading from the press 

clipping: 

 

The president of Saskatchewan‘s New Democratic Youth said Thursday he clapped when members of 

the J. Sullivan Brown Brigade burned the United States flag in Naicam a few weeks ago. 

And he said . . . 

 

That‘s the president of the NDY. 

 

. . . the NDP sponsored it. 

 

Not NDY. 

 

‗There are those who said burning the flag was in bad taste but I personally clapped. It is unfortunate 

they didn‘t burn a couple of five-star generals too.‘ 

 

This is Lowel Monkhouse of Regina with the NDY. Then it goes on: 

 

Jean Maguire, NDP vice-president was aide-de-camp in the brigade which demonstrated against 

United States bomb-storing training in Saskatchewan and burned the United States flag in protest. 

Outside the convention hall, Mr. Monkhouse told the Leader Post the NDP . . . 

 

Not NDY. 

 

. . . had also pledged financial support to the brigade although it had not yet made a contribution. 

 

This is Mr. Monkhouse. The Member for Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) said that he didn‘t know the 

people that were connected with the flag burning. Well, I have another clipping here, July 27th, 1968, 

―Five Named by NDP‖: 

 

Five members of the Saskatchewan NDP Provincial Council have been elected to the Provincial 

Executive. 

 

And who do you suppose they are? Mrs. Penrose Whelan of Regina, Irving Carison of Melville, Gordon 

McMurchy of Semans, J.H. Brockelbank of Regina and Lowel Monkhouse of Regina. NDY 

representatives, NDP executives, so any statement, Mr. Speaker, to this House to indicate that the 

Members opposite and the NDP Provincial party don‘t know anything about the flag burning, it is not 

true, simply not true. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very interesting debate. For a long time I 

have watched people wrap themselves in the Union Jack on special occasions. This is one of them. My 

mind goes back, because of some reference that was made to Tommy Douglas and some war policies. I 

remember the time when to further the war effort, contracts were offered on five per cent and all these 

good reactionary, free enterprise, flag-flapping, Union Jack-waving industrialists wouldn‘t touch a 

contract. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1523 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Young people could die on the fields of France and they didn‘t care. They either got 

contracts plus or they wouldn‘t touch them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — We have heard a whole lot this afternoon about criticizing our good neighbours to the 

south. I haven‘t heard anyone damning them to the extent that some of their own papers are doing. I 

have a copy of the Saturday Evening Post here for February, 1969, and I just want to read you an 

editorial, not somebody‘s article, I am going to read you a paragraph out of an editorial discussing the 

United States of America getting out of Vietnam. He is speaking about the will to carry on the war or the 

will to get out of it. He says that the will to carry on can be sustained only if we are willing to continue 

telling ourselves the lies about our commitments to our allies. These are not my words, these are the 

words of the editor of the Saturday Evening Post. There has been nothing uttered on this side of the 

House in their misgivings of American military policies that can equal a condemnation like that. We on 

these prairies have built up a way of life over the last 60 years, as pioneers. If we were to sit back with 

the attitude of the Premier this day with his indifference as to what is going to happen to our children 

and our grandchildren, I for one don‘t care who I criticize, I am not going to sit back and let anything 

like that happen without fighting and taking a chance as to who I offend. So far as the Minister of Social 

Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) is concerned, he ought to be ashamed to get up in his seat and say some of the 

things he has said today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wooff: — I will not support the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. D.G. MacLennan (Last Mountain): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I had no intention whatsoever in 

getting involved in this debate until the matter of fishing came up again with all the red herring. My 

interest picked up a bit and I listened to a few remarks opposite and I just couldn‘t restrain myself any 

longer. We heard, and I take note of the remarks made by the Member from Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) of a typical, selfish, NDP, Socialist attitude. He says that he wasn‘t 

prepared to sacrifice his life or the life of any of his family for any American. I wonder what he thought, 

when the Americans by the hundreds of thousands sacrificed their lives and spilled their blood for his 

well-being and welfare, for himself, his family and his grandchildren. Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to 

note the names of the people that Mr. Nixon and the American people can label as opponents and as 

possibly, God knows, even enemies. You have Mao of China, you have Lloyd of Biggar, Ho Chi Minh 

of North Vietnam, Berezowsky of Cumberland, Kosygin of Russia, Smishek of North East Regina. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege, I have no 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1524 

connection with any Communists. I have said in the House the Communists destroyed my family 

overseas. I resent this. If he wants to go outside I will take him on - outside of this Legislature - if he is 

going to insult me once more. I want him to withdraw, Mr. Speaker. I have spoken as a citizen of this 

province and I am not connected with the Communist Ho Chi or anybody else and I don't think I should 

be insulted in that way or any other Member for that matter. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — Mr. Speaker, I never said that he was a Communist, I never insinuated that he was 

a Communist, I just listed him along with some other well-known people who are in opposition to the 

government of the United States. I will go on with the list if he wants. Smishek from Regina, Ulbricht of 

East Germany, Wooff from Turtleford, Gomulko from Poland, Berezowsky again, Castro of Cuba and 

oddly enough Tommy Douglas from anywhere he might be running in Canada. It‘s a very conspicuous 

list, it‘s a list that I hope I am never on and I feel sorry for the gentlemen that are on that list, 

Consequently they can right their position by supporting the amendment and supporting the amended 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, you know I really think that this is quite a 

sad day for the Saskatchewan Legislature. It is sad because, I think, we have seen it here probably at its 

worst muckraking, name calling, yelling across the floor, absolute denials of Members of this 

Legislature to be able to discuss issues of the day that we think are important. And if the opposition 

doesn‘t, they can express it by exercising their power of majority. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I want to draw to the attention of the Member that is speaking to the tact that there has 

been absolutely no denial in this Chamber of the right of Members to voice their opinion to the fullest 

and to the greatest extent. If any Member did not like what was going on he should have risen on a point 

of order. I‘ll make jolly sure that everybody, everybody gets a chance to speak before this debate is over 

and to the fullest extent. There are several people on both sides of this House that have not done so yet, 

but just don‘t cast any reflections on the Chair in regard to the defence of freedom of speech in this 

Chamber. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I cast no reflection on the Chair. I am simply saying . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You just did! Now go ahead. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I ask you, Sir, if it is 

essential or desirable or necessary to castigate a Member in that particular way. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Ever since I entered this House and especially in 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1525 

this Chair I have defended the rights of free speech. When I sat on the Opposition side I defended the 

rights of free speech and I do so now for you or any Member and I‘ll be hanged if I‘m going to sit here 

and be accused of stopping anybody from speaking to the fullest extent. Now go ahead. And any time 

you want me on the floor of the House, all you have got to do is move a motion of non-confidence and 

I‘ll get right down there. Go ahead. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the debate is getting very serious and I think you are right that this is a 

very serious point. I want to make it absolutely clear in my remarks I did not in any way wish to infer 

that you, Sir, personally have never defended the right to the freedom of speech. I think the contrary is 

true, that we on this side of the House have found you to be an eminently fair and reasonable Speaker 

and if I said anything that was misconstrued that way, I, as a parliamentarian and as a member of the 

legal profession, withdraw. But, Mr. Speaker, I certainly was not saying that. I got up because I was 

concerned at what I thought was going across in this debate from Members opposite and that was what I 

said to be muckraking and innuendo and a bunch of shouting, in other words debilitating against the 

importance of the debate as the Leader of the Opposition has introduced it in this proposed motion, We 

have all sorts of names being mentioned, for example, by the Member from Last Mountain (Mr. 

MacLennan). They refuse to mention names like Senator McGovern when he talked about the people 

who opposed the ABM system, or Senator Ted Kennedy, or the late Senator Bobby Kennedy who also 

spoke on the ABM business, or for example, Dr. Spock. He said, Mr. Speaker, that he didn‘t want to be 

included in a list of names like that and I can tell him that by his contribution he never would be 

included in a list of names like that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — He talked about the war of the United States. 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — On a point of order. I just wanted to point out to the Member from Riversdale (Mr. 

Romanow) that the Member did not suggest any list of people who spoke against the ABM when he 

spoke about opponents to the United States. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now these are all debating questions. That is hardly a point of order. 

 

Mr. MacLennan: — My point of order is simply that I did not state that they were anti anti-ballistic 

missiles. I stated the names of the people that were in opposition to the United States Government and to 

the United States as a nation generally speaking. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to get involved in any debate particularly as to 

what the Member did or didn‘t say. I am sure that all Members of this House know what he said when 

he went down and listed people name by name. I am going to say, Sir, that, if you are going to name my 

colleague the Member for Regina North East in this debate, you can put him in the category 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1526 

of the Kennedys and the people we have talked about, and no less anti-American than that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I want to make it personally clear and quite perfectly clear that everyone of us is 

indebted in some form or another to the United States of America. Accident of geography places us right 

next door to one of the greatest countries of the world, the United States of America. There is no 

question about that. But don‘t ever have the Member from Last Mountain (Mr. MacLennan) tell us about 

the Second World War and the actions of the American nation. They, Sir, didn‘t act until 1941 - a full 

two years after war had occurred in the European scene and only after they were attacked. Only because 

it was in their own interest. The fact of the matter is this that they decided calmly and rationally, 

independently, what was best in their own foreign policy terms. And that is what the proposed motion 

by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) intended to do, to say to the people of Saskatchewan and 

Canada, ―Look, we are an independent province, we are an independent Canada.‖ We may disagree with 

our friends from time to time but friends are there to be disagreed with from time to time and we object 

to the system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — May I also remind the Hon. Members that this is exactly what has been intimated by 

the Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau and I hope that this matter can be salvaged yet. May I make 

one other observation, Mr. Attorney General (Mr. Heald). This can be interpreted as a confessional. As 

far as I am concerned personally - and this has been said by Member after Member on this side of the 

House – I don‘t condone any of the actions of flag burning. That was a piece of arrant nonsense. But I 

can simply say this: Lowell Monkhouse was no more speaking for the NDP than the Members in the 

Liberal youth convention who said that the Liberal party is nothing but a stamp-licking and boot-licking 

party. I wouldn‘t get up and say that that is exactly the sole purpose and the sole being of the Liberal 

party. The fact of the matter is that at any function that I have had anything to do with as a Member of 

the New Democratic party, never has it ever been proposed or approved, that I know of, by any New 

Democratic Party in convention with respect to the question of burning. And may I also just to clarify 

the record say that Jean Maguire, whoever she is, is certainly not a vice-president of the New 

Democratic Party. The fact of the matter is simply this, Mr. Speaker, that this amendment is really a red 

herring. This has been said by the Members of this side. This is why I say it is a sad day. We had here an 

issue before the House on the question whether or not this Legislature expressed its opinion of opposing 

the proposed ABM system in the United States. That was all! No one asked for the amendments to be 

dragged in about flag burnings or about Socialist imperialism or anything of that nature, or name calling, 

or naming of people in North Vietnam and otherwise. It is a simple opportunity to debate an issue. 

 

All I can say is simply this. The Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) has very adequately told 

us why we can t support certainly one part of the proposed amendment. And that is 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1527 

because the Liberal Government in Ottawa does not know and hasn‘t known for some years what the 

policy is with respect to defence and foreign matters. I am going to cite one very small authority if I 

might. In 1963, Mr. Speaker, and this is still a continuing issue and the nub of the argument today, there 

was a great debate on nuclear arms. There were some of us who said that Canada ought not to accept 

nuclear warheads because there was an escalation. Many of the same arguments, Mr. Speaker, were 

advanced today in urging the Government to oppose the ABM installation. And members of the Liberal 

party, members of the group that sit opposite, also said the same thing time after time. In fact, the then 

Leader of the Opposition, Lester Pearson, gave his commitment to the people of Canada that we would 

not have nuclear warheads on our soil. That was good until 1965. Like any other Liberal promise it was 

a broken promise because in 1965 we turned around and accepted nuclear warheads. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And at that time I can tell Hon. Members that there was a great deal of consternation 

by some members of the Liberal party. 

 

I just want to quote a little item from an article called, Cité Libre in Quebec. Members may have not 

heard this quote regarding the reversal of the foreign policy decision and defence matter of the Liberal 

Government of the day: 

 

I have never seen in all my examination of politics so degrading a spectacle as that of all those 

Liberals turning their coats in unison with their chief when they saw a chance to take power. 

 

And then further on he said this: 

 

The head of the troop having shown the way, the rest followed with the elegance of animals heading 

for the trough. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was the now Prime Minister of Canada, Pierre Elliott Trudeau. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — This man is now the chief man of the Liberal party in Canada and now the Prime 

Minister of this nation. This man now has engaged in what is called his dialogue with respect to such 

important foreign matters and defence policies, such as for example, NATO. And now, withstanding 

what my friend the Minister of Welfare says, this proposed amendment asks us to express confidence in 

the man who has just finished, and these are quotes from the articles that he has written, who had just 

said that quote a short five years ago. He has one Minister, Mr. Kierans, going in one end of the country 

and saying that NATO is no good. He says that Canada should pull out of NATO. He says our defence 

arrangements are out of date and are obsolete. And another Minister, Mr. Cadieux goes to the other end 

of the Canadian nation and says, No, NATO is a very good thing. We‘ve got to support it. They don‘t 

know themselves what the position is with respect to NATO. And it is the same thing with Red China. 

Now they are trying to examine the question of whether or not Red 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1528 

China should be entered into this thing. I will be very interested to see what finally happens because 

there is another book written by one Pierre Elliott Trudeau called Two Innocents in China. There is a 

very interesting comment with respect to some of the type of debate that I have made reference to, Mr. 

Speaker, at the beginning, and that is to say what I consider to be muckraking, and smear, sometimes 

subtle and sometimes blatant. 

 

Mr. Trudeau says some very important things about the recognition of Red China. Would Hon. 

Members opposite say that he was towing an anti-American line, because you know the Americans are 

against Red China being recognized? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — The American‘s don‘t want Red China in the United Nations. Would the Hon. 

Members say that Mr. Trudeau, now that he is entering negotiations in defence alliances, in recognizing 

Red China is probably doing the wrong thing? No. What does he say about this matter when he talks 

about defence matters and when it comes to recognizing Red China? He said this and I am quoting from 

his book, Mr. Speaker: 

 

For years anti-Communists of this kind . . . 

 

and I might just stop here from the quotation. Anti-Communists of those kind, because they are not 

Pierre Elliott Trudeau‘s Liberals. They are not ours I can say that. 

 

. . . have applied themselves to discrediting any evidence that might suggest that the Russians were not 

Stone Age barbarians. Then suddenly the Soviets put gigantic Sputniks in orbit around the earth, 

photographed the other side of the moon and confounded world opinion with the scientific progress. It 

is evident then, today, that Western governments would have done well to have listened more 

carefully to travellers who told the progress of the USSR and to have put rather less trust in the witch 

hunters. 

 

And that is what we have opposite, a bunch of witch hunters when it comes to the question of this 

Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Their reaction to the question of an important issue such as this is exactly the type of 

tactic that is employed by the Member from Athabasca (Mr. Guy), the Member from Last Mountain 

(Mr. MacLennan), the Minister of Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald), not the Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) to such an extent, and the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). It is a simple question of witch 

hunting, the type of witch hunting that is condemned by the Leader of their own party nationally. 

 

You know the Liberal party in Canada really doesn‘t know where they are going in defence matters, one 

day we are in NATO and one day we are out of NATO. I was very interested to hear the Deputy Premier 

say this morning that he knew that next Tuesday Canada was going to announce that we are going to 

remain in NATO. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the hot line has now been reconnected between 

Saskatchewan and Ottawa. It seems that the 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1529 

Provincial Treasurer knows a little bit more about what we are going to do NATO-wise. All I can say is 

simply this. I hope, Mr. Treasurer, that you have more information than you were able to provide for the 

people of the Province of Saskatchewan on what Ottawa was going to do with respect to wheat prices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Where was the hot line when the wheat prices were being debated? You couldn‘t tell 

us what Ottawa was doing. You didn‘t know that the International Grains Arrangement was being 

broken. Now all of a sudden you know what the situation is with respect to the NATO question. You 

know the situation now. It simply tells us one thing. You have a hot line when it comes to guns, but you 

have no pipeline when it comes to bread and butter for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You have a great source of information about international defence systems but no 

source of information about International Grains system, the bread and butter, the type of thing that we 

were talking about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they are so confused they are like the drunken driver, the drunken horse-rider. He got 

into the stable and he mounted the horse the wrong way. The horse was pointing one way and he was 

pointing the other way. Someone said, and I think it was a friend from Souris-Estevan, ―Hey, you are on 

the horse the wrong way.‖ To which the guy replied, ―How do you know which way I am going?‖ And 

that is exactly the position of the Liberal party, both nationally and provincially. ―How do you know 

which way I am going?‖ they ask us. 

 

Then they ask us in the Resolution, in the first part, to say that we have confidence in the Government of 

Pierre Elliott Trudeau. I say that is patent nonsense and the people of Saskatchewan know that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one on that side of the House need lecture us or particularly me about Socialism and 

imperialism. Nobody has to lecture the six or seven people of Ukrainian background. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Oh! All right! The only ones who really know what the effect of it was. You don‘t 

have to lecture us why we came to Saskatchewan or Canada . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You don‘t have to lecture us about how to defend this country. We know that. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I see that the sensitivities of the Provincial Treasurer have been 

somewhat touched again and he has entered this debate with full flay. I wish that he would make some 

sense this time, but unfortunately he hasn‘t. All I am saying is this, Mr. Speaker, it tends to be a bit of a 

specious argument to talk in personal terms about, you know, the effects 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1530 

of Socialism and imperialism and the like, and I don‘t want to engage in that. I simply say, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, Mr. Provincial Treasurer, that by the same token you ought not to try and take by one large 

brush, knowing the facts of the situation respecting the Members on this side of which I am one, with 

respect to the question of Soviet imperialism and Socialist aggression, whatever it happens to be and say 

that we are all anti-American. The Member from Moosomin, the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) 

tells us about . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Milestone. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Milestone, right. Sorry, but he doesn‘t know what riding as he is never there 

anyway. It is either Moosomin or Milestone so it doesn‘t matter. Sorry, Mr. Minister, your policies are 

rather confusing as well. 

 

May I simply just say this. He said to us in the course of the debate, he asked us why is it we‘re always 

anti-American? Why here we have an ABM system but it is anti-American, the whole flavour of the 

Resolution. ―Why,‖ he says. ―every time the New Democratic party speaks it is anti-American.‖ All I 

want to know and ask the Minister: did the Russians put in the ABM system? Who do you expect us to 

protest to? Who do you expect us in the democratic country to protest to? 

 

Look, those Members opposite, Mr. Speaker, are saying this: They tell us about democracy. They tell us 

all about the important virtues of democracy to which I wholeheartedly subscribe, of which one is this 

debate. Mr. Minister, one of the virtues is the right to protest, the right to discuss, and the right to give 

suggestions to our neighbours to the south, and this is what the motion of the Leader of the Opposition 

does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — There is no use me going up and down Red Square parading with a picket because I 

am not going to convince anybody in the Kremlin at all, but I am going to convince my own 

Government. I am going to convince my democratic people in the Province of Saskatchewan and in the 

Dominion of Canada and hopefully the United States, because it is a democratic country. Arrant 

nonsense to talk about the question of going around and protesting here in Saskatchewan. For the record 

may I say this, that I have personally and I am here now reiterating opposition to imperialism, such as, 

for example the type that has been aired in this Chamber at the Czechoslovakian crisis. The 

Czechoslovakian crisis was a rape of a terrific country of terrific people. Every one of us on this side has 

said it. Every one of us on this side. The fact of the matter is that we are talking about one thing. We are 

not talking about Czechoslovakia. We are talking about the ABM system. The United States government 

is unsatisfied. They want Canada‘s participation, and we, as Canadian people want to register our 

opinion to the Canadian people and that is our democratic right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I don‘t know how anyone can say that was anti-American. My colleague and I, I 

think, get along relatively well. We 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1531 

discuss from time to time some of the pieces of nonsense that come out of the Liberal Government. I 

sometimes happen to agree with the legislation and he doesn‘t agree and we have that right to disagree. I 

am not anti-Walter Smishek because I happen to suggest a certain course of action to him. I am not 

anti-American because I happen to suggest a different course of action for the United States of America 

or the Dominion of Canada. In fact, I am pro-American. 

 

The facts of the matter are that when you show an interest in the activities of another country, another 

person, or issues of the day, you are not going to hurt the cause. If the argument is strong, it is going to 

stand up to the test of time and through all of the argument, and even the bungling of the Members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said that this is a sad day in the Legislature and I quite firmly believe that 

personally. I watched this Legislature time and time again downgrade itself. I suppose I have - I am 

sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I meant to address these remarks personally to the Speaker - I suppose by 

some of the comments that I have made or were interpreted by Mr. Speaker, I have contributed to that as 

well. I have apologized wholeheartedly. But you know I came down here in my second year under some 

crazy delusion that in a democratic system all of these things that the boys opposite talk, I could raise 

some of the issues and argue passionately sometimes, a little bit of a barb sometimes, about the guts of a 

particular issue, and we come and we wrestle and we decide in terms of the merits of the issue. 

 

Time and time again, and this is the final clincher, what happens is that every time an Opposition 

Member introduces a resolution, it is automatically and without consideration opposed by the Members 

opposite with some form of an amendment, an amendment, simply speaking, that is for cheap politics or 

harking back to 20 years, and I simply say . . . 

 

Mr. MacDougall: — . . . for 20 years. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Look, the Member for Souris-Estevan, just stick to the subject that you know best 

about, that was the poem about whiskey or whatever it was and leave the rest to the people around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I was saying before I was so rudely interrupted by the Member from 

Souris-Estevan, the argument against the ABM installation, I think, is very simple. It has been put 

forward very learnedly and scholarly by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). Simply, there are 

enough deterrents now in the American system to deter against any possible attack or act of aggression 

by the Soviets. 

 

It is told by countless writers and documented by my colleague from Regina North East (Mr. Smishek). 

There is an overkill. Any argument that this particular system is needed as a deterrent is absolutely 

specious. They have enough now. They have enough systems and enough aeroplanes to deter. There are 

enough of the books to go around to be able to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that there is enough documentation 

admitted. Mr. Speaker, let me say this. I don‘t honestly think that these 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1532 

people have read a thoughtful book on the question for the last 10 years - 5 years. The question simply is 

that there are enough deterrents at the disposal of the American nation, the North American people, 

enough deterrents to blow this whole entire North American Continent sky high. 

 

Secondly, Canada can aid in the fight against Communism, I think, in more meaningful ways. We 

cannot enter into the rocket age as we don‘t have the resources. We can enter into the combat against 

Communism by providing more aid to underdeveloped countries, for example, moving up to three, four 

or five per cent of our gross national product to help that way. We don‘t help, I don‘t think, when in 

particular, now, the United States has enough weapons and rockets to maintain itself. We don‘t help in a 

small area of this nature but we can help in other ways that are more significant. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, to me I think that there is an issue here of independence. I think we have the right 

and the duty as Canadian citizens to voice and express our concern when we think that our sovereignty 

is being violated. As Senator Fulbright of Arkansas said, the action of the United States Government 

was taken without absolutely any consideration or concern for the people of this province and the people 

of Canada. I think that is bad and that alone is a principle that ought to be supported by this Legislature, 

that we are a truly autonomous and independent House and a truly autonomous and independent people 

who are going to give our expressions to our friends to the south. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth argument I think is that any escalation of any arms anywhere is bad in the 

interests of peace. I think that this is only bound to provoke increased retaliation or the possibility of 

retaliation, increased armaments on the part of our enemies whoever they may be, real or imaginary, 

wherever they may be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate that this to me has been - and I know that the boys opposite won‘t 

believe it - politics of disillusionment. It has been a question of frustration. An absolute disappointment. 

As I say I am probably as guilty from time to time as anybody in name calling in the heat of debate, but I 

want no part of a proposed amendment to a Resolution that makes a farce of this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I personally, and the people of the Province of Saskatchewan want no part of an 

amendment to this Resolution that is simply drawn so that they have cheap politics by the Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy) and so on, so they can drag names across the Chambers of this House. 

 

I want to have no part of a proposed amendment to a Resolution that takes away from what we ought to 

be discussing, one of the important issues of this province and this nation, and that is the question of 

ABM system, and has now thoroughly deprived us of that right to discuss that issue and at least express 

our opinion by virtue of the proposed Resolution. 

 

Mr. Treasurer said that the Resolution is nutty. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1533 

Mr. Steuart: — Kooky! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Kooky and nutty! Well, I can simply say this, Mr. Treasurer, that, if being concerned 

about humanity is nutty and kooky, then put me in that category, because that is what the proposed 

motion was. You may not agree and you can disagree, you have the right to say that the proposed 

motion was wrong on the merits. But the fact of the matter is whatever stance the Government would 

have taken, you would have debated some vital issue that affected humanity but you didn‘t because of 

your proposed amendment. Anybody who takes part in this amendment now in my view is only being a 

party and an agent to the crime that is being perpetrated by the Members opposite. Therefore, I am going 

to subscribe to one more final quotation of the now Prime Minister . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Ho Chi Minh? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — No, not Ho Chi Minh, the Prime Minister of Canada. Prime Minister Pierre Elliott 

Trudeau. Do you happen to know him, Mr. Treasurer? Have you talked to him lately? You know he said 

this and I quote: 

 

Thus the political philosophy of the Liberal party is simplicity itself. 

 

Little did Mr. Trudeau know what he was writing about when he was writing this. He said: 

 

Say nothing, think anything that you like, or better still, don‘t think at all . . . 

 

We saw that today, that‘s for sure. 

 

. . . but put us in power because we are best fitted to govern. 

 

Now I don‘t think that the people of the Province of Saskatchewan will buy that. Rather they will buy 

this final quotation by the Prime Minister and I quote: 

 

In actual fact only the NDP was morally justified in reproaching the Government on its defence 

policies. This is the only party which has followed a coherent defence line on this particular point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — That is the issue, Mr. Speaker, and any Member who happens to take part in the 

Liberal side in this debate at this particular point, in my view, will not only be transgressing some of the 

views that I have outlined with respect to the conduct in this Chamber, but as well, undoubtedly, what 

happens to be the word of the most significantly followed person in Canada, Mr. Pierre Elliott Trudeau. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately I wasn‘t here at 

the 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1534 

beginning of the debate because we had a Telephone Board meeting this morning and it lasted longer 

than I had anticipated. But it didn‘t take me very long in the House to catch the gist of the debate. 

 

I recall sitting here that it was reminiscent of the same type of debate that we have had in this House for 

20-odd years. My friends across the way resent the fact that someone refers to them as being 

anti-American. I can remember some years back the Minister of Agriculture, the snoose-chewing 

Minister of Agriculture, said that we should pass a resolution and we should call down the wrath of the 

gods against the American Government who have American troops on Canadian soil, who have a 

division of American troops in North Battleford and we were to adjourn the House in order to go to 

North Battleford and see what these desperate American troops were doing in North Battleford. 

 

You know that some went to North Battleford and do you know what we found? Three American 

soldiers walking down the streets of North Battleford. This was the great invasion, the great American 

invasion that the Minister was talking about in those days. I find precisely the same trend today. I wish, 

at least if they have a firm conviction, that they would be honest in those convictions. If they have no 

use for the American Government, and if they are afraid that the American Government and the 

Americans are a threat to Canadians, as the Member here stated, why don‘t they say so? 

 

I was interested in the Member from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), coming up and giving 

above all an address as if he was the sage of the Opposition. A few days ago he was speaking about my 

generation and what we should do in education. The expert from the Opposition on Education. Today he 

brings into the House the views of my generation on defence and this is the viewpoint of my generation. 

 

Let me just read the Resolution and I am going to take time to read it: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its concern that the proposed construction in North Dakota and Montana 

of an anti-ballistic missile system would represent a threat to world peace as well as a particular 

danger to the people of Western Canada and especially Saskatchewan, and urges the Government of 

Canada (a) to refuse to participate in such a program; 

 

To participate in any anti-ballistic missile program. Not just that we ask them to remove them from 

North Dakota and Montana, but that we go on record as refusing to participate in any antiballistic 

program. Why? 

 

and (b) to use all the means at its disposal to convince the Government of the United States that the 

said proposal would be an escalation of the nuclear arms race and a consequent further threat to world 

peace. 

 

They remind me of a teachers‘ meeting about the new Deweyism in education. One parent got up and 

said, ―You know if my little boy Johnnie is causing any trouble, just slap the boy next to him, that will 

frighten him.‖ This is the attitude that they are taking. This is exactly the attitude of the CCF. Now they 

talk about anti-ballistic missiles. Let me read you something 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1535 

from this week‘s issue of Newsweek, March 24, 1969: 

 

The US Fuller Reconnaissance plane has detected a new Soviet-built SAM anti-aircraft missile site in 

Cuba, southwest of Havana. The US Intelligence is keeping a close watch on recent Cuban missile site 

construction. 

 

Why don‘t they say this would lead to an escalation of the threat of war? What are we asking in the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker? We are asking that we express our confidence as Canadians in the ability of 

the elected Government of Canada and the elected Government of United States to plan and implement 

an adequate defence policy for our continent and its people. What less can we do? For us the Canadians 

to express confidence in our Government and confidence in the brand new American Government - our 

Prime Minister and their President meeting today - to express confidence that they together will plan and 

implement an adequate defence policy for our continent and for its people. Secondly that we affirm ―our 

deep and abiding friendship for our American neighbor and our sincere regret at the irresponsible action 

of certain elements in burning an American flag.‖ I notice that my generation from Saskatoon Riversdale 

(Mr. Romanow) expressed regret likewise in his speech. He says, ―I wash my hands clean of this action, 

we don‘t want to take any responsibility for this.‖ Then why can‘t he support this amendment that we 

too regret ―the irresponsible action of certain elements in burning an American flag.‖ 

 

―Regrets that world peace is threatened by recent Socialist imperialist aggression in Czechoslovakia and 

elsewhere throughout the world.‖ Mr. Speaker, these are the fears that are uppermost in the hearts of 

Canadians, and uppermost in the hearts of the people around in the free world. Their only prayer and 

their only hope is that the free nations of the world, in understanding and in common cause, would seek 

out ways of defence that would be a deterrent to aggressors who would think we were weak, and ready 

to be marched upon. I for one think that this amendment is expressing the heartfelt desires of the people 

of Saskatchewan, that we express confidence in Mr. Trudeau in his leadership and in the President of the 

United States, that these two great governments may get together and in the interest of both Canadians 

and Americans on this continent, devise a means of defence which will be strong enough to say to all 

those who would think that, we are weak, that we will stand no aggression and we will repulse 

aggression from whatever quarter it may come. 

 

This is in essence is what the amendment stands for. This is in essence all we are asking. This is in 

essence what we are asking Canadians and the people of Saskatchewan particularly to subscribe to. May 

I say in this, there is no indication of anti-Americanism, there is no indication of animosity between 

Canada and our great neighbour to the South, there is nothing but a determination to build a friendship 

between us and together that we can be a beacon of peace in the world. That these two great nations 

standing on this Continent stand shoulder to shoulder together and will protect the interest of the free 

world wherever aggression may take place. 

 

I take great pride in supporting this amendment as I am certain that every worthwhile citizen of 

Saskatchewan would want us to do, that we join with our great American friends to the South to say to 

the world, to any nation to have second thoughts before they would think that we are timid and we are 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1536 

weak and that we are ready for takeover. Thus it will be in my judgment, a deterrent, not an escalation, 

but a deterrent to all those who have other thoughts that, while we are peace-loving and have no 

ambition to garner onto ourselves any portion of the world, we will nevertheless defend our borders and 

we will unite in the process of doing so. 

 

I urge the Members to support this Resolution which is a constructive resolution. We stand in readiness 

to defend those things which we believe in on this continent. Therefore, if you wish to be counted, stand 

up and be counted! Stand up and be counted. Would you prefer to carry on a war with our great 

American ally to the South, to say to Americans, ―We want no part or parcel of you.‖ To say as the 

Member for Cumberland East (Mr. Berezowsky) said, ―They are as dangerous to world peace and are as 

aggressive and as war-like as the Russians. They are equally as imperialistic as the Russians and if it 

was to their advantage that they would not hesitate to sacrifice Canadian people, Canadian wives and 

Canadian children.‖ This is the picture we got this afternoon of American people. This is the picture we 

got . . . 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Point of privilege, I said that the Americans themselves said that. The Americans 

said it, that they are willing to sacrifice Canada for United States. I‘ll dig it up for you if you like. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — The Member from Cumberland said it, not I. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I didn‘t say it. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — This is typical. This is typical of the Socialist propaganda. I have heard it for 20 years 

in this House. Don‘t try to tell us now that you have changed your heart, or your basic principles. You 

were born on the theme of anti-American, anti-capitalist, anti-riches, anti-affluent society, 

anti-everything that makes progress and peace and order in the world. I will support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The amendment was agreed to on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 31 

Messieurs 
Thatcher Coderre Radloff 

Howes Larochelle Weatherald 

Cameron MacDonald Mitchell 

Steuart Estey Gardner 

Heald Hooker Coupland 

McIsaac Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Barrie Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

Grant   

 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1537 

NAYS — 1 

Messieurs 
 

Willis 

 

The debate continues on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, I take it, if the Leader of the Opposition speaks now, I 

understood your ruling earlier that this is a debate on a concurrent motion, then I would submit that the 

Leader of the Opposition has lost his right to speak at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, no! Order, order! The debate continues on the motion and the amendment 

concurrently. That doesn‘t preclude the Leader of the Opposition or any other Member who moved a 

substantive motion or a motion for second reading of a bill to close the debate. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if this Resolution was as useless and out of place and irregular as some 

Members opposite have suggested, it has certainly attracted a lot of attention. Any resolution that brings 

to its feet five Cabinet Ministers, plus the Member from Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) must have 

something at least to commend it. One can‘t help but wonder, if this Resolution was such a useless 

procedure, why the Members of the Government side of the House paid so much attention to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there isn‘t much that I want to say in closing the debate on the Resolution. I don‘t wish to 

say much because in fact the comments have been in large measure already rebutted by my colleagues 

who have already spoken. I do although want to make some comments. 

 

May I refer first of all to the Member from Hanley, because I want to separate him from some of the 

general comments I make about other speakers in this debate from the opposite side of the House. He 

and to some extent I must admit the Minister of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron) did pay some 

attention to the Resolution. They did make some comments about the Resolution itself, and I appreciate 

the fact that they thought it worthwhile to discuss it. I can quite easily understand, Mr. Speaker, that 

there are differences of opinion and I respect the differences of opinion with regard to it. I find it 

difficult to understand the extreme effort to avoid discussing the Resolution which all of the other 

Members undertook. 

 

In talking about what the Member from Hanley (Mr. Heggie) had to say, I do want to take issue with a 

couple of points that he made. He said, ―There is little we can do as citizens of Saskatchewan, this is a 

Canadian and a world affair.‖ I would have thought you know that we as citizens of Saskatchewan are 

also citizens of Canada and citizens of the world. It is because we are citizens of the world that this 

Resolution was brought before this Legislature today. He said secondly, in reference to some of the 

senators whom I have quoted, that it is a good thing there are senators in the United States who have the 

opportunity and who can stand up and oppose installations like the ABM. I agree with him. But I 

wonder why, if it is a good thing that senators over there can do it, it becomes 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1538 

automatically a bad thing when some of us do the same thing here. I wonder . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . when he is saying that, how he can excuse also his support of the Minister of Public 

Works (Mr. Guy) who, when someone of us takes this position, immediately terms us ―Communist‖ and 

―anti-United States.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, I share the feeling, and I share it very deeply, expressed by my colleague, the Member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). He said it was a sad day. I think it was too. I am dismayed 

and I am disappointed at the attitude of the majority of those who have spoken from the Government 

side on this Resolution. I am dismayed and I am disappointed at the attitude of many of those who sat in 

their seat and did not speak. Here, Sir, was a serious proposal. It was put forward with all sincerity. It 

was put forward in the belief that it was worthwhile for this Legislature to talk about something which 

has a bearing on the essential great question of today, which is the question of world peace. The 

Members from the opposite side of this Legislature for the most part have treated it with frivolity and 

even with levity. The amendment which was moved was simply a political stratagem, a bit of subterfuge 

to attempt to avoid talking about this important issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The Premier broke the ice, led the pack in this by suggesting that it was a waste of time. I 

have to again express my dismay and disappointment that the Premier holds discussions of this kind in 

such utter contempt. 

 

I would like to read a short statement from a great American document. It is from the Declaration of 

Independence. That short statement is one which has reference to an obligation ―to have decent respect 

for the opinions of mankind.‖ In all sincerity, I felt that the kind of talk we heard, particularly from the 

Minister of Public Works and the Provincial Treasurer, failed to show any decent respect for the 

opinions of mankind or any decent respect for the right of people to utter the opinion which they hold. 

There seems to be a suggestion, Mr. Speaker, that to be against an idea, is to be against the country of its 

origin. Obviously, that is shear stupidity! There seems to be an idea that, to be for an idea, is to be for 

the country of its origin in all things. That is an equal depth of stupidity. May I submit that those who 

oppose the right of people to speak out without being called Communists or something else, because 

they do speak out, are the real anti-Americans in this Legislature and outside of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Those who suggest that anybody who happens to differ with them is Communist, or label 

in some other derogatory way, these are the real anti-Americans. I‘m sorry the Provincial Treasurer isn‘t 

in his seat - these are the people who are really guilty of treason, guilty of treason against the basic 

decency of democracy . . . 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1539 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, there are two excellent reasons, I think, why this Resolution should have 

been discussed here today. One is that the Government of Canada, represented by the Prime Minister, is 

meeting with the political leaders of the United States. We are told that he has not yet made up his mind, 

that the Government has yet to make a decision, as to which way it wishes to go. We are urged 

constantly also that the Prime Minister, and I honour him for it, wants dialogue, wants discussion. I 

submit there is no better place in which we can have a dialogue and discussion about this matter, there is 

no better way in which we can encourage dialogue and discussion about it in the province, than by 

discussing the kind of resolution which we have tried to discuss here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — That‘s one reason why it is appropriate for us to discuss this. 

 

The second reason is that this does in the opinion of some of us constitute a possible threat to world 

peace. Maybe we‘re wrong. We don‘t think so, but thinking as we do, then we surely have a 

responsibility to speak out. I say to the Member from Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) who raised some 

question about this being a dead horse and why the Resolution was here. There is an old quotation: 

 

To sin by silence when you should protest makes cowards out of men. 

 

There is no reason at all for any of us . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . to be cowards by sitting in silence with respect to a proposition of this particular 

magnitude. 

 

May I turn to just a few of the comments of the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). He went back into 

history some 30 years, I‘m not going to bother to go back and comment on those remarks. We say just 

this, Mr. Speaker, that it is true Canada had some deficiencies with respect to preparedness at the 

beginning of World War II. I have heard many political and military figures say that our greatest 

deficiency at that time lay not in the unpreparedness of our military force. The greatest deficiency lay in 

the deficiencies of education and health of the Canadian people. If we had been putting more of our 

resources, doing a better job of solving our domestic problems at that time, we would have been way 

ahead in our war effort when the war was declared. That declaration incidentally, with regret, was 

supported by all of our Members in Ottawa at that time with the exception of one. That man probably 

was the most highly respected Canadian there ever was, J.S. Woodsworth, who did vote against it, split 

with his own party to do so. If my hon. friends want to read one of the moving moments in Canadian 

history, I suggest that they go back and read Mansard, on the day when J. S. Woodsworth stood up alone 

in that House and made his declaration. Note the statement of the Liberal Leader at that time, the Right 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1540 

Honourable Mr. MacKenzie King, who got up before Mr. Woodsworth and said: 

 

I know what my friend is going to say, I know that we are mostly in disagreement with him . . . 

 

Then he went on to plead with the House to give this great man his right to speak as he wished to speak 

and to respect him for his position. I would suggest to my hon. friends . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . especially the Provincial Treasurer that he might read that little bit of Canadian 

history which I think ought to make us proud of Canada and of the Canadian Parliament. 

 

Now it was suggested by several Members across there, and particularly by the Provincial Treasurer, 

that there had been no statement by our party with respect to the recent invasion of Czechoslovakia. 

Now one of the characteristics of our Provincial Treasurer is that, as was said by somebody a long while 

ago, he relies on his memory for his wit and on his imagination for his facts. This is just one more 

instance in which he relied for his memory on the facts. Two and possibly three times he made the claim 

that nobody in this party had raised any protest whatsoever about the recent Russian invasion of 

Czechoslovakia. He is saying it here now. Mr. Speaker, let me read a bit from the record. Hopefully it 

might convince the Provincial Treasurer that he shouldn‘t rely all the while on his imagination for his 

facts. I read a statement by T. C. Douglas, under date of August 27, 1968: 

 

The New Democratic party expresses its support of the people of Czechoslovakia in their endeavor to 

introduce a greater degree of political democracy in their form of government. The Soviet Union‘s 

attempts to obstruct these reforms are unjustifiable. No nation has the right to interfere with the efforts 

of another nation to freely determine their form of government. It is the hope of the New Democratic 

party that the Canadian Government will make it abundantly clear to the Soviet Union that the attempt 

to exert military or any other pressure on Czechoslovakia would be viewed with extreme disfavor by 

the Canadian people. Should the light of democracy in Czechoslovakia be snuffed out for the third 

time in this century, world opinion would be outraged, the resulting outcry would be more vehement 

than that which accompanied the Soviet intervention in Hungary in 1956. 

 

Secondly, let me read just a bit of an earlier statement by Mr. Douglas and Mr. Lewis, on August 21, 

1968. In this one they said: 

 

The unwarranted invasion of Czechoslovakia by Soviet Polish and East German forces is a ruthless act 

of aggression which has shocked the world. 

 

They added later on: 

 

Czechoslovakia and its people have again been sacrificed to serve blind Soviet Communist interests 

. . . 

 

and went on in that way. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1541 

Mr. MacDougall: — What magazine were you reading? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shut your mouth and open your ears! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the sound of heavy water from Estevan, dripping on the blocks of time over 

there again - or maybe it‘s his stomach flopping over as it was a few minutes ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I want to say just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, a very little bit I assure you about the 

comments of the Minister of Public Works. My comment is simply this, Mr. Speaker. Usually I can be 

pretty proud of this institution of ours. But in fact this morning, as he spoke, I was ashamed to be a 

Member of this Legislature . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . and it‘s not the first time I‘ve been ashamed when that particular Member stood on 

his feet. 

 

An Hon. Member: — He‘s not there most of the time to stand up! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I felt only a little bit worse when the Provincial Treasurer was speaking! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I have just taken some time to demonstrate the Provincial Treasurer getting up here and 

stating something of fact when the records prove him wrong. Over and over again, Mr. Speaker, that is 

the kind of situation we get in this House. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What position is the provincial party in? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The Provincial Treasurer as usual spits and snarls and spits and snaps from his seat. He 

spends more time talking sitting down than all the rest of this House put together. He should, because 

when he gets up he has so little to contribute. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, let me turn to this charge of anti-Americanism. I was extremely careful in 

what I said, I was extremely careful in my selection of references. Let me recall those references, people 

whom I quoted to support the position that I was taking. There was Dr. Forsyth, the Secretary of the 

Board of Evangelism and Social Service for the United Church. There was a Pauline Jewitt, a former 

Liberal Member of Parliament. I quoted from a number of United States senators and scientists. Do 

these gentlemen who talk over here so glibly about anti- 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1542 

American ideas suggest that Stuart Symington, a former Secretary of National Defence in the United 

States, is anti-American when he opposes this system? Do they suggest that Senator McGovern, one of 

the candidates for the Democratic leadership is anti-American? Do they suggest that the former 

Secretary of Defence, McNamara, is anti-American when he criticized the missile system and when he 

pointed out that this would lead to escalation? Do they suggest that anyone of the four scientists, 

advisors to Presidents in the field of science are anti-American? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they use this term only in an attempt to cover up their own inability or their unwillingness 

to have a rational discussion of the situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, may I make just one or two further comments. May I say to the Attorney 

General (Mr. Heald) and I hope he will take my word for it, that the New Democratic Party in this 

province at no time supported or endorsed the unfortunate and regrettable happening of burning an 

American flag to which he referred. Secondly, will he take my assurance that Jean Maguire to whom he 

referred is not now and was at no time a vice-president of the New Democratic party in this province. 

And, thirdly, will he take my word for it that the New Democratic party at no time paid one single 

solitary nickel to this particular happening or this particular event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all that I want to say in closing is one last quotation and I hope that the Members don‘t say 

that it is an anti-American quotation. I quote from the Hamilton Spectator in an editorial in September of 

1968. They talked about the missile system and they said: 

 

Our first endeavor, 

 

Canada‘s first endeavor 

 

 should be to ensure that this country has no part in it. 

 

That is a Canadian newspaper. That is essentially what we have been saying as we discussed this 

Resolution that is before us. Our first endeavour should be to ensure that this Canada of ours has no part 

in it. It was the hope, when I put this Resolution forward, that Members of the Government albeit might 

have differed with it, but might have been prepared to discuss it with some degree of respect. It was my 

hope that they might, while opposing the idea, have given reasons as to why they oppose it. I can 

understand opposition. For the life of me, Mr. Speaker, I can‘t understand the attitudes that they brought 

to this discussion since they, Mr. Speaker, since they refuse to respect the Resolution, I can see no 

reason for respecting this red herring of an amendment which they put forth. That is why I remained in 

my seat on the other vote and will remain in my seat if they call a vote on it again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The motion as amended was agreed to on the following recorded division: 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1543 

YEAS — 31 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher Coderre Radloff 

Howes Larochelle Weatherald 

Cameron MacDonald Mitchell 

Steuart Estey Gardiner 

Heald Hooker Coupland 

McIsaac Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Barrie Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

Grant   

NAYS — Nil 

Messieurs 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 67 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince 

Albert East-Cumberland) for Return No. 67 showing: 

 

The acreage of Crown land on which forestry cutting operations have been conducted that has been 

replanted by (a) the Government or any agency thereof; and (b) others, since April 1, 1964, and the 

average per acre cost of replanting. 

 

Hon. J.R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, in order to make the information 

requested in this Order for Return more meaningful, I move, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General 

(Mr. Heald) that the Motion for Return No. 67 be amended by striking out all words after the words 

‗showing‖ and substituting the following therefor: 

 

(1) Whether the Department of Natural Resources carried out any reforestation programs since April 

1st, 1964 on Crown land on which forestry operations have been conducted. 

 

(2) If so, the number of acres on which such programs have been carried out. 

 

(3) Whether any reports have been prepared by the Department of Natural Resources since April 1st, 

1964 with respect to the reforestation of Crown lands on which cutting operations have been 

conducted. 

 

(4) If so, the estimated per acre cost of such reforestation. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1544 

Return No. 70 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince 

Albert-East Cumberland) for Return No. 70 showing: 

 

The average return per acre in stumping dues from Crown land on which timber has been cut for the 

use at the Prince Albert Pulp Mill. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — Mr. Speaker, to make the information requested in this Order for Return more 

meaningful I move, seconded by the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) that Motion for Return No. 70 

be amended by striking out all the words after the word ―showing‖ and substitute the following therefor: 

 

The stumpage rate per cord charged by the Department of Natural Resources on timber which has 

been cut for use at the Prince Albert Pulp Company Limited mill. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have no objection in obtaining this information but it isn‘t what I 

asked. I really wanted a return per acre in view of the fact that I want to compare some figures in 

connection with another question. I was hoping that the Minister could have given me the average return 

per acre, but I might have to ask another question to get that information. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 18 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince 

Albert East-Cumberland) for Return No. 18 showing: 

 

The number of houses constructed by the government for Indian and Métis people in the fiscal year 

ending March 31, 1968, and the location of each. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, some three weeks ago I discussed 

with the Member from Prince Albert East-Cumberland this adjourned debate and was advised that he 

was primarily interested in houses constructed in the northern area. 

 

This Return asks the number of houses constructed by the Government for Indian and Métis people. Mr. 

Speaker, we do not keep a record of the occupants of these houses according to nationality, and I do not 

think any employee of the Department should be engaged in going around to the houses to determine the 

racial background of any person. So I propose the following amendment, seconded by the Hon. Minister 

of Mineral Resources (Mr. Cameron). That Motion for Return No. 18 be amended by deleting all the 

words after the word ―constructed‖ in the first line and substituting the following therefor: 

 

or under construction by the Government for northern residents, naming the community and number 

of houses 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1545 

constructed or under construction in each: (a) in the fiscal year ending March 31, 1968; and (b) in the 

fiscal year 1968-69 to February 28, 1969. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 1 - Student Representation on the Senate 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J.J. Charlebois 

(Saskatoon City Park-University): 

 

That the Government give early consideration to the approval of student representation on the Senate 

of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. Lloyd: 

 

That the words ―faculty and‖ be inserted after the word ―of‘ in the first line; that the words ―and the 

Board of Governors‖ be inserted after the word ―Senate‖ in the second line; and that the following 

words be added to the motion: ―and that the Government also give consideration to appointing a 

Commission composed of public representatives together with representatives of the University 

administration, faculty and students to study and report on such changes in administrative structures 

and practices of the University, which would provide adequate participation by the public, faculty and 

students.‖ 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, quite a few days have passed since I asked leave to adjourn 

the debate on this very important subject and I have a few words that I want to say now. 

 

I think I remember saying that perhaps the University does need a slight shock now and again to keep it 

in touch with the reality of 20th century living. But we ought to be very careful not to shock it to death, 

to electrocute it by massive and unwarranted change. I want to say first, Mr. Speaker, that I am not 

afraid that any resolution that we may pass in this Legislature is going to shake down the walls of that 

grand University that we have built here in Saskatchewan. At the same time, I think that we have to 

recognize that the University is a creature of this Legislature. If The University Act is to be changed or if 

the Act that governs the University is to be changed it must be done here. 

 

We have a responsibility to examine the effect of the proposed changes very carefully. We are 

attempting to recommend to the Government by a Resolution that a change be made in the 

representation in the Senate of the University. And we are also considering the amendment moved to the 

Resolution by the Hon. Member from Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) which advocates other changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Member from Saskatoon Nutana South (Mr. Estey) has answered the 

criticism of the Hon. Member from Biggar and I think has demolished his argument. He made the point 

that a separate commission would be able to do nothing, that is nothing that the Senate at the University 

is not able to do now. The Senate is composed of public representatives, together with the 

representatives of the University administration 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1546 

and the faculty. Surely, Mr. Speaker, if we think that the Senate is not able - in his words – ―to study and 

report on such changes in administrative structure and practice which would provide adequate 

participation by the public, faculty and students,‖ I say again, if we think this is not possible now, then 

surely it is time for us as representatives of the people of the province to really exercise our prerogatives 

as Members and to really wade in and to make some significant changes in The University Act. 

 

Now many of the arguments for and against change in our University, I think, spring from fundamental 

differences in views held about the role of the University or what it should be, or what it should be doing 

and what it is all about. I think much of the discussion that has been heard in this session of the 

Legislature ignores the fact that there is serious division as to the role of the University. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at least there is a body of thought that believes that it is an institution set up by society to 

serve that society, to equip its younger members with the skills needed to maintain the technical services 

and cultural amenities that society deems necessary. This is a significant body of opinion. I want to say 

to the Members that if this is the University, then the academic faculty are servants and students have no 

directing role but are customers for or victims of the training and the certification that the institution 

provides. 

 

This view can be justified by the way in which most Canadian universities are set up. They didn‘t come 

from the banding together of scholars with a common intellectual passion. I don‘t think they arose from 

the demands of students sharing an intellectual hunger, but they did arise from the conscious decisions 

of the public to arrange for a supply of talents, homemade and homegrown, that must otherwise be 

imported. These origins are reflected in the survival of non-academic boards of governors and the 

maintenance of universities by public funds. 

 

Other people, Mr. Speaker, believe quite differently. If we want to divide our thoughts about the role of 

the university into two broad fields, the first one is that the University is set up to serve society, set up to 

propagate our beliefs and our education, to pass them on relatively unchanged to our young people and 

generally to provide training, professional training perhaps for doctors, engineers, and to pass on the 

conventional wisdom of the day. But there is a very significant body of opinion that thinks otherwise 

about the university. There are perhaps two, three, four or five different shades of view about the role of 

the university in this other contest. 

 

The first, I think, is that some people believe that the university is a community of scholars. It is like a 

guild of persons devoted to the furtherance and dissemination of certain kinds of knowledge and skill 

approved by its members. One joins the guild by graduating or on joining its teaching body. 

Administrative officers and boards of governors have no other function than to serve and to further the 

role of scholars. Students in this view are thought to be members, not apprentices. 

 

By the way I want to quote something from The Leader Post that reinforces this view. Dr. John Chappell 

was formerly on the teaching staff at the University here and resigned two weeks ago. This is dated the 

19th of February and I quote: 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1547 

Dr. John Chappell, 35, said in an interview that he resigned two weeks ago on the general principle. I 

want to teach in a university where the faculty runs the departments. If the students run the university 

we are going to lose our academic respectability. 

 

He has other things to say but the crux of the matter is again: 

 

Dr. Chappell said a student should be an apprentice and then he can become a master. 

 

I say to the Members, Mr. Speaker, that this reinforces a particular point of view about what the 

university ought to be doing. 

 

Then again you might think that the university is a community of students. The professors in this view 

are the most senior members and the freshmen are the most junior. Such a community does not have the 

closed nature of a guild. It consists rather of all those members of a community dedicated to intellectual 

inquiry of any kind. 

 

Again in this view, administrators and governors will exist merely to provide the physical facilities in 

which such pursuits can be carried on. I say again, Mr. Speaker, that there are many different views 

about what the university ought to be. They don‘t all conform to this traditional view. I want to quote 

something from an interview with Marshall McLuhan who I think the Members know has some 

different views about the education system. He says about our young people: 

 

It is not an easy period in which to live especially for the television-conditioned young, who unlike 

their literate elders cannot take refuge in the zombie trance of Narcissus narcosis that numbs the state 

of psychic shock induced by the impact of a new media. 

 

I don‘t pretend to understand everything that McLuhan says but, in answer to this question about 

university and about education generally, ―Why do you think they aren‘t finding the freedom that they 

wish within the educational system?‖ Mr. McLuhan said: 

 

Because education which should be helping youth to understand and adapt to their revolution in new 

environments is instead being used merely as an instrument of cultural aggression, imposing on 

retribalized youth the obsolescent visual values of the dying literate age. 

 

If education is to become relevant to the young of this electric age, we must also supplant the stifling 

impersonal and dehumanizing multiversity with a multiplicity of autonomous colleges devoted to an 

in-depth approach to learning. If we don‘t adapt our educational system to their needs and values, the 

needs and values of the young people, we will only see more drop-outs and more chaos. 

 

Now, I don‘t think many people understand McLuhan and I don‘t pretend to understand him myself, but 

he has a different and perhaps a more modern view of what the university is doing to our young people. 

He said in the same interview that he is essentially a conservative person and that he doesn‘t really like 

the changes that he sees going on around him, but at the same time he doesn‘t think there is any use in 

trying to turn back the clock and he doesn‘t think that it is possible or wise 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1548 

to weep over spilled milk or to stop changes that are occurring and have already taken place. 

 

In reference to the university and to the education system generally, he says that, if literate Western man 

were really interested in preserving the most creative aspects of his civilization, he would not cower in 

his ivory tower bemoaning change but would plunge himself into the vortex of technology and, by 

understanding it, dictate his new environment, turn the ivory tower into a control tower. 

 

Claude T. Bissell who is president of the University of Toronto had this to say in 1965: ―In the first 

place we must recognize that each of these estates . . . ‖ and here he is talking about students, staff and 

administration and about the relationships between them. I think that this is relevant to this discussion 

today. He says: 

 

. . . will develop a special feeling of individual and distinct interest. Students will have a special 

interest in life outside the classroom and that interest will, I think, have an increasingly political 

emphasis. As I have already suggested, the interest will also move into the classroom and professional 

immunity from criticisms and assessment cannot in the future be guaranteed. The staff will be mainly 

concerned with the continuity and the quality of academic life and the administration with the integrity 

and the autonomy of the university as an institution, both in its internal structures and its external 

relations. 

 

He goes on to say that the main casualty and the failure of convergence of these three streams is the 

institution itself. Students are less sensitive to institutional arguments and understandably so. It is easier 

for the middle-aged and the elderly to have love affairs with institutions, the young have less 

disembodied passions. And he goes on: 

 

Yet if an institution is not loved by those who know it best it cannot long survive. 

 

That is particularly true of a university for it is of all mundane institutions an act of faith, a perpetual 

experiment, a search for the ideal. 

 

These ideas, I think, are challenging and dramatic in this year and the years to come. I want to say first, 

Mr. Speaker, and reinforce again the fact that I don‘t consider change to be undesirable. Massive change 

that comes too quickly possibly can be, but anyone who believes that what we have now at our 

university or any university in North America is what has to be for the future or should be forever, I 

think, is very mistaken. There is a great cathedral in Europe whose first stone was laid 250 years before 

the last ornament was put on the spire and so I think it must be with our university. We must continue to 

build on what we have begun as the foundation. We have laid a solid foundation in excellence here in 

Saskatchewan. But to say that what we have now is unalterable, unchangeable, perfect and complete is 

nonsense. 

 

Much of the purpose of a university is to be an agent of change and I wonder if we can look any place 

else in our society for new ideas and concepts. Where else but in the universities 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1549 

can we expect to find the energy and the idealism and the will to change our society for the better. We 

don‘t understand, I don‘t understand, and I have no patience with the anarchists who smash and burn our 

institutions to the ground hoping that something better, like Phoenix, is going to rise out of the ashes. I 

don‘t have any patience either with those who believe that what is now is necessarily what is going to be 

in the future. 

 

If part or parts of the super-structures of our institutions, and this includes the university, have become 

unwieldy and unnecessary or are now impediments to progress, then isn‘t it wisdom to cut them off. 

And isn‘t it wisdom to use these discarded parts to build if possible something better, something of 

value. Mr. Speaker, a study of the natural sciences teaches us that terrestrial life has been subject to 

many mutations in response to changes in the physical environment. We know that, if environment 

changes, organisms must also change or become extinct. Mr. Speaker, it‘s clear that if our University 

and if all our institutions as well, are constitutionally unable to change, then they too will be pulled 

down brick by brick to make room for something better. 

 

Let me say that radical change itself is not always beneficial and is sometimes undesirable. I want to ask 

the Members how foolish it would be to burn down a good house just because the floor may be dirty, 

how outrageous it would be to junk a car because the ashtray is full. How much more reasonable to wash 

the floor. How much more reasonable to mend the roof or to build an addition than to burn the house 

down and then to have to live in a cave for the rest of your life. Mr. Speaker, how much more sensible to 

see the need of student representation and to do something about it than to make an inflammatory speech 

calling out pickets against the Board of Governors. How much more sensible for the administration to 

try to improve the faculty‘s teaching methods and to better the physical surroundings if improvement is 

needed. How much more sensible for students and administration to co-operate in solving problems as 

they arise rather than to allow relationships to deteriorate to the point of triggering a senseless and 

berserk attack on a computer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‘ve tried to demonstrate my belief in the necessity and the desirability of beneficial 

change in our university government. I believe, as I have said before, that many of our problems that are 

generated in connection with the young people are caused by the frustrations by their peculiar position. 

Physically and mentally, in my opinion, most university people are adults. They‘re preparing themselves 

and, in most cases, are prepared for responsibilities which they are denied. These responsibilities are 

denied to them by the Establishment. These responsibilities are denied because the Establishment just 

can‘t bring itself to believe that anyone under 25 or 30 years old is mature enough to make major 

decisions. I take issue with this view, Mr. Speaker. I say the best way to teach responsibility is to give 

responsibility. We teach our children to manage money by giving them their own money to spend. 

Young people gain knowledge and maturity in other areas of social conduct by adult experience. 

Representation on the Senate of the University will give the students a new stake in university life. As 

well it will encourage them to think seriously about the problems of participation in the larger society. I 

believe that the benefits from the change that we are suggesting will flow in equal measure 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1550 

to students and to the institution itself. The day-to-day problems and minor annoyances of space and 

light of instruction and the curricula ought to be, and I think they will be, more readily solved. But, Mr. 

Speaker, most important of all I hope and believe that student representation on the Senate will help to 

lead us one step closer to the solution or at least to the contemplation of a basic question of the role of 

the University of Saskatchewan in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I will be pleased to support the proposal introduced by the Member for 

Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few words to this debate. I want to 

comment a little bit on the place of the university in our society and the changing pattern of university 

organization as it has evolved and as it is likely to evolve in the next decades. 

 

I was encouraged to say a few words in this debate by the comments which I read of a speech made by 

Dr. A.W. Trueman, a distinguished Canadian academic. I would think there must be few people in 

Canada who would be better qualified to comment upon university government and university affairs 

than Dr. A.W. Trueman, Bud Trueman. He is now Chancellor of the University of Western Ontario. He 

was formerly Chairman of the National Film Board and a Director of Canada Council. If my memory 

serves me right, he served as President of the University of New Brunswick and I am virtually certain 

that he served as president of the University of Manitoba. He holds an honorary doctorate from the 

University of Saskatchewan and I had the distinct pleasure of attending the Convocation at which he 

received his degree and heard the very thoughtful and provocative address which he delivered at that 

time. 

 

This précis of his remarks is contained in the Dalhousie Alumni News and it happens to be the précis of 

a speech which he gave to the alumni association of that university on October 21st of last year. I will 

attempt to sketch his ideas and on occasion quote directly from his remarks. 

 

He is telling us what I think we ought to know, that it is characteristic of our century that the governed 

are determined to have a larger and larger share in their government and it seems to Dr. Trueman that 

this movement is inevitable and right. It is a tide which cannot be dammed back or reversed, and 

obviously the sensible thing to do is to respond with intelligence and understanding of these tidal 

changes and to avoid violence by involving everyone concerned, faculty, students, administration, 

governors, in well-meant, useful and constructive consultation and reform activities. And then Dr. 

Trueman goes on to express some views as to the role of the Board of Governors which I found rather 

revolutionary. He goes on to say that he thinks that we are blind if we refuse to see we are in a period of 

transition which will come to an end only when university government is largely but not exclusively in 

the hands of faculty, assisted by students either on equal terms or as somewhat junior partners. He goes 

on to trace the history of boards of governors in Canada and to point out that they have in the past 

largely 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1551 

reflected the knowledge, experience and acumen of the very able representatives of business and 

finance. And he says that no one can find serious fault with the quality of this representation. In the days 

when this type of board was developed, when the proportion of income supplied by government was 

much lower than it is now, these business representatives constituted a natural and necessary link with 

the business world which was an extremely important source of direct supply. 

 

Then he goes on to say that this age has passed. The world tide of conviction that the governed must 

have a much greater share in government is running swiftly, strongly and irreversibly. He then applies 

this thought to universities and says: 

 

I believe that the board of governors at the apex of university government is becoming a rapidly 

obsolescent institution. As a matter of fact I think it is obsolete. I favor very strongly the one-tier form 

of government that President Bissell of Toronto is now advocating. 

 

And I was pleased to hear the Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) quote Dr. Bissell in the course of his 

remarks. 

 

Dr. Trueman goes on to say it seems an anomaly that an institution whose sole concern is the fostering 

and promotion of art, the humanities, the social sciences, the natural sciences, and the professions should 

be placed under a board of governors of whom the majority are businessmen. A business corporation 

does not load its board of directors with university scholars. It uses its own kind. I am bound to believe 

that a university board should use its own kind, at least as a majority, i.e. the scholars on its faculty and 

its senior students, in conjunction with a smaller group of men representing the outside community and 

the business world. He goes on to buttress his argument for this proposition by saying that students are 

much more informed than they have been in previous generations. If I may quote: 

 

We have a generation much more widely informed about the society they live in than their elders. 

 

And he attributes this to film, radio, television, rapid communication, all the reasons which we similarly 

ascribe to the relatively high degree of knowledge and confidence of today‘s students. 

 

He says that he does not agree with all of the student demands and then he goes on to say: 

 

But I believe that there is a sufficient basis for many, if not most, of their dissatisfactions. They feel 

that they have a right to be consulted about and to have a hand in framing the type of education they 

want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won‘t quote more from this very thoughtful and thought-provoking argument put forward 

by Dr. Trueman. He advances in the course of his remarks, not only his views with respect to the board 

of governors and the fact that a business-oriented board of governors is no longer appropriate, but he 

also levels strictures at the type of instruction and indicates that in his view the formal lecture-type, 

essay examination procedure is no longer appropriate but is rather sterile, dull, unduly authoritative, and 

much too demanding of time which could 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1552 

be better spent in more nearly independent study and an investigation under the guidance of interested 

and skilled members of faculty. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know whether I could agree with Dr. Trueman in the sense that I don‘t know 

whether I could advocate those views for the University of Saskatchewan at this time. I think the idea 

that the Board of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan should be constituted of a majority of 

scholars does not now fit in with the place which the University of Saskatchewan occupies in the 

educational and administrative life of Saskatchewan. I don‘t think it‘s too remarkable an idea. Older 

universities have been run on this basis for many generations. I attended Oxford University where the 

boards of governors of all the colleges are made up of scholars with indeed no businessmen or no 

representatives of government. And, similarly, the government of the University of Oxford, as opposed 

to its colleges, is made up of scholars appointed by the various colleges. Certain safeguards are built in 

to prevent too much self-perpetuation of a little clique, if I may use the word, ―guild,‖ I think, was the 

word chosen by the Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith), certain safeguards are built in to prevent a guild 

from engaging in pure self-perpetuation so I think that the idea put forward by Dr. Trueman is not 

necessarily heretical. I think it is perhaps a little too advanced for Saskatchewan at this time or a little 

too different, whether advanced or retarded, a little too different than that which would find favour, I 

suggest, with the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

But I suggest that Dr. Trueman‘s words do call to our attention the fact that the time is past when the 

Board of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan can reflect only those people who provide the 

money. The time is past when the Board can only reflect the views or can only have on it appointees of 

the government and of those alumni who have gone out into the business or professional world. The 

Member for Elrose very properly, it seems to me, sketched out three or four or five views of the 

university, three or four or five ideas of what is the essence of a university. And we must, I suggest, 

balance some of those ideas. One of the ideas is that the university is primarily a public-service agency 

to provide society with those persons learned and skilled which society needs in order to carry on its 

work. Another view of the university society is that it is a place where young people go to mature, to 

grow, to become men in the true sense of the word. A third view - these are not mutually exclusive - is 

that a university is a place where scholars gather in order to exchange among themselves the wisdom of 

the ages, to be guardians of the heritage of learning upon which our Western society is based, and to add 

to the body of knowledge which is used to build, not only the physical world in which we move our 

bodies, but the intellectual world in which we move our minds. So I suggest we have to balance the 

rights of the Legislature to control public funds, and it seems to me, with respect, that Dr. Trueman 

perhaps gave insufficient attention to that aspect of university government, to balance that right and 

desire with the desire of young people to have a voice in the world, in which they live and by which they 

are moulded, and the desire of scholars, who populate this community of scholars, to have a voice in that 

community, of which they are a permanent part, and in respect of the government of which community 

they wish to have a voice in order that they may make their work be most fruitful for the community. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1553 

I think we can do this by making the Senate reflect these points of view. I think we already have a 

Senate which reflects the Government‘s views and the views of the scholars. I think we can add to this a 

number of students who would be able to add a voice, another point of view to the government of the 

University. I realize that this is not easy. It is difficult for one student to speak for another. They are a 

changing community and accordingly the voice of the students is often a voice which is not accurately 

reflective of student opinion. It is inordinately difficult to assess public opinion in a body which is 

constantly moving. 

 

I think we can also make our university reflect these three points of view by having the Board of 

Governors have upon it representatives of the public selected by the Government, and I suggest properly 

so, representatives of the scholars, and representatives of the students. I don‘t for a moment think that 

the addition of a number of students on the University Board is likely to erode in any effective way the 

necessary financial voice which a government must have in the governing of a university. I think we 

ought not to try to gloss over this very real fact that a university is a large spender of public funds and in 

our democratic and our representative form of government, it is necessary that the government of the 

day have some sort of voice in the governing of a university. But I think that that voice need not be 

exclusive and it can be effectively voiced at the same time as scholars and students have a voice. 

 

Our task then is to balance the needs of these three groups. We must be careful in arranging our 

university administration, not to regard universities as solely a factory to produce scholars for public 

consumption. I always deplore the use of words in applying to universities which might suggest that 

universities produce a good product or that the product of the university is well received. I realize that 

this is a form of speech, but I wouldn‘t want us to fall into the idea of believing that a university is some 

sort of social sausage factory whose object is to produce a sufficient supply of brand X, brand Y and 

brand Z to perform needed social functions. Nor would I want the university to be solely a cloistered 

haven for scholars who would shut themselves off in the proverbial ivory tower and not be aware that 

they are performing a very real social function. 

 

I would want a university to be, yes, a social-service agency. Yes, a community of scholars, but also a 

place where a student could stand and grow and increase his stature in wisdom and in truth, where he 

could become a man, not only in the economic sense but in the philosophic sense and, if we‘re not afraid 

of the word, in the spiritual sense. 

 

I am about to conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker. I believe that, if we keep those three ideas of a 

university in mind, we will reach the conclusion that the senate of a university ought to reflect all three 

of the government, the faculty and the students. Similarly the board of governors ought to reflect all 

three of the government, the faculty and the students. I think that the particular manner in which we 

ought to endeavour to provide adequate participation for the public, the faculty and students is not fully 

worked out. I think the idea of a commission to work this out is not a bad idea. I very much support the 

Resolution of the Member for Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois). I support the 

amendment which would allow student participation on the Board, and I support also the idea 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1554 

of a commission which would study other ways to provide additional and more fruitful participation by 

public, faculty and students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The House recessed at 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, the Resolution we were dealing with and 

that was dealt with by the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) just prior to the supper hour, is on 

a motion put forward by the Member for Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) and the 

amendment thereto moved by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). 

 

I would like to make a few remarks on the amendment primarily, Mr. Speaker, and relate it again to the 

original motion. Now it would seem that the object of the amendment put forth by the Leader of the 

Opposition is a two-fold amendment to urge membership by both students and faculty on the Senate and 

on the Board of Governors and secondly, to support or request the establishment of a special 

commission to study and recommend with respect to the administrative structure of the university. This 

goes a good deal further than the original Resolution which was concerned primarily and explicitly with 

membership of students on the Senate and it seems to me that the amendment completely or 

conveniently or accidentally or otherwise, overlooks some important considerations. Of the 67 members 

who are on the Senate, 30 or 31 are members of the university community. However, this is the organ of 

the University which, in a broad sense, is responsible for the academic affairs of the university. The 

General University Council composed of senior administrative officials together with 18 members 

elected from the Campus Councils has extensive powers in that same general area, partly in an advisory 

capacity to the Senate and secondly, of course, in part in authority exclusive to the councils themselves 

such as the field of making regulations regarding examinations, school terms and other points. This does 

not include the role of the faculty in the campus Council. I think that it should be fairly obvious, Mr. 

Speaker, that faculty power or faculty influence, if you will, is very great presently in the power 

structure of the university, and this, of course, is as it should be with respect to direction and 

administration of the academic affairs of the University. I have no particular objection whatever to 

faculty representation on the Senate, although I may say it would probably not add that much to it. 

 

The original motion proposed student representation on the Senate and I have no objection, Mr. Speaker, 

to the suggestion in the original motion. I do believe, however, that the value or the importance of such a 

step has been highly overrated by many of the proponents of the idea. Last year The University Act was 

amended in this House to allow for a number of changes in the administrative structure of the University 

with the two-campus idea, and it was the Government‘s view at that time to defer the idea of students 

being represented on the Senate until other administrative changes had become operative under the new 

two-campus structure. As I‘ve said, I firmly believe that the whole question of the value of student 

representation on the Senate has been overrated by many of the proponents and the people speaking for 

it. Reports from student representation on 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1555 

the senate of other universities in our country certainly haven‘t indicated that the experience has proven 

to be as meaningful as was hoped for. It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that it‘s a good deal more 

important for student involvement to take place at a level closer to where the action, actually from the 

students‘ point of view, in the various committees, within the colleges, or faculties is now, I understand, 

frequently taking place at our University of Saskatchewan. I suggest also, Sir, that there‘s a good deal of 

loose thinking or woolly thinking with respect to this subject of involvement in the so-called 

decision-making process. We have pronouncements by many people that everybody involved in the 

decision-making must be a participant right from the beginning right through. Certainly I think that, 

when everybody tries to manage everyone else‘s business, quite often what happens we have more chaos 

and more disorder, because no one really assumes any responsibility in a situation of that kind. To say 

that management of an institution is everyone‘s business is almost the same as saying that it is nobody‘s 

business. Somebody must have the authority and the responsibility and they must go together. 

 

Some argue for representation on the Senate by the students and faculty. I think there is a good point to 

be made here, and certainly it will afford faculty and students a greater sense of identity perhaps with the 

development and the character of the University, and this would have to be a good thing. As I say, I‘ve 

no objection to these thoughts. 

 

With respect to the other question put forward in the amendment by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) in regard to faculty and student representation on the Board of Governors, Mr. Speaker, I do not 

hold the same view in this regard. The arguments, I think, put forward for student and faculty 

representation clearly indicate to me that those who propose this really are looking at a different concept 

of the Board of Governors, or choose not to recognize the present statutory concept as it is. Perhaps as 

the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) pointed out previously in this debate, we could well look 

at the concept or the present role of the Board of Governors. However, as the Act now stands the Board 

is, by reason of a statutory definition, responsible essentially for providing the material resources and the 

administrative machinery which make possible the real business of the university, the academic 

program. Now the Board itself is not an academic authority. Reduced to its simplest terms I suppose we 

could say the task of the Board is to provide the means by which the university, as an institution of 

learning, can carry out its educational objectives which in their turn are products of the direction given, 

in this case by the Senate and by the faculties. Why anyone would wish to compound the confusion by 

creating a situation of overlapping, duplication and perhaps even divided loyalties, is difficult to 

understand. I suggest that perhaps a more useful exercise - and this was referred to in the remarks of the 

Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) and the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) - might well be for 

the various groups and interests in the University to clarify their own objectives in terms of their 

relationship to the University itself and from there on perhaps look at the structure that might better 

accommodate these objectives and these wishes. 

 

Now, the other portion of the amendment that I‘d like to comment very briefly on, Mr. Speaker, was the 

suggestion that a special royal commission more or less be set up to look at this 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1556 

whole question. Other speakers have referred to this particular point and my only suggestion here would 

be that it‘s several years out of date. It would be a duplicate in effect of the Senate, except of course for 

student representation, because I‘m sure that most here are well aware that the University bodies have 

only recently completed fairly comprehensive studies of their own structure themselves. I think that we 

should surely give the University itself an opportunity to implement some of the recommendations and 

some of the changes that were suggested in their own major study on reorganization. So I certainly 

cannot accept the view that another commission at this point in time would produce anything different or 

anything helpful at this particular point in time. I‘m a little surprised, Mr. Speaker, to see that in the face 

of all the protestations about autonomy and independence of the University, that the amendment 

suggested the Government itself appoint such a commission. Now it may well be that as the Member for 

Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) pointed out and again the Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) there could be 

changes. There perhaps should well be changes in the structure, in the role, in the objectives of the 

Senate and of the Board of Governors, and I‘m sure that as time goes on these changes will come about. 

However, at this time, Mr. Speaker, I do not propose to support the amendment but rather the motion 

itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale) Mr. Speaker, I had not intended to enter into this debate 

respecting the Resolution from the Member for City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois), but some of the 

comments opposite made today and several days ago, on Tuesday, have prompted me to say a few 

words especially in light of the fact it was my privilege and pleasure to be the seconder of the 

amendment put forward by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). 

 

I want to say, first of all, that the purpose of my remarks are to vigorously support the proposed 

amendment, because I think that it in fact will give true meaning and purpose to the Resolution as put 

forward by the Member from Saskatoon City Park-University. 

 

At the outset, I would like to make some brief remarks respecting the observations of the Minister of 

Education (Mr. McIsaac), who just took his seat. Of the points that I noted, the Minister first of all 

indicated that there was a certain degree of faculty power now present by virtue of the fact the Senate of 

the University had something like 31 people from the academic community represented on the said 

Board. My observation here is that it‘s a misnomer, Mr. Minister, to really talk in terms of faculty 

power. Essentially what we have here is faculty influence rather than faculty power and really what we 

do have, in effect is an ex-officio body or members of the academic community on the Senate. And I 

really suggest to you, Sir, that a quick reading of The University Act will show that the power with 

respect to very many of the meaningful decisions of the University rests with the Board of Governors. 

 

I direct the attention of the Members of this House to Section 63 of The University Act and I don‘t 

intend to go into any detail respecting the powers but Section 63 does set out these particular powers. It 

says: 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1557 

The board may from time to time (for example) maintain and keep in order and condition real 

property. 

 

And it talks of the powers of the board respecting real property: 

 

It may also spend such sums for the buildings of real properties with the approval, etc. 

 

It goes on to talk about a vast variety of powers that have been set out here. 

 

The important point I wish to make is that there is an essential power vested in the Board of Governors 

that directly affects the students. Members who are aware of the student unrest know that one of the 

major complaints by the students on the University campus is a question of housing. Students have a 

direct say and a direct question that they‘re asking about the question of housing. I have a clipping with 

me whereby the Students Council talked about the need to find location and roomings for about 10,000 

students. I suggest that this is a power that comes directly under the influence of the Board of 

Governors. And really for the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) to say that 31 members of the 

academic community are represented on the Senate, begs the question, the question in this particular 

example being: who has the power to make the final decisions respecting such important aspects as for 

example construction of facilities? 

 

One other observation that I wish to make. The Minister said that he thought there might be a loss of 

responsibility. Frankly, the argument here lost me somewhat. I don‘t see how there can be a loss of 

responsibility by the mere addition of students and faculty on the Board of Governors. The loss of 

responsibility or the fear of loss of responsibility is more imaginary, Mr. Minister, than real. The 

responsibility will vest and remain with the Board of Governors. If they make a wrong decision, we 

know who the body is that can be made accountable for the decision. All we do simply here, by the 

proposed amendment, is expand the responsibility to a very significant other body of the community, 

namely, the students and the faculty. 

 

Thirdly, the Minister talked about the concept of the Board and I, for one, feel that the concept of the 

Board has to be drastically revised. I think that the concept of the Board ought to be based on some 

large-scale democratization of the Board of Governors. Frankly speaking, I do not think that the Board 

of Governors presently is representative either of the university community or of the people of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. Now that may not be of any particular fault of this Government. I‘m not 

fixing any blame on any particular authority or anything of that nature. I simply say that as far as the 

concept of the Board is concerned we can certainly go a long way towards democratizing it and I think 

it‘s important too towards democratizing the decision-making powers of the University by adding on to 

the Board of Governors, the voice of the students and the voice of the faculty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — One final observation by the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) that I should like 

to allude to, and that is the argument that the suggested amendment really is a duplication of 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1558 

what we have now. May I say that the studies that the Minister alluded to are beneficial studies. They 

are studies that certainly added and improved, I would think, the overall concept of the University but I 

think it‘s a specious argument, respectfully, to say that the Resolution as amended and proposed by my 

leader respecting the commission, is a duplication. It is really an unfair suggestion. I don‘t think that it 

can be reasonably expected, Mr. Minister, that the Senate of the University of Saskatchewan can 

realistically, objectively, in cold blood, be able to analyze its own particular composition, or particularly 

the Board of Governors. I think, if this were the case, then really what the Government of the day three 

or four years ago would have done on the question of administration of the Government Services, when 

it set up the Barber-Johnson Commission on procedures and expenditures and administration, likely 

what it would have done would be to set up a Committee of the House, or perhaps a Committee of 

Cabinet. But I think the Government was wise to say, look here, the Members of the House are too much 

involved and too much interested in the question of administration that their judgment is likely to be 

clouded by what they‘re going to decide or what they‘re going to study. Therefore, presumably the 

rationale and the thinking of the Government was, ―We‘ll turn this over to an independent commission, 

the Barber-Johnson Commission,‖ (I believe was the name of it), ―in order to objectively look at it.‘ And 

I think this is a very important aspect of the Leader of the Opposition‘s (Mr. Lloyd) amendment. A 

commission of this nature really is looking into, I think, one very important question, a question that has 

been debated much lately in the news, the question of whether or not there ought to be for example a 

separate second University of Saskatchewan, Regina campus, independent and separate from the 

University of Saskatoon campus. I know that some senior officials from the University argue that this 

would be a bad thing. I personally disagree, respectfully, with the submissions of the University people. 

But the important thing is that the University people themselves are judging whether in fact this is the 

best place or the best way for education in the field of university. It ought to be really, I think, the 

responsible representatives of the people of the Province of Saskatchewan that say whether or not 

there‘s going to be an independent and separate and autonomous university here in Regina and one at 

Saskatoon with some strong links of co-ordination. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — It is. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now as I say, well, no, it isn‘t. There is none, I say. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — No, we say there‘s not going to be two universities at the moment. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, that‘s right and I‘m saying that the argument and the merit of the Leader of the 

Opposition‘s amendment is that an independent commission ought to look into the question of whether 

or not the position of the Government is valid because I, for one, don‘t happen to think that it is valid. I 

think that the Regina campus, for example, Mr. Premier, respectfully, is probably neglected when the 

administrative structure is so far away from Regina. I know they meet frequently, but I‘ve heard too 

many complaints and I personally feel the complaints are valid, that the simple fact of the matter is that 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1559 

there is not independence and this is a detriment to the problems of the University of Saskatchewan right 

here in the city of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — And I simply say this, that the amendment, that of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) says, look here, let‘s set up a commission, and, Mr. Premier, if your contention is valid, 

presumably the independent commission will make some final decision in this area, that I am sure most 

Members on this side will be willing to abide by. 

 

Now just a few other comments if I might and this is really the motivation for entering into the debate, a 

few comments respecting the observations by my colleague from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth). I regret 

that he‘s not in his chair tonight. 

 

This also relates to some of the observations by my learned gentleman and friend from Elrose, Mr. 

Leith. May I say that the Member‘s contribution this afternoon was a very learned one and well-thought 

out and I thought one he ought to be complimented on. Somehow, Mr. Minister, the proposed 

amendment was, I think, interpreted and I think is being interpreted - I have this feeling - by the 

Members who have spoken from your side of the House, to be the real flood-gates to open up the 

question of student power. I think the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) entered into the debate 

bringing in the issue of student power. He did so rather reluctantly with his heels dragging, and he 

apologized for having to discuss this issue of student power as it related to the Resolution. I thought 

frankly - I know the Hon. Member from Nutana South and I think very highly of him personally - the 

speech was really rather a poor antiseptic for the Government‘s lack of initiative to deal with this 

problem of student representation on the Board of Governors. I think frankly that the attitude shows 

through that the Government somehow is afraid of one or two or three university students on the Board 

of Governors and one or two or three faculty members on the Board of Governors. I really haven‘t been 

able to pinpoint the reasons for this fear, but, as I‘ve suggested, I think it has some direct link to some 

suspicious paranoia about student power. 

 

Firstly, the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) said that we should at all times maintain the rule 

of law respecting university issues. This was mentioned by the Member from Elrose (Mr. Leith). No one 

disagrees with him on this point. That statement was, I think, a not so subtle implication that somehow 

the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) or we, the Members on this side, were introducing an 

amendment which really supported those who wanted to see a breakdown of law and order on the 

university issues. I think it was a subtle suggestion and an unfair suggestion by the Member from Nutana 

South that all faculty and students, who are vitally interested in the future progress and decision-making 

powers of our University, are somehow interested in tearing down this very body within which they are 

now working. 

 

Secondly, the Member from Nutana South stated that the dissenters should be warned. He warned the 

students with respect to their cause. He argued that they had to carry their cause through reason and 

logic. Again no one on this side of the 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1560 

House will quarrel with that. We simply ask why the Government opposite thus far seems to refuse to 

provide a forum, Mr. Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac), whereby reason and logic that the Member 

for Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) pleads for can be presented to the governing bodies. We agree with you 

that the arguments of the students and the faculty ought to be done through logic and through 

persuasion, though we ask you: do they have the forum now that allows them to present that argument of 

logic and reason? The simple fact of the matter is that it doesn‘t because they‘re not on the Senate and 

they‘re not on the Board of Governors where the real decisions are made. I simply say: how does the 

Government opposite expect the students and the faculty and the taxpayers of the province to put 

forward the case of student reform to those who decide these matters without even having an 

opportunity to sit on the Board? It‘s precisely the fact that the students and the faculty are not allowed to 

have meaningful representations that causes, I think, many of the concerns among the educators with 

respect to this question of demonstration and representation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I think the point of the whole proposed amendment is to give these academics - and I 

mean now students and faculty - an opportunity to put their case, to put the question, as the Member 

from Nutana South says, before the decision-making powers of the University. 

 

Thirdly, the Member from Nutana South (Mr. Forsyth) referred to a quotation from one George F. 

Kennan. The quotation was to the effect that any group who seeks to frighten or present violent 

objections - I think this is the exact quotation - to the present status quo bears a strong resemblance to 

totalitarianism. The quotation further stated that it placed all of the other citizens on the other side of the 

table. The quotation was made by the Member from Nutana South because obviously he thought that the 

students were, it suppose, likened to totalitarianism because of their posture. Well, I would suggest to 

the Hon. Member and the Government opposite that they really study that quotation themselves first 

before asking the students and the faculty to observe it, because I suggest that the posture taken by the 

Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac), the posture taken by the Member from Nutana South (Mr. 

Forsyth), the posture perhaps taken by the Premier, is really a violent objection to allowing students and 

faculty to present their views in the orderly and democratic fashion that this proposed amendment calls 

for. I would suggest respectfully to the Government that it is they who have the violent objections. I 

would suggest that it is their actions in being inflexible that resemble totalitarianism. Its actions have 

placed the students and the faculty on the other side of the table and that‘s why this Resolution is being 

proposed and amended and what it‘s all about. This Resolution does not draw divisions between faculty 

and students on one hand and some other governing body on the other. This Resolution, I think, tries to 

bring all sides together and I feel that, if the Members reject the proposed amendment, they‘re drawing a 

line once again, whereby the reason and the logic that the Member from Nutana South pleads for will 

not be permitted to be presented to the proper authorities. I say it is they, the Members opposite, who 

will launch into a politics of confrontation by refusing to provide this much-needed forum for 

democratic debate in the University. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1561 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I just simply have to ask myself very briefly just what in the world the 

Government‘s afraid of when it refuses this independent appraisal that the proposed amendment asks 

for. I want to make it clear as I have already that the proposed amendment does not and will not involve 

any detailed scrutiny into university functions. We‘re not worried if the Government appoints the 

commission. The Resolution merely attempts to recognize the fact that there may have to be a form of 

dramatic change in the present university organization. I wish to point out that, recently, in the Ontario 

College of Arts, a one-man inquiry into the school‘s administration was carried out. It was carried out by 

the Chairman of Ontario‘s Committee on University Affairs, Dr. Douglas Wright. He presented a 

23-page report made public. For example, he recommended a new 18-member governing council. It 

was, I think, a radical recommendation with respect to traditional concepts, Mr. Minister, of a board of 

governors. It stated that the new 18-member governing council should include nine members from the 

public at large, six from the faculty and three students. The Art College Principal, Mr. Sydney Watson, 

termed the report ―a truly democratic distribution of responsibility‖ and said that immediate reforms 

would be instituted in this particular area. 

 

I am now arguing here that this type of reform, I‘m not saying that this is the answer, but I merely wish 

to point out again to the Minister that the question of a commission is not an unheard-of practice. I 

merely wish to emphasize to the Minister that this is the trend in education to give faculty and students 

representation. Just to show you how much of a trend it is, recently two Dalhousie students and the 

Student Council business manager were appointed to the school‘s Board of Governors. That‘s at 

Dalhousie. Dalhousie, now, Mr. Speaker, is the fifth university where students have been offered seats 

on the Board of Governors and the fourth to have accepted them. Carleton students have one 

representative on the board. Ryerson has two. Alberta has two representatives on the board. Calgary now 

has the opportunity but turned it down. This is nothing new. Queen‘s University is arguing this question 

now and likely is going to adopt it. I don‘t see what the hang-up is as far as the government is concerned 

and why the Members of this Legislature can‘t express their opinion in support of that concept. I think 

respectfully the arguments advanced by the Members opposite reflect a narrow and conservative 

outlook. I think their attitudes are like a car driver, you know, who comes up to a yellow light. You have 

the Member from Elrose (Mr. Leith) who is sort of sympathetic to the problem. The car driver comes up 

to a yellow light and he just doesn‘t know whether to stop or to go. They just seem to be confused and 

afraid of this whole situation of student representation or faculty representation. I don‘t know whether 

it‘s because they‘re afraid that their supporters are going to be fearful or suspicious of their motivations 

or what it is. I simply say the Government really doesn‘t know where it‘s at, to use a common 

expression kicked around these days. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We know precisely where we‘re at. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Well, respectfully, I don‘t agree obviously, Mr. Premier. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1562 

I think that if the Government knew precisely where it is at, it would get on with the job of appointing 

the students on the Board of Governors and the faculty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Democratize things. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to just very simply say this. The argument 

for inclusion of both faculty and students on the truly decision-making bodies of the University is 

incontrovertible. Firstly, it stands to reason that the professors should have a say over matters ranging 

from curriculum to construction of buildings. After all it‘s they who have to live in the buildings for 

most of their lives, that‘s why. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The taxpayer has to pay for it. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Yes, that‘s right, the taxpayer has a say as well. I‘m not saying the faculty should 

have an exclusive voice. I‘m simply saying the faculty should have a strong and almost dominant voice 

simply because the facts of the matter are they are going to have to work in them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, you don‘t know what you‘re talking about. Oh, smarten up. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, the argument suggests non-concern for the taxpayer. Can any Member 

here in this Legislature tell me what is in the proposed amendment that says that we, the Members of the 

New Democratic Party, don‘t give a hoot about the interests of the taxpayer? Nothing in this amendment 

suggests that there‘s no interest in the part of the taxpayer. In fact, the contrary is true because the 

taxpayer is now seeing that the need is there for faculty and student representation on the Board of 

Governors. To that end the proposed amendment tries to reflect the concern that I think we on this side 

of the House have for the taxpayer. No one is suggesting any exclusive control by the faculty or by the 

university students of the university. Of course not. But I certainly don‘t subscribe to any master-servant 

theory that I think the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) respectfully propounds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I didn‘t go to university simply because I could memorize for eight or nine years and 

regurgitate back what the professor told me. Sure, he had superior knowledge, but the fact of the matter 

is, as a number of learned authorities are saying, the students of today are more qualified and more 

capable in order to exercise the things that directly affect them. And, Mr. Premier, that means 

curriculum, that means buildings and that almost means a say, not a final say, but a say in the choice of 

professors and classes. It‘s nothing so radical, so revolutionary. It is, as I said, being done in four or five 

other universities. And I respectfully say to the Premier that, 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1563 

if the Government and he really knew where they were at on this business, they‘d get on to try and at 

least institute this type of a reform. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — It‘s not a reform. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — What is it? It‘s a matter of reform. It‘s a matter of constructive reform, Mr. Premier, 

and you know it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Romanow: — You know I think a good analogy is the question of, really the question of - yes, my 

colleague suggested that it‘s really participatory democracy - but . . . I suppose the Rt. Hon. Prime 

Minister isn‘t thought very highly of by the Members opposite these days. 

 

I think the analogy is here. I think, Mr. Premier, that it‘s the university students and the university 

faculty who will have to fill out the question of memoranda, countless other detailed documentation that 

an institution like a university demands. To leave them out of the true decision-making process in these 

small things to the large things, such as leaving them off the Board of Governors, I think, would be 

parallel to allowing the Cabinet opposite to determine, for example, all matters of procedure that govern 

the legislators of this House. I suppose it could be argued in some way or another that we‘re all 

ex-officio Members of the Government. In a fashion, it could be argued by some theorist that we have 

some influence over the gentlemen opposite, although I‘m rather frankly coming to another conclusion 

in that regard. We all know that the true decision-making process respecting the procedures of this 

Chamber lies with each and everyone of us, the legislators of this province, with us the constituents of 

this Legislature, and I think the analogy lies here with the university faculty and the university students. 

They are the true constituents of the university. They are the consumer. They are the persons who put 

out the end product, the persons that have to live in the facilities and I think to suggest that a board of 

governors should have the sole authority is an antiquated view. 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — When are you going to give students a 

chance to study? 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Pardon me? 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Make your point so I can finish off this debate. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes, let‘s have the vote. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What‘s the hurry? You‘re getting paid for it. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — I wish the Hon. Member from Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) had 

repeated that comment, but I hope he‘ll make it when he sums up and closes up the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to conclude by one final observation by 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1564 

a very noted educationist. Mr. Premier, you will be interested that I am quoting from an authority by the 

name of Dr. Robertson, Principal of McGill University. Dr. Robertson had occasion and has had on 

more than occasion in recent days to concern himself in the question of faculty participation. Perhaps 

this quotation will come back to haunt him, but I think it is applicable in this debate. He said that student 

demands to participate in administrative policy decisions of the University are, ―perfectly legitimate.‖ 

He said what the Leader of the Opposition had said in his remarks, that students today are quite different 

from those of generations past, namely because they have a greater access to knowledge, automation and 

technology. Principal Robertson said, ―Science has given the student a greater sense of international 

participation, a greater awareness and concern in world affairs. Students have learned the power of 

communication media and know that they can voice their concern with considerable effect and merit.‖ 

Dr. Robertson said that affluence had nothing to do with unrest. It was just simply a matter of growing 

awareness in the world‘s problems. What he in effect said is what this amendment is asking the 

Members of this House to recognize, that the students of our generation see the problems of our world 

sometimes a lot better than we do, or the board of governors. They want new means and methods in 

respect to examination testing. They want some say with respect to their activities. I think the 

amendment falls perfectly in tune with the needs of the 1970s. I think that the Members of this House 

who vote against this proposed amendment will be cutting off the channel of communication with the 

faculty and the students. I think the Members who vote against the proposed amendment will be holding 

back the development of the education and the development of the university by at least five years. I 

think that the Members of this Legislature who vote against this proposed amendment, especially the 

Members opposite, really will show to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan that their interests 

are not with the students, the faculty and the taxpayer of the Province of Saskatchewan. Needless to say, 

Sir, I shall be supporting the proposed amendment. 

 

Hear, hear! 

 

The amendment was negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 21 

Messieurs 
Lloyd Meakes Michayluk 

Wooff Berezowsky Brockelbank 

Kramer Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Dewhurst Snyder Kwasnica 

 

NAYS — 30 

Messieurs 
Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Larochelle Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald  Gardner 

Heald Estey Coupland 

McIsaac Hooker McPherson 

   

   

   

   



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1565 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Barrie Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, my remarks will be brief in 

closing, but I would like to say that I am pleased that the amendment has been voted down, simply 

because I feel that the motion as presented is clearly to the point. While to some it may not seem to go 

far enough, I would like to say that it is a very important step in itself and is better I think not confused 

with other issues at this time. 

 

For example, we have had some accusations of specious arguments and so on. We can get quite 

confused I might say in regard to such specious arguments. I would like to make one comment only 

about the argument that was put forth that the students in order to have their housing needs made known 

must have representation on the Board of Governors. Nothing could be further from the truth. The 

students certainly have every means at their disposal to make their needs known to the Board of 

Governors, so that from this point alone, to get away from confusion, I think it is a good thing that we 

are going to vote only on the motion itself. I really hope that all Hon. Members will support this motion 

and I sincerely hope too that the students will respect the confidence that is being placed in them. There 

are many people and among them some students who are not satisfied with the way the Senate conducts 

its affairs. I would like to suggest to them now that their representation should certainly be meaningful 

to them at this time, if only for the reforms they might achieve in this regard. It is our hope that their 

responsible contribution to the Senate will prove their worthiness for further votes of confidence in the 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Resolution No. 8 - Guaranteed Wheat Price 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): 

 

That this Legislature recommend that the Provincial Government requests the Federal Government to 

adopt an agricultural policy that would provide for both an export and domestic guaranteed price for 

wheat, set through a study of production costs and world market trends and subject to periodic review, 

to insure an adequate standard of living for the farmer. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, a few days ago the House had a debate on a 

Resolution moved by the Government which called for the two-price system for wheat. In view of the 

fact that it was passed unanimously by the Legislature, and in view of the fact that both sides of the 

House expressed their view point, I don‘t see very much point in proceeding with this particular 

Resolution and the Government will support it as it stands. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1566 

Resolution No. 3 - Introducing Student Groups 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. I.H. MacDougall 

(Souris-Estevan): 

 

That this House request Mr. Speaker to introduce all student groups sitting in the Galleries before the 

Orders of the Day are entered into, and should the House be in a Committee of the Whole, request the 

Deputy Speaker to perform the same function. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t suppose this 

Resolution is one that could be called a basic issue of such impact as other Resolutions heard today. I 

hope that, when I defend the privileges of the Members in this House, I won‘t be pointed out as a 

Communist or anti-somebody or other. I hope I won‘t hear any other kind of ridiculous charges as well. 

 

What I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is what I previously indicated. Briefly it is that we do get student 

guests into our House and it is a privilege and a pleasure for Members of the various constituencies to 

introduce them to you, Sir, and to the Members of this Legislature. I think it is a civilized performance, 

it is a traditional one, something that has been carried on for many years, and I don‘t really understand 

why a Resolution like this is brought here in the first place. I said, and I say again, that I think it isn‘t 

only a privilege but a personal right that a Member has and I wouldn‘t want to see it changed, at least at 

this time. There may be a time in the future, Mr. Speaker, when we may not find a few minutes, two or 

three minutes a day to carry out this present privilege. 

 

I am sure that all Members of this House, with the exception probably of the mover, would desire to 

continue this tradition and custom of introducing their own student guests to other Members of the 

House and to yourself, Sir. Because I think it is a gracious act, it makes the students feel that they are 

somebody. As well it makes us feel that we have a function to perform which is appreciated by the 

young people of the Province of Saskatchewan. I can‘t envisage any normal person objecting to this 

kind of procedure. As the Hon. Member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) has pointed out, it only takes a 

minute or two of our time and I believe that we have already spent more time on this Resolution than the 

time spent on introducing students in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — So having said that this is a courtesy, not only to yourself, Mr. Speaker, but to the 

Members of this House, having said that this is a tradition that has been accepted for a long time and is a 

pleasant procedure here, I would want to say that . . . there is really not much advantage proceeding 

further with it, however, because I do want to find out what is happening in other Legislatures, I am 

trying to get information from other provinces, I would like to adjourn the debate. 

 

Adjournment negatived. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1567 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Speaker, might I, Sir, add but a few comments to the 

Resolution introduced by the Hon. Member from Souris-Estevan which proposes to deny privileges 

Hon. Members have up to the current session enjoyed, and that is, Sir, the privilege of introducing to the 

Members of this Legislature students from their respective constituencies. 

 

At this point in time. Mr. Speaker, neither the mover of the Resolution nor any Member from the 

Government benches has put forward reasons why this change is necessary. One fact is evident, Sir, that 

is that Members opposite are reluctant to rise and speak in support of the Resolution. Mr. Speaker, what 

are we as Members of this Legislature and the constituencies which each of us represent trying to 

accomplish by seemingly radical deviation from tradition as proposed by this Resolution? Will its 

adoption save time? Obviously not, Mr. Speaker. This Resolution merely proposes to transfer this task to 

the already heavy load of Your Honour‘s responsibilities. Will this change, Mr. Speaker, add to the 

decorum of the proceedings? I have doubts and reservations. Are we then, Sir, frankly and openly 

admitting that the Members of this Legislature both past and present have inadequately performed their 

responsibility and that we now openly concur that introductions of student groups by His Honour will 

greatly enhance this procedure? Mr. Speaker, at the outset, I want to make it abundantly clear to Hon. 

Members that my stand against this Resolution does not dissociate me from the high regard I have for 

Your Honour‘s position. I want to impress you, Sir, and all Hon. Members that, since your appointment 

to this eminent position you have discharged your duties with decorum. I want to congratulate you, Sir, 

for the manner in which you have discharged your arduous task. However, Mr. Speaker, I maintain that 

the students from the Kinistino constituency should be introduced by the Hon. Member from Kinistino. 

This is rightly his duty as a Member for the area. I am indeed sorry that the Hon. Member from 

Souris-Estevan does not appreciate the fact and wants to absolve himself from this responsibility. May I 

assure the Hon. Member, Sir, that at his request he could be relieved of the responsibility at any time by 

any Member of this Legislature. Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Hon. Member from Kinistino 

for his self-appointment to officially act for this side of the House as timekeeper for the actual 

introduction. During his contribution and debate he presented statistics which prove that neither side of 

this Assembly has achieved records both for length or brevity in introducing respective groups. Have 

you noticed, Sir, that on several occasions during the session the Hon. Member from Hanley (Mr. 

Heggie) has requested permission of the House to introduce student groups from his constituency when 

the proceedings were well advanced beyond the Orders of the Day? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — I am assuming, Sir, that I can count on his support. The Hon. Member from Hanley 

is aware and rightly so that these introductions are a good lever to a bit of good public relations. 

Students, Mr. Speaker, on leaving this Assembly do carry away educational and personal opinions and 

viewpoints. Back at the school and in their homes, they probably relate that it was their Member from 

Souris-Estevan or Hanley, or City Park-University or the Hon. Minister of Mineral Resources or the 

Member from Maple Creek who has risen in his place to recognize their presence and 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1568 

introduce them to all Hon. Members of the Legislative Assembly. Hon. Members must have on occasion 

been aware, as no doubt you have, Sir, how meticulously, diligently and with utter care the Hon. 

Member from Yorkton (Mr. Gallagher), when the occasion arises, spares no words to show his 

appreciation and due respect to groups present. The Hon. Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) only 

a week or so ago crossed constituency boundaries to make sure that he put in a political plug for himself. 

At this stage, Mr. Speaker, I have a suspicious feeling that he too when he comes back to the House will 

be in support of my stand in respect to this Resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, student groups are accompanied by members of the school staff. It has been customary and 

properly so to give recognition to these teachers and in some instances to the bus drivers. In both these 

instances, Mr. Speaker, these people at great sacrifice of time, money and effort make it possible for the 

students to be with us. It is therefore only proper that they too be recognized. There are occurrences, Sir, 

when changes of teachers occur without notification of personnel in charge of prior arrangements. Hon. 

Members will recall that I had a group of grade 12 students from the Blame Lake School Unit on 

February 24th. Three of the teachers accompanying the group were not those whose names were initially 

given. Let us just assume that His Honour performed the introduction using the names of the original 

teacher. In all probability he would have introduced the three teachers who were not present in the 

galleries, while those present would have been unrecognized. What a situation! Do we want to place His 

Honour in these rather embarrassing situations? I say definitely not. This we could, Mr. Speaker, avoid 

by opposing this Resolution. 

 

There is but one argument I want to use to gain further support for the stand I take, Mr. Speaker. In some 

instances, some of the students are known personally to the Member, as may be their parents. The 

parents may be supporters so that there may be that very close personal aspect which is very vital in 

constituent-member relationships. This personal acquaintance, Mr. Speaker, is what causes Members to 

rise in their places to make sure that they recognize the group from the constituency. Mr. Speaker, the 

Member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) probably is of the opinion that what I have mentioned 

does not concern him. Here and now, Sir, I want to dissociate myself from his logic because what 

perturbs me, Sir, is the fact that this Resolution if passed will deny the Hon. Member from City 

Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) or the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald), the Member for Saskatoon 

Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank), the privilege of introducing student groups. Mr. Speaker, I feel that I am 

obligated to the people of my constituency. For a group of young students from my area or from any 

area of the Redberry constituency to come here it is necessary for them to travel over 200 miles. I owe it 

to them, Mr. Speaker, I owe them at least the courtesy of publicly introducing them to the Members of 

this House. Does the Hon. Member from Souris-Estevan expect me to support a Resolution that denies 

me this privilege? Definitely not, Mr. Speaker. I call upon all Hon. Members to lend me their support. 

 

Before I conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, may I bring to the attention of the Hon. Members several 

other aspects that have a bearing and an influence upon these groups other than the fact as to who will be 

introducing them. In my opinion, Sir, it is our overall behaviour, our attitude when these students are 

with 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1569 

us. It is my opinion that our disrespect to each other, coupled with our total disregard of our behaviour, 

is what mirrors lasting impressions in the minds of the students for this and other democratic 

institutions. This attitude that we portray during their presence and particularly that of the members of 

the Executive Council, who, as Cabinet Ministers represent the highest post in our democratic form of 

government at provincial levels, is what lowers respect and disregard for the democratic parliamentary 

procedures. To further illustrate my point, Mr. Speaker, may I refer to a school paper, Belief, published 

by the student council at the Blame Lake Composite high school, Saskatchewan. This issue is dated 

February 28th, 1969, and was published only after its editorial staff accompanied the grade 12 group 

who visited this Legislative Chamber on February 24th. Here is the impression of the students as 

reported in the paper under the title ―Viewing Regina.‖ It begins with their departure from home and 

finally their arrival at Regina. They spent some time at the RCMP Barracks, from there they came to the 

Legislature. It is this particular portion of the report that I want Hon. Members on both sides of the 

House to take note of, and I quote: 

 

From there, 

 

(meaning the RCMP Barracks) 

 

we travelled to the Legislative Building where we had the pleasure of seeing Premier Thatcher, 

Opposition Leader Woodrow Lloyd and our own MLA, D. Michayluk, who delivered a very 

impressive speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: 

What he had to say captured our attention but apparently not the attention of his fellow MLAs, 

especially those of the Liberal party, who made wisecracks and walked in and out of the building 

while he was speaking. Their attitude was shocking! As most of us will be of voting age on the next 

election, perhaps Mr. Michayluk‘s speech narrowed down our choice of a political party to only NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michayluk: — Mr. Speaker, because I am convinced that this Resolution should not be considered 

at this stage, and more Members are aware that the same opinion and concern is shared and has been 

expressed by Hon. Members who have participated in debates, I therefore would like to move, seconded 

by the Hon. Member for Cutknife (Mr. Kwasnica) an amendment to the Resolution as follows: 

 

That proposed Resolution No. 3 moved by the Hon. Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) be 

amended as follows: 

 

That all the words after the ―House‖ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

request the Select Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections to study the procedure of 

introducing students in this House and report thereon. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1570 

Mr. A. Thibault: — (Kinistino)Mr. Speaker, I am going to relate all my remarks to the amendment. 

When I spoke on the main motion, I was very kind, hoping to get some consideration. The other side 

seems to say No when we say Yes. When we say Yes, they say No. It is sort of an exercise in futility. 

This is why I would like to see this Resolution referred to the Committee on Privileges and Elections. I 

was expecting to hear some debate about this Resolution from the other side but they sat there like a 

bunch of kids who set fire to the hayloft and they had to appear before their dad. Nothing to say, and you 

know what the rest is like . . . I wouldn‘t tell you. I still have a hard time to figure it out. Are they lazy? 

They can‘t get up and spend 40 seconds or are they unhappy about us saying something extra in the 

House. They want to pull it all over to their side. Or, are they just getting old and out of date and 

fossilized? Or is it just jealousy? I don‘t know. I think jealousy played a big part. They remind me of my 

old dog. Seven years ago a mongrel dog stopped in at my place and I adopted him, he was a very good 

dog. Now he is old and I got another young one to take his place. This young dog likes to play. Once in 

a while he goes out hunting with my son. He hunts out the game for him, he helps him do the chores, 

puts the cattle in and sorts the pigs out. He is very useful. But once in awhile he wants to play with 

another dog so he goes to the old dog. He pulls his hair a little bit, the old dog growls. If he keeps on 

pulling on his hair, the old dog bites. This reminds me of the Member for Souris-Estevan (Mr. 

MacDougall) when he is disturbed by a bunch of kids. That is why I think we should support this 

amendment, to give it a chance to be fairly well studied. I want to read to you one of the introductions in 

this House not long ago. I like to see people voting according to the dictates of their conscience in this 

House. It appears to me that there are too many leaving their conscience at the door before they come in 

and then they are free-wheeling. I want to refer to the introduction by the Minister of Public Health (Mr. 

Grant): 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you and to you and to the Members of this House I would like to introduce a 

group of grade eight students of Massey school, the largest public school, I believe, in Saskatchewan 

in my constituency. They are in the west gallery and they are accompanied . . . 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — The hon. gentleman has spoken in his speech on this 

debate thus far. 

 

An Hon. Member: — On the amendment. 

 

Mr. Coderre: — That‘s right. He is speaking on the amendment and should he not confine himself 

strictly to the amendment in view of the fact that he has already spoken in the debate. He is quite broad 

at the moment. The trend of discussion at the moment has been amply dealt with in the main debate. 

Now the amendment thereto, he should confine his remarks to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well if he confines his remarks to the amendment then he has got to say why he wants 

it submitted to the Committee. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, now if I can continue after being 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1571 

so rudely interrupted. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order I think that remark was out of 

order. I think any Member of this House has a right to rise on a point of order as the Minister of Labour 

did and the Member now just said ―so rudely interrupted.‖ I don‘t think that when a Member rises on a 

point of order he is rudely interrupting any other Member. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — If it offended the Minister I can withdraw the remark. I have heard a lot worse 

remarks in this House that were not withdrawn and I haven‘t done it to hurt anyone. If he wants it 

withdrawn, if it is going to make him happy, I want him to sleep quiet tonight, I will withdraw it. 

 

Now if I can continue with this. Maybe I will have to start all over again because I lost the line here. 

However, I want to point out: 

 

I am sure we welcome this large group . . . 

 

and I am quoting Mr. Grant, the Minister of Public Health, the introduction here: 

 

I am sure we welcome this large group and wish them a most enjoyable stay and I am very pleased 

that the Resolution didn‘t pass yesterday so I, at least, got an opportunity to introduce my second class 

here this year. 

 

Now this is another reason why this should be referred to the Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

Certainly we expect the Minister to vote against the Resolution when the time comes. 

 

As I said a moment ago they sort of leave things at the door and they walk in here free-wheeling. I want 

to remind the Members of another incident that happened in this House and this is another reason why it 

should be referred to the Committee. In 1964, when the Liberals were elected, I can remember this door 

being left open during the noon hour. The chain was stretched across here and the commissionaire 

would come in with a group of students and lecture to them, describe the Chamber to them from that 

vantage point. That was very nice but as soon as the Liberals got in, whether they were old and grouchy 

and out of date - ―out, close the door, they can‘t come in behind the rail any more.‖ Well, all right that 

was one move, I didn‘t like the idea. That was another privilege that was gone. This was done. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Not by the Government. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — I don‘t know who did it but it was done under your rule when you were the 

Government. When you became the Government, that‘s when it was done. All right, that was one step 

and this is why now you are uneasy. This is why it should be referred to this Committee. They don‘t like 

students, they say OK you get up in the gallery, you can talk to them up there. That‘s fine, there is 

nothing wrong with that. The next step was, ―Now you fellows up here you got to shut up.‖ Well, I don‘t 

like that, and my students are not going to appreciate it. We are going to give it all the publicity you care 

to have. Now the only time 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1572 

that anybody has got up to speak on this matter is the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) only to try to close 

me up. So there you are. 

 

Mr. Heald: — On a point of order. 

 

Mr. Thibault: — If you stay in order as much as I am, you‘ll be very well in order. 

 

What do we see in this Province with this Government? We‘ve got disturbances in the schools, we‘ve 

got disturbances all over the place - the professors, the trustees and everything is being split up. Just the 

other day we were down into kindergarten, where will you go next? Pick the pockets of the little fellows. 

Mr. Speaker, I see that there is a great need to have this Resolution referred to the Committee. There are 

so many things that should be looked at. I don‘t know if I should tell you any more stories because I 

have got to look over my notes. We‘ve already spent more time debating it than we would have spent 

introducing the students. I don‘t know what we can do to make them change their minds. I am sure if 

there was a free vote, one of these secret ones that you fold you know and put them in a little box, we‘d 

win it handsomely. But they made a commitment to caucus. I tell you: Why don‘t you forget your weak 

principles once in awhile and do what‘s right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — This is the trouble with that outfit. They never know the difference between principles 

and what‘s right. There is an awful disturbance in that area. You can see that they are getting out of 

touch with the world. 

 

When the Member for Humboldt (Mr. Breker) today got up to introduce his students, if he could only 

have looked up there and seen the smiles on those students‘ faces, he would change his mind. I know he 

doesn‘t approve of that Resolution by the Member from Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall), not a bit but 

he is going to have to say Yes. I believe it is a party that is anti-kids. We took them off the main floor. 

What are you going to do next? This is what I am worried about. Maybe they will have to leave the 

galleries, I don‘t know. But if we can convince them that we should refer this to the Committee on 

Privilege and Elections, I am sure that a good decision will come out of it. I am sure that even the 

Members on your side will be happy about it, even the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), because he is one 

that spoiled the soup you know. He was making little political speeches. The offenders were equal on 

both sides, not any worse than the other. You‘ve been very good, you have not rudely interrupted me for 

awhile so I will sit down, Mr. Speaker, and thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on this 

but not on the amendment. I am against the amendment. But I would like to remind the Members of the 

reason, as far as this Resolution is concerned, why it was brought in. I remember it very well because 

last year was my first session and I was quite impressed 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1573 

by a lot of things. As you know first impressions are indeed lasting. One of the impressions that I got 

was the great political speeches that were being made when Members were introducing the students 

from their constituency. Now it has just been said by the Member who finished his remarks (Mr. 

Thibault) that there may have been equal fault on both sides of the House. But I would like you to recall 

the fact that we had on our bulletin board about halfway through the session last year, a petition from the 

Speaker that we use a little recommended form in introducing the students rather than giving a political 

speech each time. This had no effect whatever. I am telling you that as a new Member I did try to use the 

form that was suggested, but I noticed again that other Members did not do this and I didn‘t get the best 

impression out of this. The fact that this went on this way I think there was a real abuse. The fact that the 

Members simply refused to co-operate. Now when this Resolution has been brought in this year, every 

Member, every single Member has been reasonable about the introduction when they introduce their 

students. But let us have this Resolution put to one side and pow you‘ll get all the political speeches all 

over again. Let‘s not forget the reason why this was brought in. 

 

The Member for Kinistino I must say that he started off in the debate on the Resolution and I thought he 

was presenting himself very well, until as he went along he started haranguing and making a mockery 

out of the whole thing. And even now he has stood up, and simply acting as a comedian, he is not 

contributing properly to this debate at all in my point of view. It may be his manner that deceives me, I 

don‘t know. But he is certainly making a mockery of this debate and because of this I did lose him away, 

way back when he started putting the time clock on every Member. This was utter nonsense. If he had 

taken the year before and had taken Members from both sides of the House, believe me that clock of his 

would have run down a long time before he started to speak in this debate. I would like to suggest here - 

it has been mentioned that students come in here - it is an awesome sight to come into this House for the 

first time and to see the Members in their place. We realize that Members are walking in and out and 

that they are hollering back and forth. This is a disgusting thing in itself, but still they learn some of the 

facts of life from it. But this idea that it is essential that the Member introduce the students, that this is a 

God-given right, this is not so. It was mentioned here that the first time they came into the House, they 

don‘t know much about what‘s going on. It‘s nice certainly to have their Member introduce them but it 

is equally as nice, Mr. Speaker, that we should have you as the Speaker introduce the students in the 

proper form that you have already suggested. I think it is quite feasible that you could have the Member 

that is involved rise in his place. If the Member should happen to have a daughter or a grandchild in the 

class, he could easily advise you beforehand. I think it would be quite proper and quite impressive. This 

idea that our hearts have to bleed all over the floor here as if a God-given right has been taken away 

from us is just utter nonsense. If the Member from Kinistino (Mr. Thibault) had shut his mouth away 

back in this debate, I think he might have made a point, but I would like to suggest that he has made an 

utter mockery of the whole thing. I am in favour of the motion and against the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1574 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — I wonder if I might say a word or two in this debate because 

since the debate first started I have had the opportunity and privilege of being introduced myself in 

another Legislative Assembly. That was the Legislative Assembly in Winnipeg in the Province of 

Manitoba a couple of weeks ago. In light of the fact that we were having this debate in our Legislature, I 

took more than a passing interest in the way in which they introduced students in that Legislature. I 

haven‘t talked to the Member for Saskatoon City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) and I don‘t know 

whether he knew this procedure or not, but what they do in Winnipeg is that the Speaker introduces the 

students from a particular school and then he introduces the students as being from Birch Hills school or 

the Kinistino constituency which is represented by the Hon. Member for Kinistino and he asks him to 

stand. I was very impressed by this procedure. I think it worked very well. 

 

When this debate first started I must confess that I had some sympathy for the Member for Kinistino 

(Mr. Thibault), but that sympathy has evaporated, I am sorry to say, tonight. Because I thought with all 

due deference to the Member from Kinistino - and I have a great deal of respect for him - he became a 

bit abusive tonight if I might say so. He referred to Members on this side of the House leaving their 

consciences at the door. Well, I don‘t think I need the Member for Kinistino to lecture me on where my 

conscience is and I wouldn‘t presume to lecture him on his conscience, Sir, where he leaves it. So I think 

that was a rather unnecessary addition to the procedure. Then he made a reference to the fact that after 

we became the Government, the door was closed to the Chamber. Well, I haven‘t had much opportunity 

to look into that, but as the Premier said the Government of the day didn‘t have anything to do with it. I 

have found out since you made that statement that probably the reason why the door was closed was 

because during the time it was opened, during the period of 1964-65, a very, very valuable attribute of 

this Assembly, namely the statue of Lord Nelson disappeared. And it was apparently the decision of the 

Clerk of the Assembly, Mr. Bradshaw who was here - Mr. Koester was away. It was apparently his 

decision that in the interests of security the door should be closed. So it wasn‘t any doing of the 

Government of the day to sort of make the Chamber more sacrosanct or harder to get into, as far as the 

students were concerned. This was a decision in the interests of security which was taken by an officer 

of the Assembly. 

 

Now as to whether or not the Member can do a better job or whether the Speaker can do a better job, I 

heard a very impressive introduction in Winnipeg by the Speaker and I know, and I know every Member 

of this House knows that our Speaker can do a better job than any other Speaker in Canada in 

introducing people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heald: — Your opportunity to meet with your constituents or your opportunity to meet with your 

students is not going to be detracted from in any way, shape or form. The Member for Kinistino (Mr. 

Thibault) meets his students, I try to meet my students, we have dinner with them, we try to buy them 

dinner sometimes, we are with them afterwards. You talk in this debate, Members opposite talk in this 

debate, Mr. Speaker, as though 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1575 

these students aren‘t going to be introduced. I think they are going to be introduced in a most eloquent 

and effective fashion. Your opportunity to meet with them, communicate with them, go through the 

Chamber, is not being detracted from in any way, shape or form. And I ask in all sincerity of the 

Members opposite not to try and make political capital out of this. Try something different, don‘t be so 

defensive about everything that you started in this House. This is really the trouble you know. You did it 

this way and because we dare to change, because we dare to make a motion that will change procedure, 

hopefully for the better in our view on this side of the House, you are defensive about it because you 

started the other procedure. So I invite you to give it a try and we can assess the situation another year. I 

think it will work fine and you will have lots of opportunity to talk to your own students, and we will 

have a good, effective, eloquent introduction of every student that comes to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I could add a word here. I am one of those 

poor guys that never gets a group of students down here because I am so far away from home. But to me 

it has been very interesting to listen to the Members on both sides of the House introduce the students 

that have had the privilege and have had the leadership to visit the Legislature while it was in session. 

Just one reference to what the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) said a moment ago that, because they had 

the courage to change it, he admitted before he said that that they weren‘t going to change it. At least 

this was the impression he left and he claimed that some of our chaps had talked them out of it. This is a 

very poor argument for principle or for procedure or anything else. This is just being plain stubborn 

about it. I agree . . . 

 

Mr. Heald: — The Member doesn‘t wish to misquote me. What I said was that when the Member for 

Kinistino originally made his speech on the original motion that I had some sympathy for his position, I 

didn‘t say that I was going to vote against the motion at that time. That‘s what I said. 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Mr. Speaker, I think the records will prove that you said when you came into this House 

tonight that you were prepared to vote for it. I‘m willing to check the record for the answer. I think that 

this with all deference due, Mr. Speaker, and I know that you can do a good job, but I would still like to 

ask the House to reconsider this matter on behalf of the young people, on behalf of the Members. All of 

you and I‘m now speaking for both sides of the House, I personally would very much like to see the 

procedure continued of Members introducing their own students. I still live in hopes that I might get 

some students down here, you know. But with those thoughts I am going to leave the argument or the 

debate as I don‘t think there is anything to be gained from carrying it on any further. I shall vote for the 

amendment and against the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add one or two words after 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1576 

listening to the Attorney General (Mr. Heald). He referred to the statue of Nelson being missing from 

this Chamber. The implication as I took it was left that possibly it could have been some of the students 

that took it. He didn‘t say so but it could have been. 

 

Mr. Heald: — I made no such implication. I said that I was advised that the Chamber was open and it 

was open at all hours. I certainly made no implication that any students were involved. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — The Attorney General said that the doors being opened and the students coming in, it 

was easy for people to get in and this bust was missing from the Chamber. 

 

I wish to say, Mr. Speaker, that when the session started that year I noticed that the statue was missing. I 

assumed that it had been taken out for repair. Later on during the session I asked the Minister of Public 

Works what had happened to the statue, and it was at that time that I was informed that the statue had 

been mysteriously taken from the Chamber. During the Estimates I asked the Minister of Public Works 

at the time if he knew when it had been taken and he said he had no knowledge but it was missing. Well, 

I haven‘t made an issue of it since, but I don‘t think we should say it was because the doors were left 

open during the session that it was missing. I don‘t know when it was missing and I am sure the 

Government doesn‘t know. I know we wish we all did know. 

 

But one other remark I would like to add, when I was the Speaker, I had groups of students come in 

from time to time. I felt that it wasn‘t my place as the Speaker to introduce the students, I got the Deputy 

Speaker to introduce the students from my constituency to the people of this Legislature, and I would 

like to see the Members of this Legislature have some private rights that aren‘t going to be eroded by the 

majority Government. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 21 

Messieurs 
 

Lloyd Meakes Michayluk 

Kramer Berezowsky Brockelbank 

Wooff Romanow Pepper 

Willis Smishek Bowerman 

Wood Thibault Matsalla 

Blakeney Whelan Messer 

Dewhurst Snyder Kwasnica 

 

NAYS — 30 

Messieurs 
 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

Boldt Larochelle Mitchell 

Cameron MacDonald Gardner 

Heald Estey Coupland 

McIsaac Hooker McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1577 

 

Barrie Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmeiser 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — I don‘t propose to get into the actual debate on this 

Resolution, I merely would like a clarification and I don‘t know who may be able to provide it. Perhaps 

yourself, Mr. Speaker. As I read the motion that is now before us introduced by the Hon. Member from 

Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall), it calls for the introduction of students by Mr. Speaker. But in 

reading the Resolution it seems to me that it does not prohibit an individual Member rising before the 

Orders of the Day, after you have introduced the students, to also draw the attention of the Assembly 

that there are a group of students in the gallery. I am merely raising the question, Mr. Speaker, because 

if this Resolution is adopted as the Government Members are obviously determined to adopt it, 

tomorrow a group of students may come and they might be a group from my constituency or any other 

constituency. As the Member rises I think it will be unfortunate if the Member or the Speaker or 

anybody else was embarrassed as a result of this situation. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, you can advise us as to 

how this Resolution will be interpreted. The amendment that was just voted down would have clarified 

the problem. I think it was a desirable thing for us to have the Committee examine the procedure and 

bring in a recommendation. I don‘t feel that strongly on the matter, Mr. Speaker, I think that the 

procedure that we had has been a good one. I, for one, have tried to limit my remarks to but a few 

seconds whenever I introduce a group of students. I do hope, Mr. Speaker, that there will be some 

flexibility even after this Resolution is adopted. I agree that we should be very tolerant, but let‘s also 

look at the sort of implication of the thing and let‘s not get into a hassle tomorrow morning or tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, could I say a word on this matter. Of course what the Member has 

asked for, would circumvent what this Resolution is trying to accomplish. We are trying to save 10 or 15 

minutes a day of the House, so that we can get on with more important matters. The Speaker would still, 

as I envisage it, introduce each school, and then he would introduce the Member of the constituency. But 

if we pass this Resolution, we would be worse off than before, certainly if the Speaker introduced 

everyone and the Members repeated the process. I am sure that you will make a ruling, Mr. Speaker. I 

would only like to indicate the feeling of the Government on this particular matter. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 72 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North 

East) for Return No. 72 showing: 

 

(1) Number of homes constructed during 1968 for people of Indian ancestry under special agreement 

with CMHC, the Province and the Federal Government. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1578 

(2)Number of the above homes presently occupied by people of Indian ancestry. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Saskatoon Nutana Centre): — Mr. Speaker, this Return is similar to Return No. 3. 

The Member is requesting a list of people of Indian ancestry who are occupying houses that are built 

under a special agreement in the North with CMHC. 

 

I don‘t think that any member of a department nor do I think the occupant of a house should be placed in 

a position where he is questioned by a party as to his ancestry to determine what his ancestry or her 

ancestry happens to be. Therefore I propose the following amendment, seconded by the Minister of 

Social Welfare (Mr. MacDonald): 

 

That the words ―for people of Indian ancestry‖ in paragraph (1) be deleted and the words ―northern 

residents‖ substituted therefor; and that the words ―people of Indian ancestry‖ in paragraph (2) be 

deleted and the words ―northern residents‖ substituted therefor. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I regret that the amendment has been introduced 

because there is every indication in the annual report of the Minister, under Director of Housing and 

Urban Renewal Branch, that this information might be available. 

 

Construction of houses for sale or rent to people of Indian ancestry. Nothing could be more specific than 

that, that is the way it is described in your own report: 

 

Special two-year agreement between the Government of Canada, Central Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation and the Province of Saskatchewan provided for the construction of housing units for sale 

to families of Indian ancestry in Northern Saskatchewan, and negotiations are in progress with Central 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation to extend this agreement for a further three years. 

 

Now is this going to be written into a report and then denied to the House? I think that it is most 

valuable to Members to know if this agreement is entered into, how many homes have been built and 

what sort of progress is made. We can gauge what is being done, we can assess the activities in this area, 

we can find out to some degree whether or not the agreement is worthwhile. 

 

Mr. Estey: — I think the Member has missed the point which I intended to make here. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister has already spoken once in 

this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Yes, and he will have the privilege of closing the debate after we have disposed of the 

amendment. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1579 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — I rise because I find this a most remarkable situation. We have 

been informed in this House that the Minister, who has moved the amendment, is going to be head of the 

Department of Indian Affairs. He rises tonight and tells us that he doesn‘t know what is meant by 

Indians. He says that his Department probably has plans to build houses for Indians and yet he tells us 

now that he doesn‘t know what is meant by the term ‗Indian‘. 

 

Surely this is remarkable. Mr. Premier, I would suggest that you look for someone else in your ranks 

who can tell the difference between an Indian and another person. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I want to focus in a little on this matter. We have 

set up a Department of Indian Affairs. This is designed to cater to a particular group of people who must 

obviously be identified. There is no way to render services to Indian and Métis people without in some 

way identifying them. So it follows, therefore, that at least for some purposes people of Indian and Métis 

origin are identified. 

 

Now turning to the Motion itself, Return No. 72, the number of homes constructed during 1968 for 

people of Indian ancestry. There can be no doubt that that information is available, because indeed the 

agreements with CHMC I assume provide that it shall be for people of Indian and Métis ancestry. If they 

don‘t then it is pretty difficult to know just what the Department of Indian and Métis Affairs is doing 

concluding agreements. In the future presumably the Department of Indian and Métis Affairs is going to 

conclude agreements because it fondly believes at least that these houses are being constructed for 

people of Indian and Métis origin. 

 

So that the question of whether they are being constructed, is not one of asking who lives in the house 

but what is the intention of the Government in building them. Constructed for Indian and Métis ancestry. 

Now that is a question of intent of the government. When you build a house you build it for somebody, 

and when you build it for somebody you can identify the class of people for whom you are going to 

build it. I trust that there will be no discrimination for or against Reginans but I trust the Minister (Mr. 

Estey) can tell us whether or not he is building or constructing in 1968 houses for Reginans. Within 

limits he can certainly tell whether a house is being built and is designed for occupancy by people of 

Indian or Métis origin or not. 

 

Now the second point, the question of whether or not the house is presently occupied by people of 

Indian ancestry is admittedly a little more difficult, but none the less I would suggest to the Minister that 

if he is engaging in programs which are designed to assist Indian and Métis people, and he is providing 

facilities for them, then it would seem to me that he has to make some decisions as to whether or not 

these facilities are being used by them. And I would have thought, for example, that a proper question 

for me to ask would be: of the people working at the Cumberland House farm, how many people are of 

Indian and Métis origin? Because if the Minister (Mr. Estey) won‘t answer that on the grounds that he 

won‘t go around and ask the people who are working on the farm whether they are of Indian and Métis 

origin, then we have no basis whatever for believing that the 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1580 

Cumberland House farm, for example, is performing anything for Indian and Métis people. And I think 

that follows. And similarly the Green Lake farm or similarly the land which is being cleared at 

Ile-a-la-Crosse or La Loche or anywhere else. 

 

Let us follow this through. The houses are being constructed. Presumably they are being rented or sold. 

They are being rented or sold to particular individuals and I trust the Minister, before he rents or sells 

them, finds out whether these people are of Indian or Métis origin. And if he doesn‘t . . . 

 

Mr. Estey: — Absolutely, in the city of Regina that‘s right. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, but anywhere else in Northern Saskatchewan . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Give them hell, give ‘em hell. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Here we are asking the Minister two questions. How many houses did you build for 

people of Indian and Métis ancestry? If the answer is nil, then it‘s nil. And if the answer is 20, then it‘s 

20, and he will know this because that is a statement of his intentions. 

 

Then the second question is the number of homes, of those homes, not any homes at large, but those 

homes which are now occupied by Indian and Métis people. If you built 20 homes for Indian and Métis 

people and you can‘t tell us now how many of those are occupied by Indian and Métis people, then 

surely that‘s a weakness in your program. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is by no means a hypothetical question. We heard Members opposite a few years 

ago tell us how many homes were built in Esterhazy for people of Indian and Métis origin and I for my 

part heard very frequently the fact that of these 10 or 12 homes which were supposedly built for people 

of Indian and Métis origin, one or two - the numbers varied - were now occupied by people of Indian 

and Métis origin and the rest were occupied by whites. Now if this is so, then clearly the program which 

was launched was a failure in that regard. Because if the idea was simply to provide housing in 

Esterhazy and to that extent that housing in Esterhazy was not occupied by Indians, the program failed. 

 

Mr. Estey: — What are you trying to say? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am trying to say that the Minister (Mr. Estey) ought to have this information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I am trying to say that surely the Minister ought to be able to say how many houses 

he constructed in 1968 for people of Indian and Métis ancestry. Question No. 1. Question No. 2, I‘m 

saying that, if he knows that, he ought to be able to know now how many are still occupied by the 

people he sold them to or rented them to. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1581 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out to 

the Minister (Mr. Estey) also that there has been an Indian and Métis Branch under the Department of 

Natural Resources and on page 37 of the report of the Department of Natural Resources you find this: 

that at La Ronge the Métis organized a committee to examine the possibility of urban renewal to provide 

more adequate housing. Plans are under way to build 14 units which will be purchased by the occupants 

and for those not wishing to live in the village, log housing is planned. It mentions Stanley Mission. I 

would like to point out to the Minister he knows quite well that there has been a housing program, or at 

least there are plans for housing at Green Lake. Now maybe it‘s under another department. The question 

is directed to the Government and surely the Government must have the records as to how many were 

planned for Indian and Métis people, as it pointed out in the report for La Ronge, so many were planned, 

14. I‘m sure the Minister must know if they were planned, if they were built and if they were built, 

whether they are being occupied. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a word to what has been 

said. The Minister (Mr. Estey) has said that he can‘t answer this question because he has no record of 

whether these people are of Indian origin or not. If that is the case, Mr. Speaker, I would like to know 

why in the world is he putting it in his annual report for? I ask the Minister to take a look at his annual 

report where on page 40 he says this: 

 

During the year 10 single-family dwellings were completed at Green Lake and sold to families of 

Indian ancestry. 

 

Now the Minister has, so he says in his annual report, a record of this and yet he stands up in his place 

here tonight and says ―we have no record of it.‖ Either he has no right to put this in his annual report, 

Mr. Speaker, or else he has no right to deny the information on the basis he took in the House here 

today. One or the other. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, just a few words. First of all I think that 

we‘re making a mountain out of a molehill. 

 

Number one, there‘s no effort to deny information. There‘s an attempt by the Minister (Mr. Estey) to 

provide accurate information. In number one, the agreement with CMHC is not for people of Indian 

ancestry. It is for people who live in the Northern Administration District. Therefore, it would be 

impossible to say whether Smith or Brown or MacDonald or whoever he may be, is of Indian ancestry 

or not because he lives in that individual home. 

 

Number two, the number of those homes presently occupied by people of Indian ancestry. It is easy to 

say that the people of the 10 homes in Green Lake are occupied by people of Indian ancestry or not, the 

housing in Uranium City, the houses in La Ronge, but not in all the areas of Northern Saskatchewan. 

Therefore, it is a practical impossibility to give an accurate 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1582 

answer to this question according to the terms of reference that are given. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to read a little further from the report of the 

Director of Housing and Urban Renewal Branch of the Department of Municipal Affairs. On the bottom 

of page 9 it says: 

 

Construction of houses for sale or rental to people of Indian ancestry. A special two-year agreement 

between the Government of Canada, Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation and the Province of 

Saskatchewan provided for the construction of housing units for sale to families of Indian ancestry in 

Northern Saskatchewan, and negotiations are in progress with CMHC to extend this agreement for a 

further period of three years. 

 

I assume, Mr. Speaker, that the people that these houses were built for there were of Indian ancestry and 

of Indian ancestry only. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The question before the House is on the motion as amended. 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Mr. Speaker, I have been listening to the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) put forward his argument on this Resolution. I failed to understand why 

he appears supersensitive about this area. Now I perceive why he is supersensitive about the area 

because he is unfamiliar with the area. I would assume that this motion when it is amended will cause 

the Premier not to go up and down this Province any longer talking about all the houses he‘s built for 

Indians and Métis people, and maybe he will confine himself to the terms as laid down in this 

amendment by the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

I can assure the House that we‘ll be watching for the Premier‘s comments when he goes about the 

Province from now on, talking about his programs. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I would hope that at the time when this 

information is provided that the Minister will take another look at this whole thing and admit that he‘s 

made a bit of a blunder in moving the amendment that he did and provide the information that should 

have been provided before this motion was amended. 

 

I think there‘s no question but what the Minister recognizes that he fumbled this one and he wishes that 

he hadn‘t. I think if he‘s large enough and big enough, enough of a gentleman to recognize a mistake 

that he‘s made, I think probably he‘ll find himself quite able and quite willing to provide the 

information. I would hope that he would do that. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, am I entitled to speak on the motion? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No. When the Member moved the amendment, he was already 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1583 

speaking for the motion. And then having moved the amendment, he had also spoken to it. 

 

Hon. J.R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, there may be some 

misunderstanding in connection with the special agreement that we, the Department of Natural 

Resources, have in connection with the Northern Administration District and certain programs that we 

have for housing. 

 

I would like to advise the House, Mr. Minister, that insofar as the special agreement we have in the 

Northern Administration District in connection with the Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation, 

this is not confined to people of Indian ancestry. We, it‘s true, construct and have assisted in 

construction of a number of dwellings for people of Indian ancestry but also any other person that 

applies for this assistance receives it. It is not confined to people of Indian ancestry. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on this. I 

think it‘s most unfortunate that you should attempt, particularly the Member from Moose Jaw North 

(Mr. Snyder), to take advantage of the position the Minister (Mr. Estey) is in where he cannot reply to 

any of these accusations that are being hurled against him. Therefore, it‘s most unjust and most unfair to 

say that the Minister had fumbled. Now the Minister has made it explicitly clear and the Minister of 

Natural Resources (Mr. Barrie) has further enlarged upon it. This motion makes reference only to one 

thing. And I want to read it so that were under no illusions, namely the special agreement with CMHC. 

The Minister pointed out that the CMHC special agreement doesn‘t refer specifically to homes for 

people of Indian ancestry. I am talking about the special agreement, I am not talking about the annual 

report. I am talking about the special agreement which you asked for in this Return. The special 

agreement makes reference to all homes north of a certain boundary in the Northern Administration 

Area. Therefore he has no way, because they do not negotiate or build homes under this special 

agreement particularly for Indian ancestry or should I say, solely for Indian ancestry. Therefore you put 

him in the position of trying to reach in and pick out every home whether this one was for Indian 

ancestry or not. He says that this is the difficulty that you put him to in this motion and that is all that the 

Minister is saying. It is not the matter of denying you information. I should think that you would expect 

that every bit of information tabled in this Legislature by a department would be accurate information. 

His viewpoint is that this cannot be accurate information, because the records under CMHC are not kept 

in that form. That is all that the Minister is saying in this motion and for this they condemn him as trying 

to hedge and not wanting to give information, of having fumbled and not being in a position to stand up 

and have the courage to say that he fumbled, therefore, this Minister should be relieved of his 

responsibilities before he has even been appointed. What sort of hogwash do you think that this House 

can get away with? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That word hogwash . . . 

 

Mr. Cameron: — I withdraw that, Mr. Speaker. I admit that I do try to keep within order and it is very 

rarely that I am called to order. I withdraw it. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1584 

Just to wind, up again to re-emphasize why the Minister said, ―I cannot give the information,‖ is 

because, as I understand it, the special agreement does not provide the information on that basis. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to reply briefly to the remarks of the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron). 

 

I listened and I didn‘t hear anybody calling for the resignation of the Minister (Mr. Estey). If the 

Members opposite did, that‘s fine. It is a part apparently of the custom of some people to make most of 

their speeches from their chair, and I think this again illustrates the fact that, if we would confine our 

remarks to those which we make when we are on our feet, the business would be expedited. 

 

To deal particularly with those comments made by the Minister of Mineral Resources, I think that he 

suggests in his remarks that, because the agreement doesn‘t designate which houses are built for people 

of Indian ancestry therefore the Minister of Municipal Affairs would have no way of knowing. It seems 

to me that this is total non sequitur. The Minister indeed may make an agreement with the Central 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation to build houses in Northern Saskatchewan and so far as Central 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation is concerned they may well be only for people north of the given 

line. They may well have nothing to do with the racial origin of the occupants. But I wonder what 

prevents the Minister from confining these sales or rentals of those houses to people of Indian origin. I 

think, nothing. I think that he is not bound by his agreement with Central Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation to rent them to all corners. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how this confusion will have arisen. If, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Mineral 

Resources (Mr. Cameron) alleges that somehow we are trying to obscure this thing, may I refer him 

once again to page 39 of the annual report of the Minister of Municipal Affairs. May I refer to one 

heading which says ―Construction of houses for economic rental in designated areas‖ and then it talks 

about agreement with CMHC for building houses in designated areas. And then the next heading is this: 

see whether this might not have suggested in your mind that someone was building houses for people of 

Indian and Métis ancestry. Quote: 

 

Construction of houses for sale or rental to people of Indian ancestry. 

 

Now that is the heading. And someone might possibly be forgiven if they believed that that dealt with 

the matter of the construction of houses for sale or rental of people of Indian ancestry. 

 

And then it goes on to say this: 

 

A special two-year agreement between the Government of Canada, Central Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation and the Province of Saskatchewan, provided for the construction of housing units for sale 

to families of Indian ancestry in Northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Cameron: — So? 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1585 

Mr. Blakeney: — So, I just suggest, therefore, that there were in fact homes constructed during 1968 

for people of Indian ancestry under a special agreement with CMHC. That‘s what I would conclude 

from reading that, and if anyone can draw any other conclusion from reading those words, I would be 

delighted to know how it can be rationally done. 

 

Now look, Mr. Speaker, let me make this awfully clear because, if the Member for Milestone (Mr. 

MacDonald) jumps up and says there‘s nothing in the agreement that says it must apply to Indians, I 

may agree with him out of hand. But that isn‘t the issue. The issue is whether houses built under this 

agreement, whatever the agreement may say, were in the mind of the Minister, for people of Indian and 

Métis ancestry. That‘s the question which was asked him. Now if it is not true that any houses were built 

in 1968 under special agreement with CMHC for people of Indian and Métis ancestry, if that statement 

is not true, if the answer to Return No. 71 is none, then his report is false. If the report is true, then the 

only rational answer to this first part is that there are a number of houses. You cannot read the bottom of 

page 39 and reach any other conclusion. I invite the Member from Milestone to apply his best Thomistic 

logic and, if he can possibly find any other rationalization of those words, I would be delighted to hear 

it. It goes on to say: 

 

And negotiations are in progress with CMHC to extend this agreement for a further period of three 

years, this agreement being the special agreement between the Government of Canada, Central 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation and Saskatchewan for the construction of housing for sale to 

families of Indian ancestry. 

 

And if in fact they aren‘t of Indian ancestry, I‘d be interested to know how the Government of Canada 

gets into this, but perhaps there‘s another explanation for that. So I say that, if this report is true, then 

there is an agreement, there is a special agreement, there is a special agreement for the construction of 

houses for people of Indian ancestry. Now let‘s be careful on this. There is a special agreement for the 

construction of houses and some of the houses may be used for people of Indian and Métis ancestry and 

the Minister, when those houses were built, had that intention of so many being constructed for people 

of Indian and Métis ancestry. Therefore he can say the number of houses constructed during 1968 for 

people of Indian ancestry. He‘s got to be able to say this or else he built houses without having any idea 

who would occupy them under this special agreement. If this is so, then his report is totally false. If 

Members can‘t follow that simple logic, I think they can be forgiven because there is no way to 

rationalize what the Minister has said in this House and what he has said in this report. If in fact his 

report is true, what we are asking is, with respect to the special two-year agreement between the 

Government of Canada and Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation in the Province of 

Saskatchewan providing for the construction of housing in it for sale to families of Indian ancestry in 

Northern Saskatchewan with respect to that, how many were built in 1968, defined in your terms, if you 

don‘t like ours? Then the next question is, with respect to those houses, defined in your terms, Mr. 

Minister, in 1968, how many are still occupied by people of Indian and Métis ancestry? 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — Mr. Speaker, I‘ve heard some ridiculous arguments since 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1586 

I‘ve been here. All we want to say is that the agreement constructs houses for residents of Northern 

Saskatchewan. If those houses are available to Irishmen, if those houses are available to Indians, if they 

are available to Scotchmen, to Germans, or whatever, Ukrainians, then those houses are constructed for 

the use of people of Indian ancestry. But when they move in, how is the Minister to know whether Smith 

or Brown or whatever it is, is of Indian ancestry? As long as those houses are constructed under the 

agreement, they are available to all people including Indian and Métis people . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. MacDonald: — . . . and the NDP, how can we quibble. Let‘s pass the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — When I listen to the lawyer Member from Regina I just 

wonder why the good Lord has made lawyers. You know we would have finished this session a long 

time ago if we hadn‘t had any lawyers in this House. They just talk, talk, especially the two Members 

from the Opposition. They repeat themselves five times and you know I‘m not that stupid that I can‘t 

understand them the first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boldt: — If anybody is stupid it‘s the lawyers on the other side of the House. 

 

The Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) is prepared to give you an answer which he feels he can 

answer correctly. He has indicated that he cannot answer it correctly as it appears on the Order Paper. 

He is not trying to evade anything. If you will just let him answer the way he has said he was going to 

answer, you‘ll get the question answered. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Well, Mr. Speaker. whether the Minister fumbled I‘m not sure, but there is one thing 

that we can be sure of and that is that we didn‘t get the information that we asked for. Now to argue that 

they are just going to have homes and they are not going to be sure about who is going to live in them, 

whether they are going to be Irish, or whether they are going to be English, Ukrainians. It seems very 

difficult to understand then why the Premier of this Province would appear on television a couple of 

nights ago and tell us that there were 40 homes at the Gardiner Dam and these were going to be given to 

native people, they would be for Indian people. If they can‘t tell Indian people, how can you be sure that 

you‘re going to have 40 Indian people in these homes? 

 

Now I‘m going to ask this: did they have this information? If you look at their report, I say Yes. Could 

they have given it to us? I say Yes. And why do I say this? I went to a housing conference in Toronto 

some time ago where a representative from this department appeared. And what was the subject he was 

talking about? Housing for native people. What did he tell us 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1587 

about? He told us about the houses that were built and who occupied them, whether they were rented or 

sold and where they were built and who was in them at the present time. And he finished up by saying 

that in some respects they hadn‘t been successful because native people had been moved into these 

homes and had moved out. Now, what I‘m saying is this, that, if this information could be given to the 

Housing Conference to 500 people in the city of Toronto, then it could be given to this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — And to refuse to give this information to this Legislature is to hold us in contempt. I‘m 

sick and tired of this Government playing hide-and-seek and peekaboo with our money. How can we 

assess its operations if it plays this sort of a game where it gives us the information in its report and then 

it amends a request for the same information when we put it in writing. I think that, if it is not prepared 

to give us these details, it is hoodwinking us and either its own report is false or else it is deliberately 

withholding information. This is not a satisfactory reply. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 76 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North 

West) for Return No. 76 showing: 

 

(1) The amount spent for architectural fees during the year 1968 by the South Saskatchewan Hospital 

Centre. 

 

(2) To whom these payments were made. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, in connection with this motion, as the 

Members of this House know the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre tables a report in the House each 

year and I believe it will be available for tabling this week, in light of that I feel that the question should 

be related to that report and consequently I would like to move the following amendment, seconded by 

the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre): 

 

That all the words after the word ―showing‘ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(1) Whether the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre will be preparing an Annual Report for the year 

1968. 

 

(2) If so, whether the Report will include details of the amount of money spent by the Centre for 

architectural fees and of the name or names of the architectural firms to whom these payments were 

made. 

 

(3) If not, the amount spent by the Centre for architectural fees during the year 1968 and the name or 

names of the architectural firms to whom these payments were made. 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1588 

Mr. Whelan: — I think the amendment, Mr. Speaker, is in order but the problem we run into is that the 

date for filing this report could be a date after which we had reviewed the estimates for the hospital. 

Could you give us the assurance that we will have the annual report before these estimates are before the 

House? 

 

Mr. Grant: — Yes. 

 

Amendment agreed to. Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 77 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North 

West) for Return No. 77 showing: 

 

Regarding the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre: 

 

(1) The total amount spent for engineering consultants during the year 1968. 

 

(2) The firms to which the above payments, if any, were made. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health): — Mr. Speaker, in connection with this motion, the same 

reasoning holds and I won‘t repeat myself. I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre): 

 

That all the words after the word ―showing‖ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

(1) Whether the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre will be preparing an Annual Report for the year 

1968. 

 

(2) If so, whether the Report will include details of the amount of money spent by the Centre for 

engineering consultants and the name or names -of the consulting firms to whom these payments were 

made. 

 

(3) If not, the amount spent by the Centre for engineering consultants and the name or names of the 

consulting firms to whom these payments were made. 

 

Amendment agreed to. Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Resolution No. 12 - Long Distance Tolls 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. R.H. Wooff 

(Turtleford): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government that Saskatchewan 

Government Telephones assume responsibility for collection of long distance tolls on calls originating 

with Rural Telephone Companies or alternatively pay to the said companies full collection costs. 



 

 March 25, 1969 

 

1589 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Speaker, I‘m going to try to be brief on 

this Resolution. I intend to bring in an amendment so I would think that I would be expected to justify 

the reasons for the amendment. If this Resolution passes as it is presently constituted, it simply means 

the inauguration of a further program of assistance to Rural Telephone Companies with a cost, an annual 

cost to SaskTel of something in the neighbourhood of $250,000. It would be adding further to the 

Department of Telephones and SaskTel which already makes major contributions to the Rural 

Telephone Companies. I just want to quickly review some of these contributions that the Rural 

Telephone Companies are receiving. They get a pole grant of one-third the cost of all new poles which 

they put in, paid for by the Department of Telephones. Grants are provided to assist in stringing new 

lines in the form of circuit grants paid by the Department of Telephones. In 1965 this Government 

introduced a further grant of $50 per route mile for underground cable. In the fall of 1966 we introduced 

a further grant of $25 per mile for each circuit when the buried cable was introduced. The Rural 

Companies receive a further grant of $2.50 per subscriber to assist in maintaining the plant facilities. 

These are all programs aimed to assist the Rural Telephone Companies. Now likewise when the Rural 

Companies convert to dial operation, the manual phones are removed and the new dial phones are 

provided free of charge to the Rural Companies, a contribution of SaskTel. This removes the cost of 

installing these telephones. Again any rural company wishing to replace an older model dial phone with 

the later improved type, SaskTel reimburses them again for one-half the cost of replacing this older type 

rural dial telephone. The Department of Telephones at their cost provides 10 of a rural staff to assist the 

Rural Companies in construction problems, in their financing problems, in the raising of debentures, and 

in the management of their companies paid for by the Treasury. 

 

Now SaskTel does a considerable amount of engineering and drafting work for the companies at no cost 

to them. In other areas it subsidizes the Rural Telephone Companies and I want to speak about one or 

two changes. SaskTel charges the Rural Companies for switching rural calls, just a little more than 

one-half the amount it costs SaskTel to do this work. The switching calls which the Resolution is 

making reference to, we charge the Rural Telephone Companies less than 50 per cent of what it costs 

SaskTel to do the switching for them. In 1968 SaskTel subsidized the Rural Companies in the switching 

fees alone to $350,000. We don‘t charge them the full switching fees. We subsidized them $350,00 a 

year. Now in areas where the Rural Companies use SaskTel poles to string their lines, we rent these 

poles to the companies at prices below cost. We actually subsidize the Rural Companies and that last 

year was a subsidy of $170,000. Likewise SaskTel rents the cable facilities to Rural Companies at less 

than half the cost that they should be charging. All along we are subsidizing from the Department of 

Telephones and from SaskTel the operations of these Rural Companies. We made another significant 

change in policy which I think has been most significant to the Rural Companies. Under the former 

Government where SaskTel operates the switching centres and the Rural Companies are led in where 

SaskTel amalgamated and made into a larger area, the Rural Company had to then change its connecting 

line and lead its subscribers into this new centre. Sometimes the centre would be 10, 15 or 20 miles 

away. This meant that the companies had to construct these lines to bring their people into the new 

centre. One example of a 



 

March 25, 1969 

 

1590 

rural company which I will call company ―A‖ had to construct 78 circuit miles to connect to the new 

centre. They had to go to the market and issue a debenture for $15,000. Another company had to go and 

issue debentures for $14,000 simply because SaskTel pulled the rug out from under them and switched 

the centre and made them construct new lines to tie into SaskTel‘s new centre. This was the program the 

former Government had. We figured this program was unfair for two reasons: first, the rural company 

had no choice in the change of the centre. This was a decision of SaskTel not the rural companies. 

Secondly, why should they be having to bear the burden of building this new line when they had a line 

that had served them very well? We changed the policy and we don‘t charge them anything for this. 

SaskTel does it at its own expense. We went further and said to those companies that in the past had 

paid for this we would refund every dollar that was paid. That has been one of the most welcome 

programs that we have instituted. This program if followed to its conclusion would have cost the Rural 

Companies in excess of $1 million, we wiped it out and refunded that $1 million to the Rural 

Companies. This is the sort of assistance that we are giving and because of that I want to move, 

seconded by Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): 

 

That all the words after the word ―Assembly‖ be deleted, and the following substituted therefor: 

 

commends the Government for its financial assistance to Rural Telephone Companies, and urges that 

such assistance be continued and expanded. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‘clock p.m. 


