




















































Hansard: February 18, 1969


412 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

11th Day 
 

Tuesday, February 18, 1969. 
 
The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
the Members of the Assembly a fine group of 47 grade 12 students from the Canora composite high 

school. Canora is known as one of the finest and progressive towns in the north-east central part of our 

province. A town of 2,800, Canora is providing excellent facilities for approximately 600 high school 

students and 550 elementary students. 

 

The student visitors, Mr. Speaker, are seated to your left in the west gallery. They are accompanied by 

their vice principal, Mr. Steve Kobrinsky, and teacher, Mr. Adrian Sawyer. Their bus driver is John 

Graham of STC. Earlier they were conducted on a tour of this building. Following their short stay with 

us this afternoon they will proceed to visit the Museum of Natural History and then tour our new 

University campus. 

 

I am certain that all of you will join me in extending to them a warm welcome and a sincere wish for a 

pleasant and enjoyable visit. We hope that their impressions of proceedings here, and the entire visit will 

be useful and informative. We wish them a safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. W.E. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I too would like to welcome a group 
of 99 grade seven and grade eight students from Glen Elm school, located in my constituency of Regina 

North East. 

 

The students are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Oliver, vice principal, Mr. Silzer and two teachers 

Mr. Lacey and Mr. Wright. To the students I want to say that this is Budget Day in Saskatchewan and 

you will find out shortly that there is no Santa Claus. Mr. Speaker, we do welcome the students to the 

Assembly here today and express the hope that their stay is a pleasant one and that they will be able to 

learn quite a few things this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I too am pleased to welcome a school, 
St. Joseph’s school, in the heart of my own constituency, Regina South East. They are here in large 

numbers some 50 to 60 grade eight students accompanied by their principal, Mr. Kartusch. 

 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

413 

St. Joseph’s school has been in our community for many, many years and it has certainly left its mark on 

many students in this area and other places. 

 

Mr. Kartusch has left his mark too in this community as an outstanding sportsman and a very 

community-minded person. We wish them a pleasant stay this afternoon and I hope that their 

deliberations here will be fruitful too. 

 

I also want to welcome the Glen Elm school because that was in my constituency when I first ran for 

this Legislature. By a stroke of a pen they were moved out to another one. We do welcome all the 99 

and their teachers here as well. 

 

The university students, may I welcome you. I see my nephew sitting there in the front row and I am 

pleased to have him here today to see the proceedings. A welcome to all the others and particularly to 

those, while I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, to the people from outside the city and in this community, 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park-University): — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to 
introduce to you and through you to the Members of this Assembly a group of students from King 

Edward school which is located in the City Park-University constituency in Saskatoon which I am 

pleased to represent. And certainly besides a warm welcome, we are sure that they will enjoy the 

proceedings of this House this afternoon and we wish them a very safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Speaker: — We also have in the galleries a group of students from the University of Saskatchewan, 
Regina campus, and I am sure that all Members would wish to accord to them a very warm welcome 

also. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Miss Dona Doan 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to draw to the attention of all Hon. Members 
of the House, that Miss Dona Doan who has been selected as Carnival Queen in the Jaycees’ Winter 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

414 

Carnival, is the daughter of Mrs. Doan who works in our Legislative Assembly Office. I am sure that all 

Hon. Members will wish to congratulate Miss Doan on being selected Carnival Queen. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a 
message from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

MESSAGE FROM HIS HONOUR THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 

Mr. Speaker: — The Lieutenant Governor transmits Estimates of certain sums required for the service 
of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1970, and Supplementary Estimates of certain sums 

required for the service of the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1969, and recommends the 

same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Thatcher: 
 

That His Honour’s message, the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates be referred to the Committee 

of Supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, it is the tradition I am wearing a different tie. It is a tradition I understand 
that has been set in this House for many years. I got this tie that I am wearing from the Hon. Member 

from Souris-Estevan (Mr. MacDougall) just before I delivered my last Budget, my first Budget last year. 

Two minutes after I delivered it he tried to take it away from me, but I managed to hold on to it so I am 

wearing it again this year. I hope that when I finish this Budget he will feel differently than he did, and 

all Members will feel differently than they did after the last one, except for the Opposition and I hope 

that they feel worse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, it is with pride I present the fifth balanced Budget to be brought before 
this Legislature since our present Liberal Administration was elected in 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Five balanced Budgets in the last five years is a record 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

415 

few governments in Canada have achieved. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I can tell this Assembly that today the 

Government of Saskatchewan is in a sounder financial position than any other Government in Canada 

today. Mr. Speaker, this did not happen by chance, but resulted from five years of sound budgeting, 

responsible tax changes and the broadening of our tax base through increased industrialization. 

However, we still face financial problems caused by rising program costs, withdrawal of federal revenue 

and continuing inflation. 

 

The most serious of these is brought on by pressures to push education, health and welfare costs far 

beyond the increase in our productivity or our financial capability. These forces are active at the 

community, provincial and federal level, and are to a large extent led by professionals in the fields of 

education, health and welfare. 

 

Our Government does not question the right of these people to fight for a larger share of the tax dollar, 

nor do we question the high priority demanded for these programs. In fact, we have given and will 

continue to give them the largest share of our revenues. Nevertheless, I am convinced that an objective 

observer of this country would seriously question our sense of values and many of our priorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in too many areas of our country, we see children and adults by the hundreds of thousands 

coming out of run-down shacks, wading through mud and dust to get to palatial schools, luxurious 

hospitals and elegant nursing homes. No one questions the idea that these buildings should be modern, 

well built and attractive. But an ever-growing number of people are questioning the amount and the way 

their tax dollars are being spent on these buildings and the level of service they generate. The public is 

looking to the leaders in these fields to show a greater awareness of the over-all needs of society and to 

limit their demands on the public purse. Too often, rather than facing up to the issue at hand with 

practical action, the problems are deferred by endless studies. The growing and increasingly complex 

needs of education and health can and must be met by a more sensible use of present facilities and 

personnel and with a slowdown in the impractical cost increases of the last few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget reflects our concern in these areas, for, while we continue to give education 

and health top priority, we have also attempted to balance the scales with programs to increase the 

wealth of our economy. I hope our professionals in the field of health and education will take the huge 

sums of money we vote them, less than they demand, but more than we allocate to other programs and 

show the kind of leadership necessary to keep Saskatchewan in the forefront in these vital fields. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this problem is compounded by the recent developments in our Federal-Provincial fiscal 

relations. In the 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

416 

coming year we will again lose $5 million in equalization grants and $500,000 in national health grants 

and as well be forced to pay the total cost of a number of smaller programs formerly cost-shared but 

now dropped by Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the loss of this revenue is serious, it is not nearly as important as the apparent motive 

behind these moves by the Federal Government. 

 

While I will go into this subject in more detail later in my speech, I have highlighted the problem 

because I am convinced our national unity demands a higher level of integrity than now exists in 

Federal-Provincial fiscal negotiations. At times Ottawa seems to be trying to hoodwink us and in truth 

the Provinces often have been less than honest with the Federal Government. In spite of these and other 

obstacles, we will balance this year’s Budget and next year’s Budget as well, if we are given a vote of 

confidence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — The fact that we will emerge this year with a small surplus, in spite of a serious drop in 
agricultural income, is a tribute to the diversification of our economy, accomplished these last few years. 

The unfortunate drop in agricultural income, rising demands for increased Government spending, a 

further withdrawal of Federal revenue and continuing national inflation combined to place an added 

strain on our fiscal outlook for the coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our goal for the 1969-70 year was to keep our expenditures and revenues in balance with 

no increase in taxation to individuals. At the same time we are determined to move ahead with the 

progressive platform for which we received a mandate in 1967, and this means new programs. The only 

feasible answer lay in the closest possible review of our present programs to see what, if anything, could 

be cut down or cut out without seriously affecting the real needs of our people or the worthwhile goals 

of a progressive government. We began this review or stock-taking last summer and it consumed 

thousands of man hours and produced excellent results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay the highest compliment to the men and women of the Treasury 

Department in general and the Budget Bureau in particular. These people are bright, hard-working and 

dedicated and a great deal of the credit for our excellent financial position belongs to them. 

 

We also had fine co-operation from the Cabinet Ministers, their deputies and staff. To request 

departmental people to take a hard objective look at their own programming and then accept the decision 

to curtail or reduce some of their activities in order to accommodate over-all government priorities is 

asking a great deal, but we did this and the response was outstanding. 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

417 

We asked these and other questions about every program, every project and every grant: When did it 

begin? Why was it started? What need did it fill? How much money and how many people were 

originally involved? How much money and how many people are now involved? What is its present 

purpose and does the need for this program still exist? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we found proof of what we already knew that government has grown at an 

unbelievable pace over the years. While this is not a very startling statement, when you see the growth 

traced, program by program, it is disturbing and poses serious questions about how to control the growth 

of modern government. We also found that while there has been, over the years, a very high birth-rate of 

government programs, the death rate has been almost nil. 

 

We decided after careful examination of all the facts that some programs had outlived their usefulness 

and, as I will point out in detail when I come to departments, we put them quietly away. Mr. Speaker, I 

predict our Opposition will not treat them so quietly because I am sure they can point to some good in 

every program. After all it is almost impossible to spend money without doing something for somebody. 

I would remind those who would criticize this approach, to balance what we have discontinued against 

the programs we have retained and the new programs we will be proposing and also to remember that 

the taxpayer could do with more consideration than he has had in the past years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after reviewing our revenue projections for 1969-70, we were faced with the necessity of 

keeping our overall expenditure increase within about seven per cent. Realizing that education, health 

and welfare would have to be given a larger percentage than this in order to maintain our high standards, 

we were forced to ask some departments to accept no increase and in fact asked others to take a 

decrease. In view of wage and cost increases our goals could only be achieved by program cuts or 

greater administrative efficiency. On top of this, most departments wanted to implement new programs 

to meet changing conditions and we agreed that this made sense. To the programs that survived this 

scrutiny we added our new plans. The result is, I believe, a responsible, well-rounded Budget. It is also 

an optimistic Budget that reflects the sound position that we are in today and the great prospects opening 

up for Saskatchewan in the years ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before going into details concerning the Government’s plans for spending and raising 

funds in the coming year, I would first like to review the highlights of Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, more than in any previous year the performance of the Saskatchewan economy in 

1968 demonstrated the enormous benefit of the program of economic diversification our Government 

has promoted since taking office. Even though a very large part of our crop had to be harvested in a 

damp condition, 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

418 

personal income achieved a record level, equal to the per capita income which was reached in the 

bumper-crop year of 1966. In 1968, labor income was the highest in the history of the province and we 

had the lowest unemployment average of any province in this nation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — In 1969 we expect non-agricultural income to be increased by about $100 million to 
well over $1 billion, another record for this province. 

 

Investment in new machinery and equipment will continue at a high level as our mines and industries 

continue expansion programs and replace worn-out equipment. Moisture conditions throughout the 

province are excellent and give promise of a good start to this year’s crop. We are confident that 1969 

should see a further advance in our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal now with some aspects of federal-provincial-municipal relations. 

 

I believe it is timely to weigh the significance of the Federal Government’s attitude to the effect that the 

Provinces should look after their responsibilities and the Federal Government would look after its. This 

statement would not be unreasonable if all three levels of government were starting from a base revenue 

potential. However, studies have confirmed that there is a fiscal imbalance between the responsibilities 

and the revenue potential of provincial and municipal governments and that this gap will continue to 

increase. The present situation is aggravated by the recent decision of the Federal Government to phase 

out national health grants over a three-year period. This will result in a loss to the Province of $4 million 

in Federal revenues. Of this amount half a million dollars would be effected in 1969-70. 

 

Not only did we object to the loss of these revenues, but we also questioned the integrity of the Federal 

Government in this regard. For example, on the same morning that the Federal Minister of Finance 

assured the Provinces of fiscal compensation for the Federal withdrawal of the national health grants, the 

Federal Minister of Health and Welfare announced the withdrawal of the national health grants without 

any transferring of funds. 

 

We have maintained our position that any transfer of responsibilities should also contain a guaranteed 

growth of funds to meet the projected cost increases of these programs. Mr. Speaker, if the present 

imbalance between our fiscal resources and responsibilities were corrected, and we can obtain these 

guarantees, we will accept the principle that the government which spends the money should raise the 

money. Then we will be 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

419 

in a position to establish our own priorities which up to now have been distorted by the Federal 

Government enticing us with 50 cent dollars. This will also eliminate the uncertainty of the Federal 

Government suddenly terminating shared-cost programs. It is even possible that both levels of 

government might even be able to reduce the number of civil servants, many of whom it appears have 

been hired to dream up detailed conditions of eligibility for cost sharing. As well, reductions might even 

take place in the countless number of auditors, many of whom audit the audits of other auditors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we are not offered a fair share of revenue, then I suggest we should hand the full 

responsibility for health and welfare over to the Federal Government along with our present inadequate 

financial resources. Because Provinces do not have adequate tax resources it makes it extremely difficult 

for them to fully meet the fiscal needs of their municipalities. The fundamental solution appears to be a 

realignment of provincial-municipal responsibilities and the allocation and sharing of our tax sources to 

properly meet our respective responsibilities. As well, all levels of government must take positive steps 

to slow down their spending and put their financial houses in order. I think that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has displayed leadership in this area by sharply controlling our Government’s spending. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, we ask all local governments, including school boards and hospital 
boards, to display the same restraint even when this means making difficult decisions. Hopefully as a 

nation we can agree on the division and the sharing of our total responsibilities and then have the 

common sense to allocate and share our tax resources, so that each level of government is able to fulfil 

its responsibilities in a capable and a self-reliant manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I turn now to our fiscal position for 1968-69. I will comment first on our revenue position. 

This year total budgetary revenues may exceed the original estimate of $338.8 million by some $5 

million or over one per cent. It appears that receipts from consumption taxes will be very close to the 

estimate. Receipts under the Federal-Provincial tax arrangements will exceed estimates by over $4 

million. Bonus bid sales of Crown oil reserves will likely be down by $1 million from the estimated $6.5 

million. All other revenues are likely to exceed the estimates by over $2 million. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we estimate that in the current year total net expenditures will be 

approximately $5 million higher than we anticipated. Major overexpenditures were incurred in several 

programs. For example, welfare services will exceed the estimates by slightly over $1 million. Fire 

suppression costs will be up by $1.3 million. Highway winter maintenance costs and other ordinary 

expenditures will 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

420 

be overspent by some $600,000. The highway capital program was increased by $650,000 for northern 

development roads. An additional $1 million will be required to pay commitments under the mineral 

resources exploration incentive program as a result of the unusually high level of activity in the north. 

As well, $1.5 million will be placed in the Saskatchewan Hospital Insurance Fund to cover the increase 

in nursing salaries. And a further $1 million was allocated to the Medical Care Insurance Commission 

Fund to meet the increase in the schedule of doctors’ fees. Underexpenditures in several capital 

programs not only offset some of these overexpenditures, but also permitted the Government to set aside 

another $1 million for the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, we expect to be able to finance all of our overexpenditures and balance the 

Budget for the fourth successive year of Liberal Administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Before outlining the major expenditure proposals I will first turn to the Government’s 
fiscal forecast. We will continue to follow past practice and base our revenue forecast on the last 10-year 

average wheat crop of 19 bushels per acre. On this basis we expect revenues in this coming year to total 

$364.3 million, that is for 1969-70. 

 

Taking into account the full year’s impact of last year’s increase in the Education and Health Tax and 

the broadening of the base of the tax, we estimate total sales tax revenues will be $68.8 million. 

Gasoline tax revenues should increase by $3 million to $48.9 million. Liquor profits should yield $25.5 

million, up by $1.5 million. Tobacco tax revenues are expected to remain the same at the current year’s 

level of $5.6 million. In total, we expect revenue from the consumption taxes to yield $148.9 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Federal-Provincial Tax Agreement the Province’s share of income taxes, excluding 

the Federal Government’s unconditional transfer of funds based on post-secondary education costs, will 

total $70.6 million. Twenty-nine percentage points of the individual income tax should yield $53 

million, an increase of $5 million over the current year’s estimate. The 10 per cent Provincial 

Corporation Income Tax will produce $17.6 million, an increase of about $700,000. We estimate that we 

will also receive $23.2 million from the Federal Government based on 50 per cent of eligible post-

secondary operating costs, an increase of $3.2 million over the current year’s revised estimates. Our 

equalization payment will be, however, reduced again in 1969-70 to a guaranteed amount of $12.3 

million, down again this year by $5 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, mineral resource revenues should be slightly higher than this year’s receipts. We assume 

that bonus bids in 1969-70 will be $5 million, a decrease of $500,000 from this 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

421 

year’s revised estimates. We expect that potash royalties and other potash revenues will increase by $1.2 

million to a total of $3.6 million. This increase will offset the decline in bonus bids and oil royalties. 

 

We estimate that all other revenues will increase by about $9.5 million. Of this increase, $3.3 million is 

a bookkeeping adjustment because national health grants received from the Federal Government this 

year will be considered as budgetary revenues rather than a refund to vote as was the practice in 

previous years. 

 

In total we forecast all revenues assuming no changes in taxation will be $364.3 million. This represents 

an increase of $25.5 million of 7.5 per cent above this year’s original estimate. This forecast then 

established the over-all target of total Government expenditures set by the Treasury Board for the 

coming year 1969-70 assuming a balanced Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now intend to outline our major spending plans for 1969-70 as well as to mention some 

of the expenditure reductions which were made to finance new programs and improve others. In 

outlining the highlights of our expenditure program, it seems only reasonable to begin with the 

expenditures on education, since education accounts for the largest share of our budgetary expenditures 

and is an area which our Government considers to be of highest priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the forthcoming year, the people of this province will devote 235 million tax dollars to 

the educational system in this province. Expenditures of this magnitude provide ample justification for 

concern by the people of this province over the spending of their dollars allocated to education. In the 

coming year, our Government’s net expenditures on education are expected to read $121.4 million, up 

by $10 million over this current year. 

 

Grants to local schools will take the largest portion of this amount, $68.8 million as compared to $65.9 

million in the current year. Of this amount operating grants will account for $62.3 million, up $4.4 

million over the current year’s estimate. While this amount does not increase the proportion of total 

school costs borne by the Government, it will maintain the share established in past years. It is our hope 

that local authorities will face up to their responsibilities and try and hold these costs in check. Our 

proposed increase is entirely reasonable, due to the fact that enrolments in the school systems are 

expanding at a slower pace than has been the case in the past years. Mr. Speaker, the distribution and 

allocation of these grants will reflect changing patterns in modern education, as well as bringing into 

better balance the needs and resources of urban, separate and smaller non-formula districts. 

 

Construction grants will total $13.5 million gross or $6.5 million after Federal reimbursements. These 

grants will provide 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

422 

for the construction of comprehensive high schools in six centres. The amount of these grants is down 

slightly from the current year’s estimate due to a levelling off of the construction of new comprehensive 

schools. 

 

In regard to northern schools, our Government intends to carry out an extensive construction program to 

improve our northern schools. A provision of $738,000 has been placed in this year’s estimates for 

construction for schools in the following areas: Stanley Mission, Patuanak, Stoney Rapid, La Ronge, 

Wollaston, Fond du Lac, Camsell Portage, Cumberland House, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse. 

 

Also in the coming year our Government proposes to begin the first phase of an addition to the School 

for the Deaf in Saskatoon. This will provide more classroom accommodation and related space for the 

increasing enrolments. We have allocated $300,000 for this addition as well as $441,000 for regular 

operating expenditures of that school in 1969-70. 

 

In regard to technical-vocational education, major emphasis in this Budget will again be on technical 

and vocation education which will result in accommodation for over 2,400 new students in our technical 

vocational schools. Provision has been made for expansion and consolidation of existing programs in the 

technical institutes in Moose Jaw, Saskatoon and the vocational centres at Regina, Weyburn and Prince 

Albert. Our Government, Mr. Speaker, plans to spend $8 million on technical and vocational training, an 

increase of 15 per cent over last year’s high. Mr. Speaker, this program coupled with the added millions 

to be granted to the University is the most positive kind of proof that our Government recognizes the 

value of all levels of education and backs that belief with action and with money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, in 1969-70, the University of Saskatchewan will receive by far the largest 
percentage increase of any program of our Government, some $5.5 million over the current year’s 

operating and capital grants. Total operating and capital grants will be $36 million, which is almost 10 

per cent of our total Budget. There can be no doubt that the Government is giving the highest priority to 

investing substantial sums in our young people. In the coming year, the Government will provide $24 

million for the operating grant to the University. This is an increase of $4 million or 20 per cent. To 

meet the capital expansion requirements of the University, we propose to increase the construction grant 

by $1.5 million to a total of $12,025,000. Included in this total is $500,000 to meet the Government’s 

commitment of matching up to $1.5 million to assist the University in its private fund-raising campaign. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, taking into account all sources of capital funds, the total university construction 

program in 1969-70 will be $16.1 million, an increase of 33 per cent above the current fiscal year’s 

program. Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that our 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

423 

University can take these huge sums of money and, by a sensible use of present facilities and a 

reasonable amount of work on the part of the faculty, provide a high level of education to every student 

who qualifies for entrance in the coming year. 

 

We turn now to the provincial library services. During 1968-69, the fourth regional library system, 

known as the Parkland Regional Library, was established in the province and is already serving 50,000 

persons through 25 branches in the Yorkton area. In 1969-70, our Government intends to continue this 

program of providing improved library services to the residents of Saskatchewan. One example of 

duplication of programs, which we noted during our budget review, is the direct lending service 

provided by the Provincial Library to individuals within the boundaries of organized regional libraries. 

The Government has accordingly decided to discontinue this service in areas now served by regional 

libraries. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that as a step toward the development of the larger 

libraries as resource centres, we will increase from 15 to 20 cents per capita grants to city libraries which 

are not within the regional library system. These grants to city libraries, coupled with the increased sums 

provided for the development of the regional libraries themselves, are an indication of the progressive 

approach taken by our Government in the development of library services for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I turn now to the Health Department. Health costs continue to increase at 
an almost unbelievable rate. The over-all cost of the Government’s health program in 1969-70 will be 

$150.3 million, which is an increase of $20.8 million, or 16 per cent over the amount approved for the 

1968-69 fiscal year. The amount is allocated to the Government’s health programs on the following 

basis: Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, last year $70.7 million, this year $77 million. Medical Care 

Plan, last year $27.4 million, this year $32.6 million. Mental Health, last year $14.8 million, this year 

$16.1 million. Frazier Report Recommendation, last year $.5 million extra, this year another $.5 million. 

Hospital Building and Expansion Fund, last year $3.9 million, this year $9.1 million. Other health 

programs, last year $11.7 million, this year $14.2 million. Capital Works Budget for Health, last year $.5 

million, this year $.8 million. In other words we spent $129.5 million last year. This year we will spend 

$150.3 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, last year we introduced utilization fees in an effort to slow down the increase in 

health costs and thus protect these important programs. In spite of an almost hysterical and totally 

irresponsible opposition instigated by the Socialists, these fees have worked and our health plans are 

being used in a more sensible manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

424 

Mr. Steuart: — We promised that no one would be denied health benefits through lack of money and to 
our knowledge no one has. However, to ensure that these fees will not work undue hardship on anyone, 

we will introduce a ceiling on utilization fees of $180 per family for any twelve consecutive months. Mr. 

Speaker, even though utilization fees have slowed down the rate of growth in health costs, these costs 

continue to rise so fast that, if allowed to go unchecked, they could either endanger our economy or pre-

empt most other Government services. As a result, we are considering other alternatives for financing 

certain benefits under the Hospitalization Plan that are not now cost-shared by the Federal Government. 

This move will affect physiotherapy services provided by private physiotherapists, radiology services 

provided by doctors other than certified radiologists, and community clinics which provide similar 

services including laboratory facilities. I must immediately point out, however, that the money saved by 

these actions, as well as additional sums, will be used to finance other health services. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before announcing our new and improved health programs, I would remind the 

House of another reason that forced us to review all health expenditures in a most responsible manner. 

As I pointed out before, on October 25th we were advised by the Minister of National Health and 

Welfare that most of the national health grant program would be phased out over a three-year period 

beginning April 1, 1969. As well, the hospital construction grant will terminate March 31, 1970 with the 

exception of those projects approved and under construction at that time. The only grants the Federal 

Government will continue are for professional training and public health research. In anticipation of this 

phasing out, we have transferred national health grant projects totalling $3.7 million and resulting 

Federal revenue totalling $3.3 million into the 1969-70 Provincial Budget along with 148 national health 

grant positions. Mr. Speaker, in spite of rising health costs and reduced national health grants, I am 

pleased to inform the House of the following new or expanded health benefits. 

 

The Federal Government’s withdrawal from the national grant program is placing additional strain on 

city health departments as well as on the Province. To compensate the cities of Regina and Saskatoon 

for a portion of this loss, we will be increasing the grant to these cities from 75 cents per capita to $1 per 

capita. In addition, the Government has assumed responsibility for testing raw milk and milk products at 

processing plants in these two cities to reduce their expenditures. 

 

In the Psychiatric Services Branch in the 1968-69 Budget, $500,000 was approved for the first phase of 

implementing the recommendations contained in the Frazier Report, particularly in areas of community 

services. In this regard, 37 additional positions for the psychiatric program were approved during 1968-

69. Substantial salary increases have also been approved for professional positions in the Psychiatric 

Services Branch. 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

425 

These measures have not only enabled the Branch to recruit more successfully for vacant positions, but 

have also enabled it to attract more highly qualified applicants. It is the Government’s intention to 

proceed further with the implementation of the recommendations contained in the Frazier Report and, in 

addition to amounts allocated to specific programs, we have allocated a further $500,000 for this 

development. It is also proposed to develop a more community-oriented program for the mentally 

retarded. It has now been clearly established that a great many retarded are brought to a higher level 

more quickly in a home environment than they do even in a well-run institution. Another important 

event in the new fiscal year will be the opening of the Prince Albert Psychiatric Centre. As well, Mr. 

Speaker, as recognizing a need to improve existing facilities it has been agreed that dietary renovations 

will be carried out at the Saskatchewan Hospital-North Battleford at a cost of $650,000. The Legislature 

is being asked to approve $16.6 million for the mental health program for the 1969-70 year, an increase 

of $1.3 million over the current year, an increase of 23 per cent. Let no one say we are downgrading our 

mental health program in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, the intensive community program which is being developed in 
Saskatchewan is probably the most active in North America and continues to attract visitors from other 

countries. 

 

As you all know legislation passed at the last session of the Legislature created the Alcoholism 

Commission of Saskatchewan and charged that agency with developing a program to combat one of our 

most serious public health and social problems. The Commission is laying plans for a three-to-five year 

program which will provide a decentralized community-based program of education, research and 

rehabilitation. Mr. Speaker, our grant to the Commission for next year will be $445,000, 82 per cent 

more than this year’s Budget and by far the highest in Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — I would look for a moment now to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. In the 
coming year, expenditures under this plan will rise to $77 million, nine per cent up over last year. Most 

out-of-Canada care is obtained in the United States of America where extremely high daily rates place a 

considerable burden on beneficiaries who receive care in that country. Now to ease this burden I am 

happy to announce the rates for out-of-Canada in-patent care are to be revised to provide maximum rates 

of $30 per day for adults and children and $7.50 per day for newborns, instead of the maximum rates 

now in effect of $20 and $5 respectively. 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

426 

In regard to hospital construction, financial support for hospital construction continues to be an 

important program. Emphasis is being given to the replacement and updating of existing hospital 

facilities in order that a high standard of hospital care might be made available to the people of this 

province. An amount of over $4 million will be allocated to hospitals, particularly in urban centres to 

enable them to upgrade their hospital plants. The 1969-70 estimates include $3 million for the South 

Saskatchewan Hospital Centre, bringing the total set aside for this project to $8.2 million. As well $1 

million for the University Hospital in Saskatoon has been set aside, bringing the total for this project to 

some $3 million. 

 

In an attempt to improve present health coverage, assistance to home-care has been extended. Over the 

past year we have approved three new home-care programs located at Willowbunch, Swift Current and 

Yorkton. The purpose of these programs is to assist communities or hospitals in providing home-care 

services for individuals in their immediate environment, where such services will either avoid 

hospitalization or shorten the period of hospitalization. This should help to relieve the pressure on 

hospital facilities in the province and also provide a type of medical care best suited to the patient’s 

needs. Mr. Speaker, experience indicates that home-care per diem costs run approximately 25 per cent of 

hospitalization costs. 

 

Looking now to Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission, in the 1968 Budget Speech, it has 

reported that benefits under The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act were being extended to 

include refraction services provided by ophthalmologists (July 1, 1968) and optometrists (September 1, 

1968) — I also announced that coverage was being extended to include Treaty Indians (January 1, 1969) 

and recipients of war veterans allowance (July 1, 1968). Now the full impact of these extensions and of 

the new centennial fee schedule, negotiated in this fiscal year between the Government of Saskatchewan 

and the College of Physicians and Surgeons, will be felt in the fiscal year 1969-70. The full year cost of 

the new fee schedule will result in increased payments of $5.2 million. Total medical care expenditures 

in 1969-70 are estimated to rise to $32.6 million, an increase of 19 per cent over the 1968-69 Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to challenge the people engaged in the health field as I did their counterparts 

in education. I am confident they can, with the money provided them, ensure for our people the highest 

quality of medical care. I am also sure that to do this without endangering our economy, they must make 

better use of the personnel, the facilities and the money allocated to them than they have in the past. Our 

Government again gives the health and education needs of our people top priority, but, as the costs 

continue to mount, it must be obvious to all responsible people that a greater effort has to be made by 

everyone concerned to hold down these cost increases. This responsibility belongs to doctors, nurses, 

hospital boards, and to hospital administrators and public health officials as well as to politicians. If 

every cent of the $150 million we will 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

427 

allocate for health was well spent to provide the best care for our people, I would have no objection to 

the amount or to the increase. But we will see hundreds of thousands of dollars wasted on unnecessary 

service, on unused facilities and unnecessary duplication. I think it is high time the professionals in the 

field of health, in and out of the Public Service, showed a little more leadership in putting an end to this 

waste. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, in the field of welfare our Government has two main goals: first, the 
provision of financial assistance to meet the actual needs of people; and second, the creation of 

opportunities and support services so that the less fortunate will be able to help themselves. In 

recognition of these goals, we are budgeting $23.9 million gross for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 

for the coming year. This is a projected increase of $2.8 million over the amount estimated for the 

current year. 

 

I am pleased to announce that the rates for foster homes are to be increased in the coming year by $7 per 

month. This will be the third increase in foster home rates since we have taken office. Mr. Speaker, we 

are justifiably proud of our group-home program for children. In this Budget, we are providing for seven 

group-homes with a total capacity for 52 children. I remind the House that there were none when we 

took office in 1964. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased also to tell this House that we have established a Roy Wilson Centre at 

Sedley for the care and treatment of problem adolescent girls. This is the first institution of its kind in 

Saskatchewan. In the past we have had to rely on out-of-province facilities for the care and treatment of 

these girls. In 1969-70 we are providing $199,000 for the Roy Wilson Centre. 

 

I also wish to announce that legal assistance granted under The Deserted Wives’ and Children’s 

Maintenance Act will be raised from $25 to $75 to ensure legal aid for persons falling in this category. 

In the field of corrections, additional parole and probation services are planned. We are providing for 

increases in this area to ensure that the interests of society and the individual are amply protected, and to 

rehabilitate offenders so that they may assume a useful and productive role in the community. 

 

The family therapy program at the Regina Correctional Centre has been most successful and will be 

extended to Prince Albert at an initial cost of $35,000. The Lebret Farm program will be expanded to 

provide training opportunities for a greater number of our Indian and Metis people. The Adopt Indian 

and Metis program has, since its inception in 1967, found homes for close to 100 children. This program 

has been so effective that the Government has decided to continue and expand it, despite the fact that we 

expect a reduction in the financial participation 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

428 

by the Federal Government. In 1969-70 we will extend the program to the Saskatoon area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious, especially in some of our northern communities, that a new approach to 

welfare must be found. The degeneration that develops among people when they are allowed to exist on 

social aid as a way of life cannot be tolerated. The Federal authorities have shown an almost 

unbelievable reluctance to face the facts of life in their refusal to consider sharing the cost of practical 

work and wage projects, as an alternative to continuing social aid. This is a prime example of the 

stupidity of cost-shared programs that force Provincial authorities to ignore local conditions in order to 

comply with Federal bureaucratic red tape, just to qualify for Federal grants. We will continue to fight 

against this criminal waste of people’s lives and taxpayers’ money in the year ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1969-70 the Saskatchewan Youth Agency will extend the Teen Power program to 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and North Battleford. The purpose of this activity is to provide summer 

employment to students in co-operation with Canada Manpower. The Government has also extended an 

invitation to Saskatchewan cities to host the 1971 Canada Winter Games. The cost of facilities for these 

games would be shared by the three levels of government involved. This project will have the short-term 

benefit of providing greater opportunities for our athletes, and in addition it will have long-term 

advantages of providing these sports facilities in the various communities. 

 

I turn now, Mr. Speaker, to our Highway Department. To put an end to the slaughter on our highways 

demands bold new programs, not the least of which must be a system of roads built and maintained to 

accommodate modern vehicles as well as today’s heavy traffic. Coupled with this is the need to supply 

our growing industrial complex with the highways needed to move goods to market. As well, we require 

roads in the North to harvest our forest resources and to extract our mineral wealth. Modern agriculture 

also places an ever-increasing load on our entire highway system, especially if diversification is to be 

encouraged. These are the major reasons we committed our Government to a four-year $300 million 

road program, $250 million to be spent by our Highway Department and $50 million through the 

Municipal Road Assistance Authority. But since we are holding expenditures in every department as 

close to last year’s level as possible, we decided to limit our highway capital spending to the 1968-69 

level of $42.5 million. However, we will raise the amount spent on maintenance and other ordinary 

highway expenditures by over $2 million beyond the amount that we actually spent in 1967-68. 

 

Mr. Speaker, common sense dictates that we should increase maintenance expenditures at a rate 

necessary to protect the tremendous investment that we now have in our highway system. Thus, 

expenditures on public highways will again be increased in 1969-70. An amount of $60.2 million will be 

provided, which exceeds the record estimate for this current year. Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, this 

compares to a total of $63.1 million which will 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

429 

be received in revenue from gasoline tax, driver licences and motor vehicle registration. 

 

In four-lane highway construction, Mr. Speaker, we now have a total of 146 miles of four-lane divided 

highways in the province. An additional 20 miles will be added to the coming year. Sixty miles of 

highway is to be constructed in Northern Saskatchewan in 1969-70 to serve northern residents and to 

provide access to additional mineral-rich areas. A total of $2.7 million will be spent in this area. 

 

Our Government will again be giving assistance to cities for the construction of streets and other urban 

connections, $3 million being provided for this project. Provision is also made for paving or recapping 

447 miles of highway, oiling or re-oiling 884 miles and grading 525 miles. In addition, one new bridge 

over the Saskatchewan River has been planned with construction to begin in 1969. 

 

Regarding Municipal Assistance, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier the Government’s intention to 

establish a Saskatchewan Municipal Financing Corporation. As well, I would like to announce today 

that in recognition of the problems facing municipalities, and in fact all local governments, Premier 

Thatcher has agreed to call a Provincial-local government conference this year, probably in June. At this 

conference I hope we can lay out a practical time-table for the modernization of local government. I 

believe that this will call for a realignment of the boundaries, the responsibilities and the revenues of all 

local government. Our Government will not force, and I repeat, will not force any changes on the 

municipalities, but we must all realize that we will never solve today’s problems with solutions 

developed over half a century ago. In the meantime this Budget reflects our willingness to help all forms 

of local government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned earlier our pledge to spend $50 million on the construction of municipal roads 

during this four-year term of office. I am pleased to report that in 1969-70 a total of $12.6 million will 

be provided for this purpose. We have for some time as you know, Mr. Speaker, assisted cities with their 

roads and streets through our Highway Urban Assistance program. Our Government recognizes also that 

towns and villages face a very difficult financial problem in providing adequate streets for their 

residents. To assist them in meeting this need and to ensure that the town and rural dweller can enjoy 

some of the amenities of the city resident, our Government is initiating a new program of assistance 

whereby towns and villages can receive financial assistance for the gravelling of their streets. A total of 

$1 million will be made available for this purpose in the future. The appropriation for this new program 

in the coming year will amount to $200,000. 

 

I also wish to mention today, Mr. Speaker, that equalization grants will be increased from $2.4 million 

to $2.5 million for 1969-70. At the end of 1968, more than 15,000 miles of grid 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

430 

roads had been constructed, an indication that this program is now nearing completion. Emphasis will 

now be shifted to the construction of 15,000 miles of the main farm access roads. Total funds provided 

for these two construction programs for 1969-70 will amount to $5.7 million, a substantial increase over 

the current year’s provision. Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased to indicate that a sum of $250,000 is being 

provided jointly by the Provincial and Federal Governments to construct roads to grid standards in 

Indian Reservations. This is $150,000 more than the amount provided in the current year and will 

provide for construction of some 35 miles of roads on these reserves. 

 

I’m sure the Opposition will be pleased to hear that the homeowner grant will be continued. The 

homeowners of this province will receive grants to the extent of $8.7 million in 1969-70. This is an 

increase of $500,000 over the amount spent in the first year of the program and it reflects additional, 

new homeowners and widened eligibility. 

 

A program of grants to towns and villages and hamlets to provide water and sewer facilities is being 

continued at the same level as for the current year. 

 

Provision has been made in this Budget for the development of a townsite near Jan Lake on the Hanson 

Lake Road. This townsite, Mr. Speaker, is intended to provide the necessary services for mining 

operations in that area, but will also assist in the development of tourist industry. The program of 

providing loans to industrial towns to assist them in critical stages of their development is being 

continued and approximately $200,000 has been provided in the Budget for this purpose. Mr. Speaker, 

our 1969-70 provision for grants to industrial towns includes a grant to La Ronge in the amount of 

$25,000 to provide that community with a source of treated water. 

 

I look now at housing. The public housing program under the Department of Municipal Affairs now 

includes self-contained units for senior citizens as well as rental units for people of low income. The 

gross Provincial investment in this program for 1969-70 is estimated at $1.5 million and will increase 

our total subsidized housing stock by approximately 37 per cent. The Government is pleased with the 

marked success of a new program to purchase fully-modern older homes in the larger cities. This is a 

joint program with CMHC and it is our intention to continue the program and expand it to include other 

growth centres. We have provided $500,000 in the Budget for this program and for the construction of 

housing units for sale to people of Indian ancestry under the northern housing agreement with CMHC. 

Mr. Speaker, in the program of land acquisition and land development, the Province proposes to invest 

$700,000 during 1969-70. This program will facilitate the provision of serviced land for housing at 

reasonable prices. 

 

I look now at agriculture. Our Government will continue to encourage diversification in agriculture so 

that a crop 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

431 

failure or continued poor export markets will not totally cripple the farm economy. To help farmers 

divert marginal land from grain production to grass and to further support our growing livestock 

industry, we are more than doubling the appropriation which provides for grants to farmers for this 

purpose. Further support to the livestock industry is provided by continuing the grant to assist in 

building or modernizing hog production facilities. This program has met with considerable success and 

we have already paid out more than $350,000 in 150 grants. The estimates for 1969-70 include $350,000 

to extend this program for another year. I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that arrangements have 

been completed wherein we will contract with the Federal Government to inspect some local abattoirs 

and we will share the costs with the plant involved. I am also able to report continued progress on 

development of the irrigation system served from the Gardiner Dam, in accordance with the terms of the 

1958 agreement. This Budget includes $3.25 million for this purpose. Construction schedules anticipate 

major completion of the 40,000 acre Broderick area during 1970. Besides this we are including in our 

estimates the sum of $90,000 plus additional staff to commence the development of the Conquest area 

which includes a possible 30,000 acres. It is planned to make available over 70,000 acres of good soil 

and a first-class modern irrigation system by about 1975. We believe we have every reason to be 

optimistic about the contribution this investment will make to the economy of that area as well as to the 

province as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Assembly is aware, I’m sure, that the Government has been increasingly concerned 

over the plight of our people of Indian ancestry. Agricultural development is one approach that has 

shown success and, accordingly, a substantial portion of the Budget for the Department of Agriculture is 

devoted to this purpose. With regard to Indian Reserves, we are budgeting for two programs. The first is 

for the development and construction of community pastures on Indian Reservations. The second is for 

the development of land on reserves for the use of individual Indian farmers. We are setting aside 

$180,000 in the 1969-70 Budget for these two programs. Mr. Speaker, we have also established a farm 

program for people of Indian ancestry not living on reserves. I am sure you are aware of the Cumberland 

House Farm project operated by the Department of Agriculture and the Green Lake Farm project 

operated by the Department of Municipal Affairs. It is proposed that all farm projects for people of 

Indian ancestry, except the Lebret Farm which will continue under the Department of Welfare, will in 

the future be operated by the Department of Agriculture. In addition, the estimates provide for 

development of farm projects at Ile-a-la-Crosse and La Loche where current employment opportunities 

are almost nonexistent and as well an additional project south and west of Green Lake. The emphasis 

which this Government is giving to this program is reflected in the following estimates which are 

included in this Budget. Cumberland House Farm, $162,000; Green Lake Farm, $137,000; Ile-a-la-

Crosse Farm, $101,000; La Loche Farm, $96,000; New Green Lake Farm, $60,000. 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

432 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget also provides for increased assistance to agricultural societies. We propose to 

increase the grants to these societies which stage pari-mutuel racing from 50 per cent to 60 per cent for 

the pari-mutuel tax collected. In addition, the ceiling for this grant to “B” fairs will be raised from 

$1,500 to $1,800. In summary, Mr. Speaker, the agriculture ordinary budget will amount to $8 million, 

an increase of 18 per cent over the 1968-69 estimate. On the other hand, now that our capital outlay for 

irrigation works in the Broderick area has passed its peak, the agriculture capital budget will decrease by 

$900,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Budget provides for an expansion of 25 per cent in the number of crop insurance 

contracts to be let by The Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Board in the coming year. We expect the 

number of contracts to increase to 15,000 in the forthcoming crop year. This increase will allow the 

Board to complete coverage in those areas where insurance is already available and to extend insurance 

to areas not previously covered. For 1969-70, we estimate $411,000 to administer these contracts. 

 

Turning now to mineral resources, when we became the Government in 1964, one of our first acts was 

to eliminate the tax on individual farmers who held mineral rights on the land they owned. The balance 

of mineral rights not held in the name of the Province is for the most part in the hands of relatively few 

large corporations. The CPR, the CNR, and the Hudson Bay Company are three among others, which 

hold vast mineral rights in our province. The tax on mineral rights has been almost nominal, only three 

cents an acre and has not changed in the past 25 years. We feel the time is long overdue when the 

owners of these mineral rights should be paying a tax more in line with their potential value. As a result, 

the Mineral Acreage Tax will be increased to 10 cents an acre and will generate an additional $800,000 

in 1969-70. I would indicate two points of interest regarding this tax increase. First, it will have very 

little effect on the potash industry, costing them in total less than $30,000 a year. Second, and most 

important, is that it is the only tax increase contained in this Budget despite allegations from all quarters 

that taxes would be increased in a major way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Legislature will be asked to provide funds for the mineral exploration incentive 

program in the form of a $1 million supplementary appropriation for the 1968-69 fiscal year and a 

further $1.1 million for next year. These amounts will provide for the Government’s share of the cost of 

exploration programs which were approved at the beginning of the current fiscal year. This program, 

which was introduced by the Government in 1965, was designed to stimulate exploration activities in the 

Pre-Cambrian Shield of the province. It has been successful to the point where it has sparked the recent 

land rush in the north. Exploration permits have been taken out on more than 40,000 square miles in that 

area following the announcement of a possible rich new uranium discovery. In the light of the fact 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

433 

that each exploration permit carries a work commitment, the need for further incentives is considered 

unnecessary. Consequently, the mineral exploration incentive program will be discontinued when 

existing agreements expire at the end of the 1968-69 fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that we may 

be criticized for terminating this program so abruptly, but we are convinced that when the government 

program has accomplished its purpose it should be discontinued. New mines expected to go into 

production in 1969-70 include two potash mines near Saskatoon, a uranium mine near Uranium City, 

and a copper-zinc mine near Flin Flon. We are confident that with the tremendous interest now being 

shown in Northern Saskatchewan the mining industry in our province has a very bright future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regard to natural resources, we are proposing a level of expenditure for the Department 

of Natural Resources below that estimated in the current year. Capital expenditures on recreational 

facilities will be reduced to $1 million from $1.9 in the current fiscal year. This is an example of the 

difficult decisions we were required to make if our Government was to act in a responsible manner and 

balance the Budget. The fact that we plan to spend less on the development of recreational facilities does 

not mean that we feel such facilities are unnecessary, but rather they are not as high a priority as our 

other expenditure proposals in the coming year. Furthermore, it must be remembered that for every 
dollar spent on capital works, at least an equivalent amount must be spent in future years to maintain 

these facilities. Even with the lower level of expenditure on capital facilities, we hope to meet the most 

pressing recreational requirements of our citizens. Consequently, we propose to start development of the 

Blackstrap recreational project to meet the needs of the Saskatoon area. We expect to spend about 

$100,000 on this project in 1969-70. We are also planning improvements in most of our other provincial 

parks. 

 

Our Government will be asking the Legislature to vote a substantial increase in the funds available for 

tourist development. These extra funds will be used to provide the necessary promotion to make 

“Homecoming 1971” a success. This campaign is designed to put Saskatchewan in the national spotlight 

and enhance our competitive position in the tourist trade. In the current fiscal year we will spend 

$20,000 on the promotion and a further $80,000 in 1969-70, and possibly more in 1971. 

 

Our Government, Mr. Speaker, as you all know has been very concerned about one particular group of 

people in this province. I refer to the Indian and Metis people, who, because of historic problems of 

location and lack of education and skills, have been unable to take part fully in the economic growth of 

our province or nation. In 1965 the Indian and Metis Branch was established in the Department of 

Natural Resources. While this Branch has had reasonable success in finding jobs for native people, the 

Government is determined to accelerate its programs to assist people Indian ancestry. With this end in 

view, legislation will be introduced to provide for the establishment of the 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

434 

Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Department. We are well aware that government programs alone cannot 

solve all of the problems facing our native people. To assist in gaining the support of all of our citizens, 

we invited private industry, church groups, educators, and other organizations of many kinds to 

participate in the Saskatchewan Task Force on Indian Opportunity. Three meetings have been held and a 

remarkable amount of work has been done by committees and sub-committees to determine what job 

opportunities are available in private industry and government, to recommend what training and 

educational programs should be undertaken to survey the labor force and to review housing programs. 

Mr. Speaker, this Legislature will be asked to vote over $1 million for the Saskatchewan Indian and 

Metis Department for 1969-70. Of this amount, $650,000 is for the continuation of present programs and 

the remaining $420,000 will be for the implementation of the recommendations of the Saskatchewan 

Task Force on Indian Opportunity and other approved programs. As I have previously mentioned, 

agricultural and housing programs will be emphasized and will be carried out by the departments 

concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that we have also made provision in this Budget for the 

Department of the Attorney General for a number of programs which will safeguard the rights of 

individuals and the community at large. I would like to just take a moment to review some of the 

highlights of the Budget of the Attorney General. We are providing over $4 million net for the services 

of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. This is an increase of approximately $.5 million over what we 

provided this year. The increase in the cost of this program has been brought about by an increase in our 

share of the cost per man, and the fact that we have contracted for more men in the coming year. The 

Expropriation Procedure Act as you know was passed last year and calls for a Public And Private Rights 

Board which will act as a liaison between the government agencies and the landowner. Provision of 

$50,000 has been made in this Budget to cover the operation of this Board. Legal aid to indigents will be 

continued in the coming year. We figure it will cost us $115,000. An amount of $35,000 has been set 

aside to provide compensation for victims of violent crimes. As well included in this Budget is an 

amount to cover the costs of a new program which will provide for the consolidation and orderly 

payment of small debts. 

 

Our Government is pleased that the legislation dealing with the drinking driver that went into effect this 

past autumn has, to date, shown impressive results. However, we are very much aware of the need to 

establish further effective methods of improving the level of driver safety in this province. We have 

carefully reviewed all government programs relating to driver safety with the intent of increasing the 

utility of public funds being spent in this regard. As a result, this Government has decided to terminate 

the safety lane program operated by the Highway Traffic Board. This decision was reached because the 

voluntary nature of this program did not subject all vehicles to examination and further, when defects 

were found, repairs 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

435 

could not be ensured. To replace this hit-and-miss program we have under active study a project which 

will call for compulsory and regular mechanical check-ups for every vehicle allowed on our highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I promised no tax increase to individuals in this Budget. And there is none. It is now my 

pleasure to announce a major tax reduction. Our Government will introduce legislation at this session to 

provide a rebate of 75 per cent of the Estate Tax paid with respect to property sited in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — We feel that the cost of this program to the people of Saskatchewan is well warranted 
when the alternatives are considered. It is our opinion that without such a rebate the continuing existence 

of the family farm or family business would be seriously jeopardized. Inflation has forced up the value 

of these units to the extent that even a modest-sized operation would be liable for a substantial amount 

of Estate Tax. The tax liability on such an estate could make the transfer of the unit to the next 

generation extremely difficult, if not impossible. Today it is not unusual for a family farm or business to 

be assessed as high as $100,000. Under the new Federal legislation the Estate Tax liability could be in 

excess of $13,000. In many instances estates would not have the ready cash for such a payment and the 

possibility of forced sale exists. It is evident that our proposal will substantially reduce the tax burden 

and eliminate the threat of forced sale of our family farms and small businesses. Mr. Speaker, the need 

for this tax relief is imperative in light of the new Federal Estate Tax legislation which calls for a higher 

effective rate of tax. In the forthcoming year we anticipate paying out over $1.5 million under this 

program. We expect that this amount will increase to as high as $4 million a year when we have rebate 

applications and payments covering a complete fiscal year. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, total budgetary expenditures in 1969-70 will be $364.9 million, an increase of 

$26.2 million over the original 1968-69 Budget. If we excluded the expenditures financed by national 

health grants which were added to the Public Health budget and are offset by Federal revenues of $3.3 

million, the percentage increase over the original 1968-69 expenditure is 6.8 per cent. We predict this 

rate of increase will be the lowest of any Provincial Government in Canada. This is a positive indicator 

of this Government’s responsible consideration of the taxpayers and the health of our economy. Mr. 

Speaker, education spending will increase by $10 million to $118 million and will again receive the top 

priority in terms of percentage of the total Budget. We will spend 33 per cent on education. To health 

will be allocated $71.1 million, an increase of $6.9 million or over 19 per cent of our total Budget. 

Highway expenditures will increase by $1.7 million to over 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

436 

$60 million, again over 19 per cent of our total Budget. Welfare spending up almost $2 million which is 

six per cent of our total Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we compare the total budgetary expenditures of $364.9 million with projected budgetary 

revenues of $364.3 million, assuming no tax increases, we would face a $600,000 deficit. However, the 

increase in Mineral Acreage Tax, which I previously announced, will increase revenues by 

approximately $800,000. Mr. Speaker, this will leave us a surplus of $221,000 for the fiscal year 1969-

70, the fifth successive balanced Budget presented by this Liberal Administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, on concluding this address, leading up to the traditional motion of supply, 
I want to highlight some of the main proposals in this Budget. We have provided for a rebate of the 

Province’s share of the Estate Tax which will bring relief of $1.5 million in the coming year and 

eventually $4 million to the taxpayers of this province. 

 

We have established The Saskatchewan Indian and Metis Department with a budget of $1 million which 

includes $420,000 for implementing recommendations of the Task Force on Indian Opportunity. 

 

We have provided another $.5 million to continue the implementation of the Frazier Report. 

 

We will increase payments to hospitals under the SHSP by $6.3 million and we will raise the operating 

and construction grants to the University of Saskatchewan by over $5.5 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have provided for a sizable expansion of courses and staff at our Provincial technical 

and vocational centres at an additional cost of $1 million. 

 

We will introduce a new program of gravelling streets in towns and villages, and a new program of 

grants to cities for the installation of sewage treatment plants, all of which will cost a quarter of a million 

dollars in the first year. 

 

We will increase the provisions for grid road and farm access construction, equalization payments, and 

grid construction in Indian Reserves by almost $1 million. 

 

Provision is made in the Budget to increase grants to city health departments and city libraries by 

$90,000. 

 

We will increase the maintenance payments to foster homes by $7 per month, a total of $200,000 

annually. 

 

Our Government this year will reform our probational and parole services, making them the most 

advanced programs in 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

437 

Canada, another $40,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agricultural grants will be increased by $130,000. 

 

And I remind this House that all of these increases, along with many other new programs included in 

this Budget, will be financed without any increase in direct taxes to the individual Saskatchewan 

taxpayer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that our approach this year of reviewing and challenging 
each program, of weighing the priorities first within departments and then throughout the entire 

Government, enabled us to reduce costs and still make room for new programs within a balanced 

budget. 

 

I believe the taxpayers, the politicians, and hopefully even the Opposition, have at long last recognized 

that government services can only increase at a rate which is related to the productive capacity of the 

economy. If they do, Mr. Speaker, they will appreciate that this is not only a progressive Budget, but a 

responsible Budget and they will support it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that you do now leave the Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Financial Critic): — Mr. Speaker, my first words must be of congratulations to 
the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) for ably delivering a rather difficult Budget to deliver. We, I 

think, are happy to hear of Homecoming 1971. We hope that it won’t interfere with the Provincial 

election of that year because some of us, I think, probably have a different idea as to who is coming 

home and where home is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Steuart: —     . . . be sent home again. 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think, Mr. Speaker, that I would like first to offer a word of correction to the 
Provincial Treasurer when he indicates that this is, did he say the fourth successive balanced Budget or 

was it the fifth? At any rate the one last year was the first and if he manages to balance this year’s 

Budget, which we will see, it will be the second. I hope to show in a few minutes that those earlier 

Budgets offered to this House by the then Provincial Treasurer, the now Premier (Mr. Thatcher) were 

anything but balanced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

438 

Mr. Blakeney: — Those Budgets are in fact the author of the dastardly Budget which the Provincial 
Treasurer brought down here last year and which increased every tax on the books. Now the Provincial 

Treasurer has said that he hopes to revise fiscal arrangements between the Province and the 

municipalities. I’m sure that this hope will be shared by every school board in this province when they 

read this Budget. Because I know that when they see that school grants are increased $2.4 million in a 

Budget of some $350 million they will know that this means sharp increases in mill rates. Let’s look at a 

few of these figures. 

 

The Premier and the Provincial Treasurer admit that the Budget indicates an increase of expenditures of 

about seven per cent, but did he increase school grants by seven per cent? Not a bit of it. Did he increase 

school grants by five per cent? Not a bit of it. School grants are up about four per cent. Four per cent in a 

Budget which offers in every other area increases of seven, eight, 10 and 15 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — This will mean one thing and one thing only, sharply increased mill rates. I would ask 
the Premier to check the increase in school grants in the last year of our Administration. It was $5 

million, it was twice his increase this year and it was twice the percentage increase. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I want now to offer a comment on the other major area of spending and that is public 
health. We heard once again the stories this year about the frightening increase, the alarming increase in 

health costs, I don’t deny that the increase in health costs are serious. And I don’t deny that they require 

attention but I suggest that they do not justify panic. I would invite the Provincial Treasurer to look at 

the annual report of the Department of Public Health which was filed with us a day or two ago. There it 

indicates that the two big programs had relatively modest increases in expenditures last year. The 

Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan program increased in expense by 4.4 per cent and the Medical 

Care Insurance Commission Plan on a per capita basis by 3.7 per cent. I’m not suggesting that increases 

of 4.4 per cent and 3.7 per cent should be ignored. I am suggesting, however, that they don’t justify the 

state of panic and alarm which the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer exhibit whenever they discuss 

health costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I want to turn for a moment to psychiatric services since the Provincial Treasurer 
mentioned those. He said that, 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

439 

“our psychiatric service program attracts visitors from all over the world.” Well this, Mr. Speaker, is 

based upon the past glories of the program and while it may attract visitors, it most decidedly has not 

attracted staff. It seems to me that this is the key as to whether a program is a success. We will hear from 

the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant) and I am sure he will have to admit to us that once again he 

has failed to attract competent staff or many people who are highly competent to this program in the last 

year. But the Provincial Treasurer has said “Oh, but look what we are budgeting for psychiatric services. 

Who can say we are starving this program.” Well perhaps some of us don’t care so much what you are 

budgeting. It is rather what you spend that we think is rather important. I would invite you to look at 

what you spend in psychiatric services. Last year you budgeted for the psychiatric centre at Prince 

Albert, $239,000 but you spent none of that. You didn’t even get it opened and you used that money to 

provide some of the other funds which you boast about to bring about your Budget surplus. Indeed this 

is true not only in this last year but in the year before. I invite you to look at Public Accounts and you 

will see that at the very time these people were putting $.5 million into the Budget, supposedly to 

implement the recommendations of the Frazier Report, at that very time and during that very month of 

March they were reporting underexpenditures of over $700,000 in psychiatric services. I don’t think we 

are very impressed with what you put in the Budget about psychiatric services. We are much more 

impressed by what you spend on psychiatric services. 

 

We see once again the steady erosion of the health plans and, I think, of the Medical Care Insurance 

Plan. We have seen physiotherapy moved from Medicare Care Insurance Plan over to the Hospital 

Services Plan some months ago. We are not told in effect that it is going to be moved out altogether. We 

have had general practice radiology threatened by this Budget. As for general practice lab services, it 

sounds very much like these services are going to be discontinued, this from a Government which was 

elected on a program of expanding the Medical Care Insurance Plan. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, a reference once again to deterrent fees and to how this ceiling that is put on is 

going to solve the problems of escalating health costs. Well the Government doesn’t know that this 

ceiling is going to do anything with respect to health costs. It doesn’t know that it is going to do the job, 

because it doesn’t know what the job is. It doesn’t know how many people paid deterrent fees of $180 or 

any other figure. 

 

I have a Return given to the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank) which indicates that the 

Government has no record of how many people have paid $180 or any other figure in deterrent fees. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

440 

Mr. Blakeney: — And yet this Government tells us that it is absolutely sure that no one is going to face 
any hardship and that this ceiling is going to do the job. This on the basis of absolutely no statistics. 

Once again it confines its leadership to rhetoric. I think that the Province and the taxpayers would be 

better served if the Government would conduct a few studies, would find out what the problems are and 

would invite those concerned to share in solving the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I doubt very much whether our hospitals and other people in the health field will 
appreciate the hectoring lectures from the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart). 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that the overwhelming impression of this Budget was one of austerity. Except for 

hospitals. I invite you to look at the Budget and see how many capital programs are cut or curtailed. It is 

a sort of hold-the-line, a Budget to spend what we must on operating expenses and to cut back on capital 

spending. 

 

Mr. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Right! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — That’s right! It is a Budget which says we are going to cut back capital recreational 
projects. A Budget which says we are going to cut back technical institute spending. A Budget which 

says we are going to cut back capital school construction. It is a Budget which says we are going in this 

moment of panic to cut back and to hold the line. I say that is a sombre speech, a very sombre speech! 

 

Those of us who know the Provincial Treasurer missed his usual Irish wit this afternoon. There wasn’t 

much of it in this sober speech. It was in sharp contrast to previous Budgets. You know, Budget days 

used to be happy days     . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — That’s right!     . . . I took a great deal of pleasure in delivering Budgets because they 
always represented either tax cuts or greater services. 

 

I may say that in this regard the former Provincial Treasurer, the Premier, was in the same boat. In those 

far-off days of 1965 and 1966 when this Government was engaged in widespread deficit financing, 

Budget day was a gladsome day. We all remember how he used to trip down those stairs and open up his 

portfolio and beam and tell us of all the goodies which we were going to enjoy. He exuded good humor. 

Contrast this now with the usually ebullient Provincial Treasurer who today didn’t 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

441 

crack a smile in an hour and a half     . . .  

 

Mr. Steuart: — Wait till next year! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — We were all at that time invited to join in the fruits of the prosperity. In fact they 
weren’t fruits of prosperity, but fruits of spend-thrift financing, but there was no hint of that from the 

Premier at that time. And anyone with the temerity to mention that we were doing a bit of financing was 

pooh-poohed as a kill-joy. Even this afternoon we hear repeatedly that this is the fourth, or fifth is it, 

successive balanced Budget. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Fifth of ten. 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — But in due course the largesse ran out, as often happens with the spendthrift. 
 

The Medical Care Fund was stripped of its $9 million and it was all gone. The Student Aid Fund was 

stripped of its $2 million and it was all gone. And the Saskatchewan Public Administration Foundation 

was stripped of its million and it was all gone. And after the millions had been borrowed for the 

University, about $20 million, it was then found that this was enough. You couldn’t borrow endlessly 

for the University and this was all gone. And finally the folly of borrowing for highways was recognized 

and that $6.5 million was gone. The cold hard truth began to settle on the Government opposite. 

 

Over $30 million had been either borrowed or filched, money which should have come from current 

taxes. That bought us quite a binge, it bought us quite a binge! It bought us goodies for all. But that day 

is gone now. The then Provincial Treasurer has gone too. We now have another Provincial Treasurer. 

We’ve got a sad refrain. Instead of gaiety and good humor, he cries dirge, a dirge of dismay. Just harken 

back to what he said. We were warned that calamity threatens. We were told of the ominous and ever-

increasing costs of education, which this Government can’t cope with. We are told of the alarming 

increase in health costs that only Draconian measures can possibly halt. We are told that sacrifices will 

be necessary. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Amen! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Amen is right! So be it. We are told that courage will be needed. The facts are that a 
fair analysis of the Provincial Treasurer’s remarks this afternoon is to the effect that these costs are 

escalating and are virtually out of control. Unless something is done, unless these programs are analyzed 

to a fare-thee-well, the Government will be crushed under the burden of escalating costs. 

 

The fair inference was that no longer is the Government in 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

442 

control of events, but events are in control of the Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — The Government somehow lost not only its confidence, but its sense of direction, its 
grip on provincial affairs. The whole tone of the Budget I say again is one of near panic. I say this 

because there is no sense of orderly progression towards long-term goals. Everywhere the Budget is of 

short-term expediency, of temporary postponements, of temporary cutbacks. One would have thought 

that the Government would have had enough of temporary cutbacks. Three or four years ago, this 

Government prevented cities and towns and local authorities from borrowing money for much needed 

projects. Why? Because the interest rates were too high. They were going to go down. Now many of 

these projects can no longer be delayed. They have to be gone ahead with. The only difference is that 

construction costs have gone up 10 per cent and interest rates have gone up 20 per cent. 

 

In 1964-65 this same Government as a crash program at that time, cut back indiscriminately any number 

of programs, to save — and we’ll all remember those famous savings of $6 million — and how 

expensive these savings were. What they did in the field of mental health was graphically outlined by 

Dr. Frazier last year   . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: —   . . . who indicated that our mental health program was in a state of near collapse. 
 

Mr. Steuart: — Ho! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Ho! “Operating on a sustained emergency basis”, were his words. You can call that 
what you like, but it sounds like near collapse to me. 

 

Now in the field of the University, the cut back on University building produced on Regina campus a 

shortage, and a serious shortage of space. These very difficult physical conditions have played no small 

part in creating the other problems which the University now has. I want to say, incidentally, Mr. 

Speaker, that I don’t include the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) in the University’s major 

problems. I know he would be high on anybody’s list of minor irritations. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Where do you put Smishek? 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, that the Government would have had enough of 
budgeting from fright and that by now it would be able to settle down to some long-term program of 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

443 

organized and orderly planning for the future, without either the juvenile giggles which used to feature 

the Premier’s Budget or the equally juvenile cries of crisis which we heard this afternoon from the 

Provincial Treasurer. 

 

One would have thought that the Government would be able to say that over the next five or ten years 

we are going to need to spend so much on schools and we wouldn’t need any emergency cutback and 

that over the next five or ten years we are going to spend so much on recreational projects and we don’t 

need any emergency cutbacks, and that over the next five or ten years we have other capital financing 

projects, which we will approach on an orderly basis, because, Mr. Speaker, in the next couple of years, 

nothing much is going to happen in Saskatchewan. We are not either going to have a bonanza or we are 

not going to go broke. Interest rates are not going to go down sharply. School children are not going to 

evaporate. People who want to use parks are not going to vanish. People will still get sick. I would have 

welcomed some evidence that the Government was taking a sensible and orderly approach to our 

problems. After all the only one chance of a big bonanza that we had this Government muffed and 

muffed again in the last few months. I refer of course, to Federal-Provincial relations. I don’t want to 

review that whole sad mess gain. But I do want to remind the House again of a few basic facts. I do want 

to remind the House because time and time again I hear the facts mis-stated by the press and by the 

Government opposite. Time and time again I hear the myth that we are getting less money from Ottawa 

because we have become more prosperous. The facts are that we are getting less from Ottawa because 

we become more incompetent as bargainers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Ah   . . .  
 

Mr. Blakeney: — All right, wait a minute. 
 

Wait a minute, just listen. Over the years since 1945, the Government of Saskatchewan along with other 

provincial governments are negotiated with the Federal Government, negotiated about sharing the yield 

from income tax and corporation tax and succession duties and estate taxes. Over the years it has been 

agreed that these taxes should be collected by Ottawa and should be paid out to the provinces on an 

equalized basis. Each province got in later years the taxes collected in its own province, plus — and this 

is the important plus — an equalization payment of enough money so that the per capita yield for that 

province was equal to the average of the highest two provinces. This meant that Saskatchewan got from 

these three taxes, income tax, estate tax and corporation tax, an amount equal to the average yield for 

those taxes from Ontario and British Columbia. 

 

This meant a good deal for Saskatchewan. It just happens that Saskatchewan sits around the national 

average in terms of tax yields. The equalization payment which brought us up from 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

444 

the national average to the average of those top two provinces meant about $35 million a year. 

 

Now in the 1963 Federal election, the Federal Liberals promised not only that they would continue these 

equalization payments, but that they would go one better. In the words of their election leaflet, “A new 

Liberal Government will make equalization payments which will bring other provinces up to the level of 

the richest in revenue per head for shared taxes.” That seemed clear enough. These Liberals were elected 

in 1964. With this firm and fresh promise they went down to Ottawa to cash in their chips. But, Mr. 

Speaker, they had not done their homework. Oh, I don’t doubt that they had looked at their papers. But 

what they had not done and what is necessary to do and still is necessary to do, is to line up your allies. 

They had not sounded out and lined up their allies. In particular they had not kept their lines of 

communication open with Manitoba and Quebec. That’s what happened to them. They got taken to the 

cleaners. A way was found to provide Quebec with money, and everybody who knew anything about 

that Conference knew that a way had to be found to provide Quebec with money. If the formula was 

upped to benefit Quebec, we were going to benefit. But a way was found with a new formula, whereby 

Quebec got a fair amount of money, other provinces got the same amount of money and one province 

and one province only lost money, and that was Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Steuart: — Come on, I’ll show you the pulp mill! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — That involved a breach of faith by a newly elected Liberal Government. But surely 
the Provincial Treasurer of all people should not have been surprised by that. The result was that 

Saskatchewan had lost $35 million. I think the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) does not deny this. 

Nor does he deny that. We haven’t lost all of it yet, we’ve lost about $20 million of it so far with the rest 

of the loss coming along next year. That is enough money to pay the entire Provincial cost, at least last 

year, of the Hospital Plan and the Medicare Plan. You can’t deny that. That is the sort of chips they were 

playing with. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — $20 million   . . . 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — $35 million will pay the Provincial contribution for both SHSP and MCIC, I invite 
you to look at the annual report. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — You are a little confused there! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — You are indeed confused but you don’t have to display it so obviously. 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

445 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — These, Mr. Speaker, are the stakes that this Government was playing with. They were 
lost, and they are going to stay lost, unless this Government gets very much better in the field of 

Federal-Provincial relations than it has proved to be to date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was all very well for the Government opposite to fight with Mr. Pearson. It is all very 

well for the Government Opposite to fight with Mr. Trudeau. It is all very well for them to take a hard 

line with Quebec, or as the case may be. But these little vanities and vote-catching poses come pretty 

expensive when they start costing us $5 million a year. This is the fair result of the incompetence and 

inefficiency of the Government opposite in managing our Federal-Provincial relations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about some other aspects of the Budget, but I 
realize that I must choose my words with some care, because last year I commenced my remarks by 

outlining the savage tax increases which were imposed. I was talking about the sales tax up 25 per cent, 

the gasoline tax up 13 per cent, operators licences up 100 per cent and so on, and so on. I went on to the 

new taxes on payment for hotel rooms and meals and telegrams, on farm fuels and on to deterrent fees 

and so on. I wondered what other tax could have been increased, and I said rather facetiously that the 

Provincial Treasurer must have overlooked the Land Titles Office, because if he had thought of it he 

would have put on an extra tax there. Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t have said that, I shouldn’t have said that, 

because the Provincial Treasurer said — and the record will show — “I’ll mark that down,” is what he 

said, and mark it down he did. Since that time he has marked up the taxes — and here they are — for the 

Land Titles Offices. Mr. Speaker, in the last year: minimum fee for Certificate of Title — up 33 per 

cent; fee to register a mortgage — up 33 per cent; certificate of Charge — up 50 per cent; fee to register 

a tax lien — 100 per cent and so on and so on. It is pretty obvious that one has to be pretty careful what 

one mentions, because any directing of the Provincial Treasurer’s attention to any field of Government 

activity immediately produces a tax boost. 

 

Let us look at the situation in the past year. If a young man phones his girl friend, that is taxed. If he 

buys her a bottle of wine, that tax is up. If she buys him a box of cigars, that tax is up. If the courtship 

continues and ultimately a love nest is acquired, that tax is up. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, this Government is 

against motherhood. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Blakeney: — I think one can only ask, 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

446 

Mr. Speaker: is nothing sacred? 

 

Certainly all I can say is that the pocket books of Saskatchewan taxpayers are not sacred. They are 

profaned by the sticky fingers of the Provincial Treasurer every day, and even then he has starved some 

very vital services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will want to look with some more care into just how these vital services have been 

starved, I will want to have much more comprehensive remarks to say about some of them, and 

accordingly I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 5 
 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): moved that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 
5 showing: 

 

Respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Science at Saskatoon, for the period April 

1, 1968 to December 31, 1968: 

 

(1) The amount of money spent for new capital construction. 

(2) The amount of money spent on renovation. 

(3) The amounts of the expenditure which were: (a) Federal, and (b) Provincial. 

(4) The number of square feet of additional space provided. 

(5) The number of additional students who can be accommodated as a result of such additional space. 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, just in order that the House is aware of all the 
information requested respecting the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Science during the past 

construction season, I would like to move, seconded by the Hon. Member for Pelly (Mr. Barrie) that 

Return No. 5 be amended by adding: 

 

(6) The number of days the construction was stopped due to strikes. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South) — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I would question the amendment, 
but I wonder if the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) couldn’t have added to it a number of other 

things such as the weather, acts of God, departmental incompetence, all of these reasons. If he chooses 

because of his own particular bias to include only this one, I don’t think we should deny it. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what that amendment has to do with asking for the amount 
of capital that has been expended, 



 

February 18, 1969 
 

 

447 

the kind of renovation, the amount of Provincial and/or Federal money that has been invested, or the 

amount of space that has been created. Truly the Minister is dragging in a red herring by the tail! What 

has the number of strikes got to do with the information that we are asking for. The only man, if I may 

suggest, that is any more stupid in this world that you can ever think of is the Hon. Minister of Public 

Affairs (Mr. Guy). He is truly one of the shining examples of irrelevance and stupidity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would hope really, Mr. Speaker, that the House turns down the amendment because it has nothing to 

do with the information requested. The Minister is merely trying to throw a side issue and an irrelevant 

matter on the question. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 11 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert-East Cumberland: moved that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for Return No. 11 showing: 

 

With respect to mining and exploration in the Pre-Cambrian area: 

 

1. the amount expended under the incentive program as of January 31, 1969; 

 

2. the number of new finds made, capable of being brought into production, since the inception of the 

incentive program. 

 

Hon. A.C. Cameron (Minister of Mineral Resources): — If the Member is prepared to take the 
expenditure in regard to the Government only, then we could answer the question if it’s understood this 

would be strictly related to Governmental expenditures. We’ve no way of knowing the accurate 

estimates of the different mining companies, what they may have spent. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 20 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 
20 showing: 

 

The number of man-days lost because of management-labor disputes in Saskatchewan during 1968. 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Mr. Speaker, I move, 



 
February 18, 1969 

 

 

448 

seconded by the Hon. Mr. McIsaac, Minister of Education, that Return No. 20 be amended by: 

 

Adding the words, “under Provincial jurisdiction” after the words, “management-labor disputes.” 

 

Mr. Davies — Mr. Speaker, I believe what the Minister must have in mind, and I can only really define 
his intentions, is to provide figures that show only the disputes that come under Saskatchewan 

Department of Labour and to exclude those figures that have to do with disputes that come under 

Federal jurisdiction. He must, therefore, have decided to make this an Order of the Assembly for Return 

on that basis, because last year, Mr. Speaker, this question was answered in the usual way on a question 

put in this Assembly. The Minister at that time provided both the information for the straight time lost 

for industries under Provincial jurisdiction and provided also the supplementary information of straight 

time lost for industries that come under Federal jurisdiction. It was quite unnecessary, I suggest, for him 

to have made this amendment. He could have answered the question and this question should have been 

answered several days ago. We did not have to go through this procedure, however, if the information he 

wishes to provide this year is solely that of strikes coming in under Provincial jurisdiction, I don’t think 

I would object to the amendment except that I think that he could have the good grace and, with his 

research department, have provided the other information as well. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:43 o’clock p.m. 


