




















































Hansard: March 29, 1969


1787 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

40th Day 

 

Saturday, March 29, 1969 
 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

FINAL WHEAT PAYMENT 
 

Mr. J.R. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to bring to your 

attention and to the attention of the Members of this Assembly the announcement of the final wheat 

payment to the farmers of Western Canada. In the past it has been the smiling face of the Premier who 

announced this relatively reasonable final payment that the farmers have received. Unfortunately he is 

not present today. This year, Mr. Speaker, the average payment will be 12.462 cents per bushel in 

comparison to as high as from 40 to 50 cents in past years. Taking into consideration the 20 cents per 

bushel increase in the initial price last year, this still means a reduction of approximately 9 per cent in 

total price of wheat to the farmer for the year 1966-67, which further means a reduction of 20 per cent in 

total price to the farmer which he received for his grain in comparison to 1967-66. This is a serious 

situation and becomes more serious when we take into consideration that 1967-68 deliveries are 456 

million bushels compared to 632 million for the year 1966-67. In total this payment will mean some $60 

million to the Prairie farmers. In 1966-67 the payment meant $315 million to Prairie farmers. When we 

take these facts into consideration, and also the fact that the payment for durum and other grains is 

down, and the average quota at the present time is 2.4 bushels per acre in comparison with 4.2 at the 

same time last year, we should indeed be aware of the difficulty being encountered by the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. I ask the Government opposite: does the Provincial Government have an immediate 

policy in hopes of correcting this situation, or has the Government reconsidered its position of not 

supplying some means of cash assistance to the farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I was aware of the figures as 

indicated by the Member for Kelsey, being a practising farmer myself, I think I can only share the 

disappointment of farmers in Western Canada with the lower final payment this year. I think it ill 

behooves some farm organizations who a year or so ago tried to impress upon the Federal Government 

and the Wheat Board that 



 
March 29, 1969 

 
1788 

the initial price should be raised by some 20 cents which in turn would affect the final payment and now 

try to indicate to the people of the province that the final price is the difference between 12 cents and 

some 40 cents a year ago, without taking into account the change in the 20 cent basis from the final 

payment to the initial payment. I think that it only strengthens the stand that I took at Ottawa last week 

on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan and Western agriculture, when we indicated to the National 

Agriculture Congress that there is every justification now for the farmers of Western Canada being 

entitled to a domestic price for wheat. We pressed this proposal most emphatically. We also indicated 

that there was every justification for the preservation of the Temporary Reserves Storage Act. As you 

know, Mr. Speaker, it means quite a substantial amount to the farmers by way of a storage payment and 

that again is reflected in the final payment. We felt that there was every justification at the time for at 

least considering pegging the price of wheat at $1.95½ a bushel until such time as agreements can be 

arranged or met between the exporting and importing countries through the International Grains 

Arrangement. We felt too that this was no time to be talking in terms of withdrawing some of the 

subsidies that the farmers of Western Canada are entitled to, in view of what would appear to be a 

recessionary trend at the moment as far as wheat sales are concerned. 

 

I would only hope that this should impress upon all Members the very serious situation that the farmers 

have been faced with over the years past in the way of strikes that have prevented the delivery of grain at 

the most crucial times, strikes that have a tendency to lose sales of Western grain to other countries. I 

think too that it now indicates that the Federal Government through its agency, the Wheat Board, should 

probably be a little more elastic and give the Wheat Board more elbow room in their pricing system in 

order to try and meet international competition and not price our grains in such a position that for a 

matter of one cent or two cents we could lose our sales to some other country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Messer: — I appreciate the Minister’s position that he took at the Congress in Ottawa last week. 

The situation that the farmer . . . a supplementary question please, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order, order! I would draw the attention of the House to the fact that whole 

discussion is completely out of order because there is no motion before the House. It is customary for 

Cabinet Ministers to make statements to the House when it is in session and when a Cabinet Minister 

makes a statement to the House, which indeed he should do, prior to making it to the press, then it is also 

customary for a Member of the Opposition, the Leader or one of his colleagues, to comment thereon. 

But there is now no motion before the House 



March 29, 1969 

 

1789 

and therefore there cannot be a debate. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Am I in order to ask a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker? I was intending to ask a 

question the second time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is my understanding that owners of lease land who have tough and damp grain in the province have 

been extended money for the drying of the Government’s share of the crop only. Is this information 

correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Before I left for Ottawa we were discussing this in my Department and I believe 

arrangements were made for those leaseholders who have damp grain to be dried that the Government 

would stand the cost of drying the Government’s share. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Do I understand the Minister to say that they are going 

to provide some help to dry the Government’s share, but nothing to dry the share that remains to the 

farmer himself? Is that the situation? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The farmer has the advantage of the cash advance for drying grain and instead of 

him paying the full share, the Government will look after its share of the grain. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Did the Minister intend to leave the impression in the House that 

the fact that the Wheat Board paid 20 cents more on last year’s crop or the previous year’s crop was the 

total reason for the 12½ cent payment. 

 

Hon. Mr. McFarlane: — I didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — You do recognize the fact that the Member for Kelsey said that . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If you want to ask a question, go ahead. I would again draw your attention to the fact 

that all oral questions are also out of order. They are therefore allowed by courtesy of the House. Go 

ahead if you want to ask a question. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — These people may have an extrasensory perception, but they don’t know what I am 

going to say when I get up. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — No, neither do I! I hope that the Committee on Standing Orders will recommend a 

revision of the rules of the 



 
March 29, 1969 

 
1790 

House so that there will be absolutely no questions asked in this House without notice – except a priority 

question of urgency. That’s the proper way to do this and get the whole matter of questions into order, 

instead of having unseemly hassles over it. Go ahead. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Does the Minister recognize the fact that there is a serious drop in overall price and 

even has been on two different occasions now? That is according to the statement made by the Member 

for Kelsey. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The Minister is aware of the whole situation as it affects Western farmers, and has 

been for years trying to do something about it. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — I am surprised. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premer): — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move seconded by the Hon. Leader of 

the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd), by leave of the Assembly: 

 

Resolved, That this Assembly unites in paying tribute to the memory of General of the Army Dwight 

David Eisenhower, former President of the United States of America and former Supreme 

Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces, whose life was devoted to the service of his 

Country, and whose death is deeply mourned by all those who served with him in the cause of 

freedom. 

 

Mr. W.S.Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I rise in seconding the motion which the 

Premier has put before the Legislature to add the sentiments of Members on this side of the House with 

respect to the death of a man who has for many years been one of the world’s great figures. It seems to 

me that history is of such a nature that frequently it does call for a particular kind of person at a 

particular time. That it seems to me was the situation with respect to General Eisenhower. As I gather 

from reading the story of the times, the particular contribution which he made was that of being able to 

balance and to synchronize the effort and the leadership and the contribution of a number of other men 

whom history had called at this particular time as well. When one thinks of the other leaders in the world 

stage at that time, such as Right Hon. Winston Churchill, such as Joseph Stalin of Russia, one can 

appreciate how difficult a task it was. It was, it seems to me, General Eisenhower’s very valuable ability 

to balance and keep these figures and their efforts together that made his great contribution in the 

interest of world peace and a world of peace in the future. 



March 29, 1969 

 

1791 

I am sure in particular those in our province who served in the Armed Forces for that period will 

appreciate his greatness in this respect and will mourn his loss. Everybody, moreover, will join in 

extending our sympathy to the family of the late General Eisenhower, the late President of the United 

States, and to the people of the United States at his death after a long and very severe illness. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege along with two or three thousand others one 

afternoon, in meeting General Eisenhower and shaking hands with him. He was certainly an impressive 

gentleman to meet. I think one of the great attributes of the former President was his ability to surround 

himself with very top men. Everybody seems to agree that he was able to run his team. I think Canadian 

servicemen particularly will feel that they have suffered a loss with the death of the General, and I know 

that every Canadian will mourn his loss. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That a copy of the Resolution just passed be transmitted to members of the bereaved family and to 

the President of the United States of America on behalf of this Assembly, by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:26 o’clock p.m. 


