




















































Hansard: April 16, 1970


1783 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

43rd Day 

 

Thursday, April 16, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 11:00 o‘clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker:  I wish to introduce to all Members of the Legislature a group of young people situated 

in the Speaker‘s gallery from the Canadian Forces Base at Dana. They are under the supervision of 

Captain Slater. They come from the constituency of Watrous represented by their Member, Mr. 

Schmeiser. 

 

I am sure that all Members wish to extend to them a warm welcome and express the wish that they will 

enjoy themselves here and find their stay informative and educational, and wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

STATEMENT 
 

SASKATCHEWAN CENTRE OF ARTS 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I would like to make a 

statement to this House on the situation that has developed at the Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts. 

 

As Hon. Members are aware, yesterday morning April 15, a strike was called and a picket line set up by 

the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. 

 

I am informed that their demands are 44 per cent in one year when you include wage and fringe benefits. 

In passing I hope that Hon. Members will permit me to say that in my opinion these demands are 

completely unrealistic. 

 

Their picket line was respected by all of the other unions yesterday and today. Thus it appears there will 

be no work at The Centre of the Arts until such time as the electrical workers‘ dispute is settled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, the Opening Week was to have begun at The Centre on the 4th of May. 

Activities have been planned for some months. I would like to take a moment to review that week. 

 

Monday night, it was planned that His Excellency the Governor General of Canada and Mrs. Michener 

would be present to open the building officially. 

 

The Centre of the Arts had succeeded in engaging the services of Mr. Victor Borge — one of the 

world‘s great entertainers — to perform on Tuesday and Wednesday of Opening Week. 

 

Thursday night was dedicated to the Country and Western fans of southern Saskatchewan, would have 

provided two performances by Don Messer and The Islanders. 



 

April 16, 1970 

 
1784 

Friday night, the Circle ―K‖ Club of the University of Saskatchewan had arranged for four musical 

groups to present a ―Rick Night.‖ 

 

Saturday, Mr. Glenn Yarbrough was to have presented two performances. Sunday, an Ecumenical 

Service was to have been held in the afternoon. The Regina Symphony Orchestra was planning a 

performance for Sunday evening with the famous guest conductor, Mr. Mitch Miller. 

 

This was the plan. The artists have been contracted and tickets have been sold. However, as I mentioned 

yesterday morning at this time, our construction schedule is such that the loss of these two days of work 

at this point means that the building will not be ready for the opening on May 4. And it will be obvious 

to Hon. Members that it is impossible for the Centre of the Arts to cancel attractions on a daily basis 

depending upon the duration of this dispute between the electrical workers and the contractors. 

 

It is therefore, Mr. Speaker, with keen regret that I must report that the Opening of the Saskatchewan 

Centre of the Arts at Regina must be indefinitely postponed. I have suggested to the Board of Directors 

that they consider selecting an appropriate date in the month of September of this year, for another 

opening date. 

 

The management of the Centre of the Arts will arrange the mechanics to refund the thousands of dollars 

already paid by citizens of Southern Saskatchewan for tickets to these performances. 

 

Hon. Members will find on their desks a copy of the summary of bookings of the Saskatchewan Centre 

of the Arts, which have been made for the balance of this year as well as 1971 and 1972. I would like to 

draw to Members‘ attention certain specific occasions which will cause particular anguish. 

 

On May 11, the Kinettes of Regina were going to present a fashion show which has been in the planning 

stage for some three months. On the 13th, the Regina Male Voice Choir was going to perform. On May 

15, the Regina Campus of the University of Saskatchewan was planning their Convocation. 

 

And may I draw Hon. Members‘ attention to the dates of May 20 to May 27 when the school students of 

this city were planning to use the Centre of the Arts for the first time and will now be unable to do so. 

 

All in all, the delay will result in a dislocation of some 32 organizations affecting thousands of citizens 

of all walks of life, and we believe that it will cost the taxpayer of Saskatchewan roughly $100,000. 

 

There are a number of decisions which will have to be made by the Board of Directors. For example, if 

we are able to complete the building before September, can it be made available for such things as the 

June meeting of the Shriners, thousands of them; the Leadership Convention of the NDP planned for 

July 2, 3, 4 – at least dozens of them; for the Buffalo Days Ball planned for July 27; and, indeed for the 

graduation ceremonies of the Regina General Hospital. 

 

These decisions will have to be made by the Board based 



 

April 16, 1970 

 

 

1785 

upon the duration of the present labour dispute. Mr. Speaker, as the Minister in charge of the 

Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts, I wish to say this development at this time is a very sad situation 

indeed. With some $7 ½ million of the taxpayers‘ money invested in a truly beautiful building which is 

within 19 days of opening, this is a tragedy for the people of the province. 

 

There have been difficulties in the past in connection with this structure; but I, along with all other 

citizens in the province, felt that at last it was on its way to becoming a reality, and would be indeed a 

source of joy to all our citizens. It now appears that we will wait – must wait- for some months before 

we are able to enjoy this facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the union involved has shown a shocking disregard for the public interest and 

well being, which to say the least is dismaying. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I shall have something further to say about this whole situation early next week. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Premier a question at this 

time. The question is: in view of the situation that he has told us about this morning, that he appoint a 

special mediator, Mr. Justice Culliton or Mr. Mervyn Woods, are names that come to my mind, to act 

immediately in an attempt to unravel all the matters that go into this dispute. It would also be my 

suggestion, Mr. Speaker, that the Chief Justice‘s appointee would look into the whole story involved 

because it has been suggested to me that the dispute and the union are being used as a whipping boy and 

as a convenient excuse by the Government, and that the delays and the mismanagement of the 

Government would in any case, Mr. Speaker, have resulted in delays that would have postponed the 

opening of The Centre. 

 

I am saying that the best way that this could be determined would be by an impartial investigation, 

because I am assured, according to some information, that I have received informally, that there are 

other facts that the Premier has not brought out this morning. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, of course the appointment of a mediator even if it were desirable, would 

in no way help us out of our present dilemma. The Public Works Department and the contractors tell us 

that even at this late date, there would be no way that we could open the Centre of the Arts. 

 

I believe as I say again, Mr. Speaker, this shocking situation indicates again that Saskatchewan must 

find some new machinery to handle strikes that are contrary to the public interest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary question. I would like to ask the Premier if he 

would appoint one of the gentlemen… 



 

April 16, 1970 

 
1786 

Mr. Thatcher: — No. 

 

Mr. Davies: — Would you allow me to finish my question, Mr. Premier?…One of the two gentlemen 

that I have proposed in order to validate the charges that he has made here on the floor of this 

Legislature which are disputed by many citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all of us regret the report… 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. I believe you ruled sometime ago that you would 

allow one statement from the Opposition. We have had that one statement from the Member and I 

suggest that we should get on with the House procedures. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Now here is the problem we get into when we have an unofficial question period in the 

House, because we have the question period and the statements all mixed in together. Now we have had 

a statement by the Premier. We have had a comment on the statement by the Member from Moose Jaw 

South (Mr. Davies). We had a further comment by the Premier and a further comment by the Member 

from Moose Jaw South. 

 

There is my view the comments on the statements and the comment on the statement should end, unless 

there is supposed to be some statement made on some other unrelated topic. 

 

We not get into the question period. I presume that the Member for Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) is 

rising to ask an oral question. This is the way I take it. And I will wait to see what his words are. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, this is precisely what I was going to do. I would like to 

direct a question to the Government, perhaps to the Premier, to tell us why were the delays in the 

completion of the program caused prior to this. We were told as the public that the Auditorium would 

have been finished and completed in February of this year. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — To stir up things like this, and that‘s no… 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! Just a minute. Now oral questions can‘t contain speeches and they 

shouldn‘t contain matters that are controversy. 

 

Now whatever the question is, let the Member state the question and I am sure that he will get an 

answer. Let‘s have the question. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, we were told that the Auditorium would be finished by February. Could 

the Premier tell us what were the delays prior to February which made it impossible to have the 

Auditorium completed. He is now trying to put the blame on the… 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! Now as I 



 

April 16, 1970 

 

 

1787 

understand the question, the question is this: what were the delays prior to this present time? 

 

Mr. Smishek: — That we were told that the Auditorium would be finished. What were the delays and 

was the Government or the Public Works Department partly responsible? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — To my knowledge there were no delays. Mr. Smishek and his union associates are the 

only reason that this Auditorium will not open on May 4. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Can the Premier tell us what disputes there 

were prior to February – labour disputes – that caused the delay? Because there were none and he knows 

that very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! 

 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Public Works): — Mr. Speaker, I will answer that question as Minister of 

Public Works. There was absolutely no delay and at no time was official information given that it would 

open in February or that it would be completed in February. the official completion date of that 

auditorium was May 1 and it would have been reached, it would have been completely finished if it 

hadn‘t been for the union and their strike. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! Now we are trying to have an orderly question period. Now let‘s stop 

this unseemingly banging of desks. One supplementary. He has had one already and he gets one more 

and that is it on that particular topic. 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to know in the light of the announcement — it is a matter of 

19 days — why the Auditorium opening should now be delayed to September 1, a period of six months? 

The labour dispute only started yesterday and I hope that it might be settled today. Why should the 

postponement be until September? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Because we are not going to be in trouble on a day-to-day basis at the tender mercies 

of this union. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, what I was going to talk about is a point of procedure. 

When this side of the House was trying to ask a question we had so much noise back there. They are not 

prepared to listen. My question is: what effort has the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) or the 

Department of Labour taken in trying to keep this thing going? 



 

April 16, 1970 

 
1788 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — Every effort has been made by the Department of Labour 

conciliation officers and myself. The only thing is I have not had enough time in the last 12 hours, there 

are not enough minutes in each hour, in fact, to do the job that could be done. 

 

RESPECTING A JOINT DECISION ON FISHING IN THE 

SASKATCHEWAN RIVER SYSTEM 
 

Hon. J.R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wish 

to make an important statement respecting a joint decision or announcement made after very serious 

consideration by the Minister of public Health (Mr. Grant), the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) in 

charge of Water Resources Commission and myself as Minister of natural Resources. 

 

This affects a portion of the Saskatchewan River system and fishing in that particular area. All fishing 

activities, domestic, commercial and sport, are now closed on portions of the Saskatchewan River 

system. The closed areas will be from a point four miles south of the Saskatoon city limits, downstream 

to the Manitoba border and Cecil Ferry east of the city of Prince Albert downstream to the Manitoba 

border. This will include the waters of the Forks area, Tobin lake, Squaw Rapids and those waters of the 

Saskatchewan Delta area fed by the Saskatchewan River, such as Cumberland Lake, Beaver Lake, 

Sipanok channel and Dragline Channel. 

 

These portions of the Saskatchewan River system will remain closed until October 31, 1970 as a safety 

precaution. This action was taken as a result of recent findings of mercury levels in species of fish taken 

from the Saskatchewan River that are above the accepted safety levels for human consumption. 

 

Preventative measures were taken some time ago to eliminate further mercury pollution of the River 

system by the only major identifiable source. Recent tests of mercury levels in the river water south 

indicate that these measures have been successful. It is expected that the level in the fish will decline 

steadily. It is impossible to predict precisely when these levels will be reduced to acceptable limits. A 

continuous testing program for mercury in fish and in the water will proceed during the period that 

fishing activity will be closed. Prior to October 31, 1970 a complete reassessment of the affected areas 

of the river will be made to determine the rate and the extent of the reduction in mercury levels. If the 

promising preliminary indications at the rate of disappearance of mercury are borne out in the longer 

run, it may be possible to represented-open these areas for fishing at that time. 

 

Despite rumours that fish from other sources in the province may have high levels of mercury, I wish to 

state no unsafe mercury concentrations in fish have been found in any other Saskatchewan water bodies. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if, Mr. Minister in view of the fact that 

the announced season date in the Saskatchewan River will preclude the commercial fishermen at 

Cumberland House from undertaking their usual sturgeon and goldeye fishery, whether or 



 

April 16, 1970 

 

 

1789 

not the Government has any intentions of making some allowances on behalf of the fishermen here. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — No. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I understand then from that, Mr. Minister, that they will simply lose this year‘s 

fishing in the Cumberland House area. I would like to ask a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — may I object for just a moment. This matter just came up. The Government hasn‘t 

even discussed whether there should be compensation or not, and you shouldn‘t draw that conclusion 

because we will certainly take a look at it. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — The supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Government has come to 

a conclusion as to what company is directly involved in the pollution problem — that is the mercury 

pollution problem — and are any prosecutions being considered with respect to that company for some 

contribution to the losses that the fishermen will be required to take. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The indication that we have that it is the Inter-provincial Compulsory-operatives in 

Saskatoon. As to whether they will be sued for damages or not, it is a little early to tell. They have such 

serious financial difficulties without any law suit that whether it would make sense to proceed or not I 

can‘t say. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — I wondered if I heard everything that the Minister had to say. I 

thought that his reference was more specifically to the Northern Saskatchewan River and I didn‘t hear 

any direct reference to the South Saskatchewan. Was there a reference made particularly to Diefenbaker 

Lake, the overflow from Diefenbaker Lake? It is all Northern Saskatchewan River that you are speaking 

of in particular is it? 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I defined the area or portion of the river system that would be from Prince Albert east to 

the Manitoba boundary as far as the North Saskatchewan is concerned, and from the city of Saskatoon to 

the Manitoba boundary as far as the South Saskatchewan is concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  We have now had three questions and that is in my view the limit for one day. We‘ve 

had supplementaries and one more supplementary going at the present time. Now does the Member rise 

to ask a supplementary question? Two Members have risen. Which one? 

 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair); — Mr. Speaker, the Minister mentioned that the fishing 

would be closed as far as the Government is concerned from Cecil Ferry to the Forks of the North and 

South Saskatchewan Rivers. Is that because the fish that may be in the South Saskatchewan River may 

frequent ten miles up that river to that area of Cecil Ferry or is it because there is other pollution in the 

North Saskatchewan River somewhere above Cecil Ferry? 



 

April 16, 1970 

 
1790 

Mr. Barrie: — No, this would be a backup of fish from the area that was polluted. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — May I ask the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) a question ? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  No, we are all through with oral questions today and any others can wait for 

tomorrow. If we are going to have an oral question period, there have to be some guidelines, some 

regulations to keep the period from period from becoming unreasonably expanded. If it gets longer and 

longer and longer, we will find ourselves in the same position as the Zok Sabha in India. They found 

that the question period gradually grew until it practically took up the whole day and no business was 

conducted, either private Members‘ business or Government business. I have made up my own mind 

and I hope that the House supports me in this regard, there shall be three questions on three different 

unrelated subjects and that each question may have two supplementaries. 

 

So there you are. I think that is good enough. That is six – nine questions if you use the whole lot in a 

day. We have exhausted the three of them now. Any further questions that Members have must wait 

until tomorrow. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 — INDEPENDENT ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution No. 8 by Mr. Brockelbank: 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the introduction of 

legislation to establish an independent electoral boundaries commission similar in principle to the 

ones established in Manitoba and Alberta charged with the responsibility of drawing 

Saskatchewan‘s electoral boundaries based primarily on the principle of representation by 

population. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

He said: I wish to express the following opinion in connection with Resolution No. 8 standing in the 

name of the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair. 

 

This Resolution in essence recommends the establishing of an independent electoral boundaries 

commission (similar to ones already established in the Provinces of Alberta and Manitoba) for the 

purpose of recommending electoral boundaries based on the principle of representation by population. 

 

I now wish to draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the amendment to Bill No. 86 moved by the 

Member for Saskatoon Riversdale. The said amendment, in order, to achieve, in his view, representation 

by population, sought to have the Bill aforesaid referred to an independent commission not as yet 

established, but the establishment of which was implied, similar to one established in the Province of 

Manitoba. This question was debated and decided on Wednesday last. 



 

April 16, 1970 

 

 

1791 

Both the motion and the amendment sought to achieve similar results by similar means in support of a 

similar objective. 

 

I wish to draw the attention of all Hon. Members to Sir Erskine May‘s Parliamentary Practice, 17th 

Edition, page 396: 

 

A motion or an amendment may not be brought forward which is the same, in substance, as a 

question which has been decided in the affirmative or negative during the current session. The rule 

may be fully stated as follows: No question, or Bill shall be offered in either House that is 

substantially the same as one on which its judgment has already been expressed in the current 

session. 

 

Because, in my opinion, the Resolution of the Member for Saskatoon Mayfair is the same in substance 

as the amendment of the Member for Saskatoon Riversdale upon which the House has already expressed 

an opinion, I declare Resolution No. 8 to be out of order. 

 

REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current) moved, seconded by Mr. W.S. Howes (Kerrobert-Kindersley), That the 

Final Report of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing be concurred in. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this matter concerning the Report of the Public Accounts Committee has been on 

our agenda for some few days now and the Report of the Committee has been before the House. I think 

that Members of the House have had ample opportunity to peruse it and I don‘t think it is necessary for 

me to discuss it in any great detail at this time. 

 

There are, however, a few remarks that I would like to make with regard to this Report of the 

Committee. I would like first of all, Mr. Speaker, to draw the attention of the House to Item No. 5 of this 

year‘s Report. This said that in this report the Provincial Auditor pointed out that The Land Titles Act, 

Chapter 115 of the Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, 1965, Section 233(1) states in part that: 

 

Before the registrar performs any duty under this Act, he shall, except as herein otherwise 

provided, demand and receive proper fees therefore as fixed by a tariff being made by the 

Lieutenant governor in Council. 

 

This section in the Report goes on to say: 

 

In their examination of the accounting records of a number of Land Titles offices the auditor had 

noted failure to ensure before work was performed that the prescribed fees or that sufficient fees 

were collected as required by the section of the Act quoted. When the Department of the Attorney 

General appeared before the Committee the Deputy Attorney General made what we considered to 

be a good case for the continuation of the procedures presently practised by that Department in this 

regard. Your Committee would therefore recommend that the Legislation be changed to make the 

procedures legal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out to the Legislature that in Bill 83, which I believe has already been 

passed by this Legislature this year, in Section 8 thereof the Attorney General‘s 



 

April 16, 1970 

 
1792 

Department did I think effectively carry out the request of the Committee. This Bill was not brought into 

the House until after our Report was tabled so that was very good. I wish to thank the Attorney General 

(Mr. Heald) for this. It wasn‘t brought in as soon as our Report was and we weren‘t able to amend our 

Report because of this. But we wish to thank the Attorney General for acting on the suggestion of the 

Committee in this regard. 

 

There is another matter along somewhat the same line that also concerns the Department of the Attorney 

General for which we thank him but it concerns last year‘s Report. If I may, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

refer to Item 9 in the Report of the Committee for last year. It said there that: 

 

When the Department of Highways was before your Committee it was brought out that according 

to the opinion of quite a few years standing from the Attorney General‘s Department, a Member of 

the Legislature was obliged to accept without appeal whatever was offered him for lands taken by 

the Crown or its agencies. Your Committee recommends that consideration should be given by the 

Attorney General‘s Department to the introduction of legislation allowing Members of the 

Legislature the right to have such matter referred to the courts for their decision as to 

compensation. 

 

Now we had a Bill before us yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I believe it was known as The Legislative 

Assembly Act and I believe it was comparatively controversial. But in my opinion there was one 

Section, if I may stress the word ―one,‖ that was I believe quite beneficial. Section 3 of Bill 86 under 

The Legislative Assembly Act which was passed yesterday, I believe, if I interpret the Section properly, 

does take care of this request of the Public Accounts Committee of last year. Again I would like to 

sincerely thank the Attorney General for taking action in regard to these matters which have been 

brought to the attention of the House by the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

In regard, again, to this year‘s Report, I would like to draw attention to Item 8 of this year‘s Report. It 

says there: 

 

The Province of Saskatchewan has for many years followed the practice of budgeting and 

accounting on a net basis, that is, certain revenues are estimated and recorded as reductions of 

expenditure rather than as items of revenue. In the opinion of the Committee this practice makes 

the Estimates and the Accounts difficult to interpret. Your Committee recommends consideration 

be given to budgeting and accounting on a gross basis. 

 

These were the recommendations of your Committee, Mr. Speaker, and in regard to that I have just a 

few comments of my own which I emphasize are strictly my own, and cannot be interpreted in any way 

as the opinions of the Committee, but I think they would be valuable at this time to give some light as to 

what is involved in regard to this section of our Report. 

 

Net budgeting, that is the estimation and recording of certain revenues as reductions of expenditure 

rather than as items of revenue, for all intents and purposes started to be used by the Government of 

Saskatchewan with the beginning after the Second World War of Federal-Provincial shared-cost 

programs. these at first were comparatively small and it is rather doubtful if, when 



 

April 16, 1970 

 

 

1793 

the decision was made to show the net figures rather than the gross, it was realized that the situation 

would develop to what it is today. Under this system estimated receipts from other governments of over 

$100,000 are shown as reductions of expenditure rather than items of revenue and only net amounts, 

except for estimated receipts from other governments under $100,000, are shown in the summary of 

revenues and expenditures in the Estimates. 

 

Taking the year ending at March 31, 1969 as an example, the budgetary revenues were estimated at 

$338,796,980 including receipts from other governments of $37,688,200. This latter item included such 

things as the Provincial share of the Estates Tax, Equalization Payment, Post Secondary Education 

Program Equalization, the statutory subsidy and other receipts from other governments which included 

estimated reimbursements from other governments if under $100,000. But the estimated 

reimbursements, shown in departmental revenues in regard to cost-shared programs, were not shown in 

the summary of estimated budgetary revenues and expenditures on pages 6 and 7 of the Estimates. In 

each departmental estimate, however, the estimated amounts to be received from other governments, if 

over $100,000, were shown and deducted from the overall expenditures, thus arriving at a net figure 

which was carried to the summary. 

 

Pages 412 and 413 of the Public Accounts for the year ending 1969 show that the actual budgetary 

receipts were $344,632,870.54. The expenditures were $334,155,899.16. But again the estimated 

amounts of receipts of over $100,000 from other governments in regard to cost-shared programs are in 

general excluded. Receipts from other governments over and above the estimated amounts shown as 

reduction of expenditure, are included under the heading ‗Other Receipts from Other Governments‘ 

which also include, among other things, receipts of under $100,000 from other governments in regard to 

cost-shared programs. 

 

In the year ending March 31, 1969, the receipts from other governments items increase from an 

estimated $6,402,000 to $9,600,000. You must go back to page 501 of the Public Accounts for the year 

ending March 31, 1969 to find the total amount spent by the Government in that year. This is shown as 

$344,155,899 as reported on page 413 plus $112,117,084 in receipts applied as reductions of 

expenditure for a total of $456,272,983. However, these expenditures are classified by function rather 

than by department on that page and are of little use in determining the total amount spent by 

departments. Expenditures by departments broken down to show what was spent on each activity are 

reported on pages 467 to 478 but ain the estimated amounts over $100,000 plus some of under $100,000 

received from other governments as reimbursements are shown as reduction of expenditure and not 

included in the totals given. Nowhere in the Public Accounts is the total amount received from other 

governments shown by individual departments. in general it may be said that, where reimbursements 

from other governments in regard to shared-cost programs exceed $100,000, budgeting and reporting are 

done on a net basis but, where these reimbursements are under $100,000, budgeting at least is largely on 

a gross basis. 

 

I personally feel that the summaries in the Estimates should show estimated receipts and expenditures on 

a gross rather than on a net basis. And it would be useful to anyone perusing public Accounts if all 

receipts from other governments could be clearly shown and reported in detail in regard to the activities 

for which they are received. 



 

April 16, 1970 

 
1794 

I would also like to point out to the Legislature that, as far as I have been able to ascertain, at least the 

Provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario and New Brunswick, are presently budgeting 

and accounting on a gross basis. I must make apologies, Mr. Speaker, this may seem a little involved 

and confusing to the House but the situation which I was endeavouring to describe is, in my opinion, 

very involved and confusing and in the interest of clarity and simplicity I feel that it would be a very 

good practice if the Government were able to change the accounting from the net basis which is 

presently used to a gross basis which we feel, or I feel, would be a good deal more clear to the 

Legislature. 

 

There is just one more point that I would like to stress at this time and that is point No. 9 in our report. 

 

Your Committee is of the opinion that its members can increase their value to the Legislature as 

they become better acquainted with the financial procedures involved in carrying out Government 

business. We would thus recommend that continuity of membership on the Committee be 

maintained as much as possible during the life of the legislature. 

 

Now it is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that some of the other committees have felt that so long as the 

Government majority, the relationship between the members of the separate parties in the House were 

maintained on the committees, that the exact individual memberships in these groups was not too 

important so long as the relative numbers were maintained. But your Committee feels that this principle 

is not really too satisfactory in the Committee on Public Accounts. This study of Public Accounts is a 

very detailed and involved one. I have been on this Committee, in its present set-up, for four years now 

and I have to admit that there is very, very much about this that I certainly did not understand. I hope — 

and I think with some justification — that my understanding of the situation is a good deal better than it 

was back four years ago when I first sat on the Committee. I think that all members of the Committee 

find that their understanding of the problems and the facts concerning the handling of the financial 

business of the Government do become a little clearer to them as we sit there from year to year. I don‘t 

think it is quite fair to any member to come in new on this Committee and be expected to understand as 

well as others who have been there for years. I think that as members of the Committee we are able to be 

of more value to the House as we acquire a better knowledge of the financial workings of government 

business and this is why your Committee has recommended that we feel that there should be, as much as 

possible, continuity of members on this Committee during the life of a legislature. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few brief observations in 

regard to two sections of the Committee‘s report. I first want to direct my remarks to the 

recommendation contained in Section 8 of the Report, that is the recommendation that the system of 

budgeting and accounting be changed from the present net system to a gross basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the records of the Committee ‗s verbatim reports will show that in the last three years I 

have raised this matter in Committee. I feel that it is an important matter for the Government to consider 

changing our system to a gross basis. The 



 

April 16, 1970 

 

 

1795 

present system of budgeting and accounting was established when the amount of funds received from 

the Federal Government towards cost-sharing programs was relatively small and, therefore, the net 

system may have been appropriate. 

 

The amount of money we now receive towards the financing of our programs from the Federal 

Government makes up a large portion of our income. Mr. Speaker, let me refer to page 6 of the 

Estimates. You will note that the estimated revenue for the Province is $395 million. Under the 

estimated revenues we have an item of almost $14 million under the heading of ―Other Receipts from 

Other Governments.‘ this amount of money is primarily for cost-sharing programs between the 

Provincial and Federal Governments, yet the larger amount of money that we receive for cost-sharing, 

estimated for the coming year of $135 million, is not included. It is deducted from the cost of programs 

and a net figure is shown. There are other revenues that we get that are not shown in the total finances 

received by the Government for various expenditures. For example, in case of the hospital and Medical 

Care premiums, we receive close to $19 million. These funds are channelled directly to the programs 

and not included in budgeted revenues, but there is no question that they are part of our Provincial 

revenues used for the purpose of financing these specific Government programs. There are other funds, 

Mr. Speaker, on page 21 of our Estimates under the Education Department, about $1/4 million is 

received from the teachers for insurance purposes. This is money the Government received but is not 

shown as revenue; it is deducted from the total cost of the plan. Similarly, in case of the Health 

Department under Regional Health Programs, we receive money from the municipalities. 

 

The system of budgeting and accounting we now have, in my judgment, obscures the real revenues and 

expenditures. By moving into gross budgeting, I believe would simplify the procedure. It would be 

much more straightforward. It would be less confusing, less difficult to understand. In making these 

observations, Mr. Speaker, let me make it clear I am not being critical of the Government. The system 

was established a long time ago. It has worked. As the Hon. Member from Swift Current has pointed 

out, most of the Provinces in Canada have now established a gross system of budgeting. We in 

Committee considered this matter, the Committee unanimously approved the idea and I would hope that 

the Government will give sincere consideration to us moving into a gross budgeting system. I think it 

would simplify things, it would make it much clearer for all the people to understand. It is not only the 

matter of Members of the Legislature understanding the Public Accounts and the Estimates and all the 

revenues and expenditures, I believe we as Members of the Legislature have a responsibility to the total 

public to make sure that the financial affairs of the Province are clearly understood by all the p. After all 

it is the people who pay the taxes. It is on behalf of the people that expenditures are made, and I believe 

that what is recommended by the Committee would help the people understand the programs better, the 

revenues better, it would enhance democracy, if you please. Democracy is very much a part of people 

understanding the whole function, the whole financial operation of the government. I do concur with this 

section of the Report and I do hope the Legislature will approve the recommendation of the Committee 

and that the Government will give it earnest consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 16, 1970 

 
1796 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, if I may rise on a point of correction in regard to my own speech, if I may 

just for a second. 

 

I said expenditures, as I had the Province broken down to show what was spent on each activity, are 

reported on pages 467 and 468. Well, this was a misprint in my speech which I read incorrectly. They 

should have been on pages 467 and 478. That is an error that I gave to the House. 

 

Mr. T.M. Weatherald (Cannington): — Mr. Speaker, I only want to make a very brief comment on 

what the Member has just said. I think he put in an excellent manner the feeling of the Committee and I 

don‘t want to dwell on it for very long. I just wanted to explain one or two reasons why I think that his 

suggestion is a good one and why it was accepted by the Committee. 

 

I think it is a good suggestion, Mr. Speaker, from the point of view that in our country today there seems 

to be greater and greater confusion about our problems of Confederation and holding this country 

together. I think a change in the accounting system from this point of view as well is necessary, and I 

make this suggestion because I feel that there is greater need for an explanation of the amount of funds 

being contributed by both Provincial and the Federal Governments. the benefits of Confederation that 

accrue to our Province are not well understood by a great number of people, I feel, simply because in a 

financial manner it has never been put forward in a manner which is rarely understood. If you read 

through the public Accounts and our Provincial accounting system that has been in operation for many, 

many years and which has proved to be a good one, I think you would find that it is, to all of us I could 

say, Mr. Speaker, except possibly a few financial experts in the department, a matter of great confusion 

to us to understand it as laymen. I think that it is becoming increasingly more necessary that we provide 

our accounting system in a manner in which the contributions by all levels of government can be 

understood by the general public. In this regard I am not only speaking of the Federal Government‘s 

contribution to the Province but municipal contributions that some time become evident. I am probably 

using ‗municipal‘ in the wrong manner here. the Member for Regina North East suggested contributions 

made by teachers and other groups such as this to various funds. 

 

So I just wanted to lend my support to the suggestion, Mr. Speaker, and to reiterate the reason that I 

think this is exceptionally important. I firmly believe it is becoming more and more important that our 

Province‘s finances be provided in a manner which is readily understood so that we may be able to 

understand the contributions made to our financial affairs of Saskatchewan by all levels of government. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 12:30 p.m. until 2:30 p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: – I wish to introduce to the Members of the Legislature the following groups of 

students situated in the galleries: I believe the group in the west gallery is from St. Phillip‘s 



 

April 16, 1970 

 

 

1797 

school in Saskatoon under the direction of Mr. Macsymic from the constituency of Nutana South 

represented by Mr. Forsyth. We also have a small group from Herchmer school in Regina from the 

constituency of Regina Centre represented by Mr. Blakeney. they are under the direction of Mrs. 

Mackrill and they are in the east gallery. 

 

On behalf of the Assembly I wish to extend a warm welcome to all of these students and hope that they 

will find their visit here educational and enjoyable and wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 o‘clock p.m. 


