




















































Hansard: February 12, 1970


1 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

1st Day 
 

Thursday, February 12, 1970 
 

3:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

This being the day appointed by Proclamation of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, dated the 

twenty-third day of December, 1969, for the meeting of the Third Session of the Sixteenth Legislative 

Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, and the Assembly having met: 

 

Mr. Speaker informed the Assembly that he had received communication from the Private Secretary to His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor, stating that His Honour would open the Session at three o’clock p.m. 

today, Thursday, the twelfth day of February, 1970. 

 

3:10 o’clock p.m. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and, having taken his seat upon the Throne, was 

pleased to open the Session with the following Speech: — 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you to the Third Session of the Sixteenth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Legislature meets at a time when many of our citizens face serious economic problems. 

 

INFLATION 
 

Both provincially and nationally inflation continues to be of major concern. 

 

Rising prices and high interest rates are causing hardship to all groups of our society, particularly to those in 

the low income category, to pensioners, and to farmers. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan welcomes the announcement of the Prime Minister that every possible 

step will be taken in the near future to bring inflation under control. 

 

My Ministers are determined to assist the Federal Government in every way possible in this most important 

task. 

 

AGRICULTURE 
 

Agriculture continues to be the foundation of Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

Yet despite bumper crops, farmers in our province are experiencing major reductions in income because of a 

drastic fall in export sales. 

 

The present situation emphasizes again the vulnerability of the Saskatchewan economy to the vagaries of 

weather and the international wheat market. 



 

February 12, 1970 
 

 

2 

As the current Session commences, there are encouraging signs that the world wheat marketing situation will 

improve during 1970. 

 

Agricultural Diversification 
 

Today it is even more apparent that increased production of livestock and poultry offers a major method of 

marketing surplus grain. 

 

My Government, since taking office, has consistently urged and promoted agricultural diversification. 

 

Again at this Session you will be asked to approve additional measures designed to expand our livestock 

population. 

 

An Act to authorize the guaranteeing of loans for the purchase of female breeding stock will be introduced. 

 

Appropriations of the Department of Agriculture will include increased amounts for paying swine building 

construction grants, for re-seeding cultivated lands to grass, and for the extension of small irrigation projects. 

 

You will be asked to approve additional funds for the Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation, 

which will permit that agency to make additional loans to major agricultural projects. 

 

Irrigation 
 

With completion of the Outlook-Broderick system anticipated in the coming year, the construction of a 

system to irrigate lands in the Conquest-Ardath area will be commenced in 1970. 

 

EDUCATION 
 

My Government continues to give the highest priority to education of our people. 

 

At the same time, it views with concern the year by year increase in local property taxes which are necessary 

to partially finance the cost of our school system. 

 

Thus, in the current year, all school budgets will be thoroughly examined by the Department and rigid 

controls on spending will be imposed. 

 

Student-Teacher Ratio 
 

In an effort to obtain better value for the education tax dollar, efforts are being made to increase the 

student-teacher ratio throughout the province by an average of two students per classroom. 

 

At this Session you will be asked to approve changes in the School Grants formula. 

 

These amendments will form the basis for a Foundation Grants Program. 



 

February 12, 1970 
 

 

3 

Larger Provincial Grants 

My Government will ask the Legislature to assume a larger proportion of the overall costs of education, in an 

attempt to ease the burden on the local taxpayer. 

 

University 

You will be asked to approve the largest sum of money in history for the continued expansion of the 

University of Saskatchewan on both the Regina and Saskatoon campuses. 

 

Student Representation 

Legislation will be proposed to give students on the Regina and Saskatoon campuses the right to elect two 

members each to the University Senate. 

 

French Language 
 

You will be asked for funds which will permit the expansion of the number of schools using French as the 

language of instruction. 

 

Teacher Pensions 

Your approval will also be requested for a measure to increase the present ceiling for the pensions of 

teachers. 

 

Grade Twelve Textbooks 

Since 1964, my Government has introduced free text books in grades 9, 10 and 11. 

 

You will be asked at the current Session to expand the program to include grade 12. 

 

MUNICIPAL ASSISTANCE 

Sewer and Water 

My Government will continue the program of bringing sewer and water installations to our towns, villages 

and hamlets. 

 

Airstrip Program 

During 1969, grants were approved for 13 new communities to assist in the construction or expansion of 

airstrips. 

 

Since its inception, 69 airstrips have been included in this project. 

 

The program will be continued and expanded during 1970. 

 

Police Assistance 

You will be asked to approve legislation which will permit my Government to give financial assistance to 

municipalities in providing adequate police protection for their citizens. 

 

Homeowner Grants 

In 1966, in an effort to help property owners with their local taxes, my Government introduced an annual 

$50.00 Homeowner Grant. 



 

February 12, 1970 
 

 

4 

Last year, 180,300 taxpayers applied for these grants, which totalled over $8,845,000.00. 

 

At the current Session you will be asked to increase the individual amount of these grants. 

 

Industrial Incentives 

My Government welcomes the Federal Designated Area Legislation, which was amended and improved a 

few months ago. 

 

This Act permits the Federal Government to make cash grants to new industries of up to 33 per cent in 

certain “slow growth areas”. 

 

Unfortunately, only about one-third of the populated area of Saskatchewan is designated under the Act. 

 

My Government will ask you to support supplementary legislation, which will bring industrial incentives to 

other small towns and communities. 

 

Home Construction 

Because of unbelievably high interest rates on mortgages, and high building costs generally, the building of 

new homes has slowed appreciably. 

 

My Government will recommend that a $500.00 grant be given to all homeowners who construct a home 

during the winter months throughout the province. 

 

My Government will continue the program of constructing subsidized rental housing units, and will expand 

the program of constructing or acquiring housing units for families placed in employment by The 

Saskatchewan Department of Indian and Metis. 

 

Pipe Lines 

You will be asked to approve legislation which will permit the sharing of a portion of the property tax levied 

against oil and gas lines. 

 

Liquor Outlets 
 

The demand for additional liquor outlets in rural areas is still widespread. 

 

My Government will continue the policy of closing some stores in small villages where the size of 

population does not justify the regular type of store. 

 

You will be asked to approve amendments to The Liquor Act which will permit the establishment of 

additional agencies. 

 

Civil Service Pensions 
 

Your approval will also be asked for a measure to increase again the present ceiling on annual pension 

benefits for civil servants. 

 

Furthermore, the Assembly will be asked to pass legislation making further adjustments to the existing 

superannuation allowances for our pensioners and widows. 



 

February 12, 1970 
 

 

5 

Coming of Age Act 
 

In Saskatchewan, as in other provinces, persons under twenty-one years of age have always been considered 

minors at law without legal capacity to enter into contracts on the same basis as adults. My Government 

believes that our young people are discharging effectively their responsibility as citizens and as members of 

society at an earlier age than twenty-one. 

 

You will, therefore, be asked to approve The Coming of Age Act, 1970, which will provide that a person 

who has reached the age of nineteen will be considered to be a legal adult, and to have reached legal 

maturity. 

 

Electoral Reform 

During the past year, a special legislative committee has been meeting periodically to study electoral reform. 

 

Using the committee’s final report as a basis, at the current Session my Government will propose certain 

far-reaching changes in The Election Act and The Controverted Elections Act. 

 

Legislative Rules and Procedures 

Since the last Session, a special legislative committee under the chairmanship of Mr. Speaker has been 

studying changes in the rules and procedures of the Legislature. 

 

You will be asked to consider new legislative procedures and rules, based upon the committee’s report, 

which are designed to expedite and facilitate the discharge of House business. 

 

SOCIAL WELFARE 

Child Care 

After assessing recommendations proceeding from our clients’ Child Welfare Conference, my Government 

will present far-reaching recommendations regarding the objectives and policies of child care services in our 

province. 

 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan 

Because of the steady and continuous increase in living costs, you will be asked to increase the food and 

clothing allowance granted under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. 

 

Day Care Centres 

My Government will initiate a program which will encourage the establishment of day care centres for 

children in certain of our major centres. 

 

Bus Fares 

My Government will propose a reduction in the rates of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company for old 

age pensioners. 

 

HIGHWAYS 

Huge sums will be requested again for the construction and expansion of our provincial highway system. 



 

February 12, 1970 
 

 

6 

Another major bridge over the South Saskatchewan River will be commenced during 1970. 

 

To facilitate the development of our northern resources, the construction of roads in the North is being 

expedited. 

 

Assistance to municipalities for expansion and maintenance of their road system will again be emphasized. 

 

INDIAN AND METIS 

It is noted with gratification that the native people of Saskatchewan are indicating a renewed pride and 

confidence in themselves and a strong sense of common purpose. 

 

The Provincial Indian and Metis Department, established by my Government last year, has made progress in 

attacking the many problems facing our native people. 

 

In co-operation with the Indian Task Force, many job opportunities have been made available to native 

workers. 

 

However, it must be realized that only a modest start has yet been made. 

 

During the past year improvements were made on the Cumberland House, Lebret and Green lake Training 

Farms. 

 

The establishment of new training farms at La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse and Mortlach was undertaken and will 

proceed during 1970. 

 

My Government believes that the problems of our native population must continue to be given a top priority, 

and you will be asked for sharply increased appropriations for these programs. 

 

MECHANICS’ LIEN ACT 

Over the years many problems have been encountered, resulting from certain inadequacies and deficiencies 

in our Mechanics’ Lien Act. 

 

You will be asked to approve an entirely new Mechanics’ Lien Act which is designed to meet the many 

problems encountered in this area and to reflect a new approach to this very important aspect of the 

commercial life of our province. 

 

VOLUNTARY PAYMENT OF FINES 

You will be asked to approve amendments enabling persons charged with Vehicles Act offences to make 

voluntary payments of fines through the mails, thus avoiding loss of time for court appearances to the 

offender and resulting in increased efficiency in our Courts. 

 

*************** 

 

The Public Accounts for the last fiscal year, together with the Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1970, 

will be submitted to you. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the Session with full 



 

February 12, 1970 
 

 

7 

confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our Province and guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

APPOINTMENT OF CLERK 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I would like to inform the Assembly that Gordon Leslie Barnhart, Esquire, has been 

appointed Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in place of Charles Beverly Koester, Esquire, 

who resigned. 

 

APPOINTMENT OF CLERK ASSISTANT 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I further wish to inform the Assembly that Michael Arthur de Rosenroll, Esquire, has been 

appointed Clerk Assistant of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

MOTION 
 

Adjournment of House, February 13 – February 18 
 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Lloyd, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That when this House adjourns on Friday, February 13, 1970, it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, 

February 18, 1970. 

 

The purpose I think is well known to Hon. Members. There is a Federal-Provincial Conference between the 

Prime Minister and his officials and the respective provincial governments. We consider it a very important 

conference because the matter of inflation is first on the agenda. Also the Prime Minister has agreed that at 

this conference the matter of the wheat prices can be discussed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:26 o’clock p.m. 


