



















































Hansard: March 18, 1970


1004 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

23rd Day 

 

Wednesday, March 18, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO AIR FORCE CADETS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — We have situated in the Speaker’s gallery a group of Cadets from many areas and 

many schools in the Kelvington constituency; they are from no specific school so I therefore call upon 

the Member from Kelvington (Mr. Byers) to make the introduction. 

 

Mr. N.E. Byers (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day it gives me a good deal of 

pleasure to introduce to the Members of this House about 40 members from the Royal Canadian Air 

Cadet, Squadron No. 542 from Foam Lake. They are here today under the direction of Mr. William 

McKie, their captain and commanding officer; Mr. George Pickering from the Civilian Committee; and 

Constable Williams, who is also one of their instructors. It gives me particular pleasure to introduce the 

members and leaders of this cadet squadron to this House. I hasten to point out that it was this squadron 

which won the highest award in the Province of Saskatchewan in 1969 as the most proficient squadron 

with a rating of 95.4. In addition, this squadron won three first-place pennants, winning the first place 

for military efficiency; secondly, as the most proficient squadron, and they placed first in the precision 

drill. The members of this cadet squadron come from seven different hamlets, villages and towns in the 

Foam Lake area. Some of these members come as far as 32 miles weekly for cadet drill and I might 

point out that 56 of the 62 members have perfect attendance for this year. I hope that the Members will 

join with me in welcoming this squadron to this House. We hope that their stay will be beneficial and 

rewarding. We welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

SASKATCHEWAN JUNIOR HOCKEY LEAGUE CHAMPIONSHIP 
 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to put on record 

and draw to the attention of all Members a very recent sports event. Last evening, March 17, proved to 

be a very happy occasion for the district of Weyburn. Their Junior Red Wing hockey team which was 

coached by Mr. Stan Dunn won the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League Championship. This is the 

first time that the Weyburn Red Wings have won this award and they did so, Mr. Speaker, by 

eliminating teams from our major cities, Regina, Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. I am sure that all Members 

join me in congratulating the Weyburn Junior Red Wings as they now are worthy representatives of our 

province. We wish them every success in their endeavours as they proceed in the hopes that they will 

bring to Saskatchewan the Memorial Cup which is emblematic of the Canadian Junior Hockey League  



 

 

March 18, 1970 

 

1005 

Championship of Canada. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

QUESTION 
 

RE: EXPLANATORY NOTES OF BILLS 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day may I direct 

again a question to the Attorney General (Mr. Heald). It has to do with the fact that a number of Bills are 

now on the Order Paper for which the explanatory notes have not been available. Since these notes are 

so valuable before second reading and since I am informed that a number of these notes are already piled 

up in the office just across the hall, would it not be possible to get these on the Member’s desks. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Yes, I’ve hoped that I’ve loosened the logjam somewhat. I 

think you got the notes yesterday — the Leader of the Opposition wasn’t here — on the large Municipal 

Bill and I think you got some other notes yesterday. I will continue to see what can be done about it. It’s 

the problem that I discussed with the Leader of the Opposition about the notes being released before 

second reading but once the approval of the Minister is obtained by the Legislative Counsel then there is 

no further problem. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o’clock p.m. 


