



















































Hansard: March 17, 1970


957 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

22nd Day 

 

Tuesday, March 17, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker:  I wish to introduce to all the Members of the Legislative Assembly the following 

groups of students seated in the galleries: from Caronport high school from the constituency of Morse 

represented by the Hon. Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan, 60 students under the direction of 

their vice-principal, Mr. J. Heppner; from the Codette public school from the constituency of Nipawin 

represented by Mr. Radloff, 36 students under the direction of their teacher, Mrs. Griffin; 50 adults from 

the Regina Vocational Centre from the Bosco Annex under the direction of their school teacher, Mrs. 

Muirhead; and a group of the 20th Westminster Scouts under the direction of Mrs. Fishley. 

 

I am sure that all Members of the Legislature would wish to record an extremely warm welcome to these 

visitors in the galleries, express the wish that they will find their stay here informative and enjoyable and 

wish to each and every one of them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

CONGRATULATIONS TO SHAMROCK AND CODERRE COMBINES HOCKEY 

CHAMPIONS 
 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Gravelbourg): — Mr. Speaker, this being the 17th of March I am going to put a 

different twist to it at this time. Instead of the twist of the shillelagh, it‟s the twist of the hockey stick. I 

would like to report on the activities of some of my constituents, Mr. Speaker. The Shamrock and 

Coderre Combines have on the 14th of March won the SAHA Bantam D Division Hockey Champions 

for Saskatchewan. I would appreciate if this House would join with me in congratulating them on their 

wonderful work. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

STATEMENT 
 

WOLLASTON LAKE ROAD CONDITIONS 
 

Mr. J. J. Charlebois (Saskatoon City Park University): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to report to the 

House that I have on this past weekend had a trip over the winter road to 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

958 

Wollaston to Wollaston Lake to the Gulf Mine and I would like to commend at this time our Department 

of Highways for the very excellent job that it has done on this winter road. There are many parts where 

you can travel over 70 miles an hour. Attorney General Mile 100 out of Brabant Lake we wondered 

whether the marker meant the speed limit or the mile marker. This is an excellent road and I will say that 

the people in the North are completely satisfied with it and very much surprised at the good work of the 

Department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — I would like to say too that some of the members of the Opposition would perhaps 

be surprised to know that, when we visited the Anglo-Rouyn Mine, on our return to Lac La Ronge, they 

have 264 men working there. There is a payroll going into the Lac La Ronge area of $164,000 a month. 

It was an excellent trip, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ST. PATRICK’S DAY TRIBUTE 
 

Mr. E. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, first I would like to join with the Hon. Member for Gravelbourg (Mr. 

Coderre) in congratulating the flying Irishmen from Shamrock for winning the hockey championship of 

the province. I would like to point out to him that two of the top players on the team are my nephews, 

Hugh and Gordon Henry. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — It is proper that they should be recognized on St. Patrick‟s Day. Mr. Speaker, this is the 

day we pay tribute to the most genial, the most intelligent, most personable, most courageous and most 

humble citizens on the face of the earth, the Irish. Mr. Speaker, the Irish have the knack of overcoming 

obstacles in order to make friends with other groups. As a full-fledged subscriber to this trait I find it 

well within the possibilities and probabilities of the Irish to be friendly with the Scots. No Irishman can 

find anything wrong, for instance, with the Camerons, the McFarlanes, the McPhersons, the 

Macdougalls, particularly on St. Patrick‟s Day. And any Irishman could find room in his generous, 

tolerant heart to be kind to the Berezowskys, the Radloffs, the Kowalchuks, the Matsallas, the 

Kwasnicas and Michayluks. Only an Irishman would readily understand that Romanow is only a 

misplaced Irish name with the „o‟ on the wrong end. 

 

When it comes to the Welsh they are vociferous for their numbers and they have to be considered. An 

Irishman well knows that the only reason they didn‟t come to Ireland was that they couldn‟t swim, Mr. 

Speaker. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

959 

Particularly on St. Patrick‟s Day it is within the Irishman‟s concept of good-will and brotherly love to 

accept with genuine pleasure the Howes, the Larochelles, the Thibaults, the Byers, the Meakes, the 

Woods, the Brockelbanks, the Snyders, the Grants, the Blakeneys, the Bakers, the Healds, the Smisheks, 

and the Peppers, for on a day like this these people with these melodious Irish names become sons of the 

old sod to help the Gallaghers and McIsaacs celebrate in a proper fashion. 

 

Irishmen today have no problems with large groups like the Ukrainians, distinct groups like the Scots, 

persistent groups like the Welsh. Mr. Speaker, I regret to advise this House that the only people the Irish 

are having trouble with at this time are Irishmen. Their performance during the last year proves that, in 

addition to lovin‟ Irishmen are known for fightin‟. And with that thought, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

extend to every wearer of the green, and every son of Ireland, on this St. Patrick‟s Day. “The top o‟ the 

mornin‟.” 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

QUESTIONS 
 

WOLLASTON ROAD 
 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the member from City Park 

University a question with respect to the statement that he made if I am in order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I thought he was paying tribute to the Irish. Go ahead. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I would like to ask the Member from City Park University (Mr. Charlebois) how 

many miles did he travel on the Wollaston Lake Road that is in fact on ice and will simply not be a rod 

when the ice melts? 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Well, this is a winter road of course, Mr. Speaker, and it does go over the ice 

wherever possible. That is, I would say, 90 per cent over water. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Yes, 90 per cent. 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Yes, and what did you expect it to be? 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, was the Member for City Park University 

congratulating the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) on ice making? 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

960 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 63 
 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Moved that an Order of the Assembly do 

issue for Return No. 63 showing: 

 

1. The net profit of the Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. in 1969. 
 

2. The part, if any, of this profit that was paid to the Government in 1969. 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the House that since this is a 

private company and that this kind of information would be of great interest to the competitors of the 

Prince Albert pulp mill, I don‟t think this is in the public interest, and I would ask the House to defeat 

this motion. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, the Order asks for a statement of the net profit of 

the Prince Albert Pulp Company Ltd. As I understand it the Government of Saskatchewan is a 30 per 

cent shareholder of that Company. It is difficult to think of a company, in which the Government of 

Saskatchewan is a 30 per cent shareholder and in respect of which the Government of Saskatchewan has 

guarantees out which exceed $50 million, being a private matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — The facts are that of the total capital provided by this company 

or provided to build this pulp company, approximately $50 million is capital in respect of which there is 

a Provincial Government guarantee, $5 million is a contribution by the Federal Crown, another 

approximate $8 million of working capital is provided pursuant to a Provincial Government guarantee 

and $3 million of the equity capital is provided by the Crown. So far as I am aware the sponsors have 

put in less than $10 million out of the total of some $65 or $70 million. I have no quarrel at this time — 

it is not my purpose in standing here to quarrel with the particular method of financing. I am just saying 

that under those circumstances I suggest that the profit and loss picture of the Prince Albert Pulp 

Company Ltd., is a matter of great public concern particularly, if we may be faced with a $50 million 

contingent liability. I understand that the profit and loss statement of the Company would be available to 

the g. I can‟t imagine a circumstance under which it would not be available to the Government nor could 

I imagine a circumstance under which it would not be in the interest of the Company to make known its 

profit picture. May I advise Hon. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

961 

Members that in the only comparable position, that of the steel mill, the financial figures of 

Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Company Limited were readily available. I don‟t know whether they were 

asked for in this House, but any number of people saw them and they were never hidden. I would have 

thought that the Government would be anxious to make known to the public that the pulp company is 

doing satisfactorily and that the public‟s investment is not at risk. If the particular period, the year ended 

December 31, 1969, is not the right period, if in fact the financial year of the company ends on some 

other date, I am sure that the Member for Prince Albert East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) would 

accept the appropriate amendment so that the financial statement would cover the last financial period 

for which there are audited statements. But having said that, I would suggest that the information asked 

for is very appropriate information. It is information of great interest to the public and ought to be 

available. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to join with the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) in urging the House to reject this motion. In so doing I want to remind the House that for 20 

long years the Socialists tried to get a pulp mill without success. Then when the Government changed 

within about a year, this Government succeeded in getting one of the largest and most successful 

enterprises that had ever came to the Province of Saskatchewan. And during all those negotiations the 

Socialists fought it tooth and nail. When we announced the mill, they said it would never be started. 

Once we started the pulp mill, they said it will never be finished. Once we finished the pulp mill the 

Socialists said it would never continue operating. Now it is operating. It is making a good profit and 

hiring hundreds and hundreds of people in our North. Now the Company is willing to take the Province 

off the hook, it is willing to buy all the guarantees back and the Socialists say, “Oh, keep the financial 

guarantees.” Now the Socialists must make up their minds. The Liberal Government did what they never 

could do. It got a major $90 million industry for Saskatchewan. Now we must protect that industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We are not going to give their competitors information that would be useful to them, 

and perhaps harmful to the Prince Albert pulp mill. and so I suggest again, Mr. Speaker, that this motion 

should be rejected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I didn‟t know that I could make the Premier so angry by asking a 

simple question. After all he has just admitted that . . . 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

962 

Mr. Thatcher: — Flip flop! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Oh, please don‟t interrupt: You had your speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the Premier the other day, mentioned and he has 

mentioned it again today that this pulp mill has been making profits. As a matter of fact it is not secret at 

all that the Company has made something like $27 million or $29 million gross profit and it has been in 

the press. Now what I have been asking is for the net profit . . . 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Nonsense! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Now the Premier has to go into the old story of trying to condemn the former CCF 

Government who had worked for a pulp mill and who had been negotiating with the very company that 

he sold the resources out to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — But the deal that we would have made would have been beneficial to the people of 

Saskatchewan, not the kind of deal that you made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, this Government has taken public money to the tune of some $80 

million according to the confession of the Provincial Treasurer last year in Crown corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — $80 million of public money. Now it says they are making profits and surely we 

should know whether we are getting at least some of it back. Oh, be quiet over there! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — All that I am asking, Mr. Speaker, is a simple question. We know what the gross 

profit is, the Premier is saying that there is a profit, we know that we have some investment. We want to 

know whether he is going to sell this Canadian or Saskatchewan resource. This is up to him but he‟ll be 

condemned if he does so, but this is another question which he has brought into the picture . . . 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

963 

Mr. Thatcher: — No wonder you are in the back seat, Bill! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — But right now all I am asking is what is the net profit, if any, and what did the 

Government get? Is this company turning over that profit to the Government because of our 30 per cent 

share or is it not? If the Premier and his Government want to hide that from the people of Saskatchewan 

then this will be just another one in a hundred denials of telling the facts to the people of Saskatchewan. 

Go ahead and hide it! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division: 

 

YEAS — 23 

 

Bowerman  Meakes Pepper 

Kramer Berezowsky Matsalla 

Messer Smishek Wooff 

Wood Thibault Willis 

Blakeney Whelan Kwasnica 

Davies Snyder Kowalchuk 

Romanow Michayluk Byers 

Dewhurst  Brockelbank  

 

NAYS — 30 

 

Thatcher Grant Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Larochelle Mitchell 

Boldt MacDonald Gardner 

Steuart Hooker Coupland 

Heald Gallagher McPherson 

Guy MacLennan Charlebois 

Barrie Heggie Forsyth 

Loken Breker McIvor 

MacDougall Leith Schmesier 

 

RETURN NO. 67 
 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 67 

showing: 

 

1. The number of acres that were cleared in each 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

964 

provincial pasture during each year 1965 to 1969. 

 

2. The number of acres that were broken in each provincial pasture during each year 1965 to 1969. 

 

3. The number of acres that were seeded to grass or forage in provincial pastures each year 1965 to 

1969. 

 

4. The acreage cost of: (a) clearing per acres; (b) breaking per acre: (c) seeding per acre. 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in this question under section 4 it is 

impossible to give the information the way the Member has requested, because when we call for tenders 

we don‟t break down the cost of breaking and seeding when we call for private tenders. Then for 

breaking and seeding, here again we don‟t separate the cost of the seeding part of the operation from the 

breaking part. 

 

That clause 4 Return No. 67 be amended by deleting phrases (b) and (c) and the following substituted 

therefore: 

 

(b) breaking and seeding per acre. 

 

Amendment agreed to 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

RETURN NO. 82 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 

82 showing: 

 

1. The total amount that was paid in 1969 for architects‟ fees in respect of the South Saskatchewan 

Base Hospital. 

 

2. To whom these fees were paid. 

 

3. The amount that was paid to each payee. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment, seconded 

by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre), as follows: 

 

That clauses 1, 2 and 3 be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

1. Whether the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre will be preparing an annual report for the year, 

1969. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

965 

2. If so, whether the report will include details of the amount of money spent by the Centre for 
architectural fees and of the name or names of the architectural firms to whom these payments 

were made. 

 

 3. If not, the amount spent by the Centre for architectural fees during the year 1969 and the name 

or names of the architectural firms to whom these payments were made. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. W.G. Davies. 

 

RETURN NO. 83 
 

Mr. Whelan (Regina North West): — Moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 83 

showing: 

 

1. The total number of judges of magistrates‟ courts in Saskatchewan as of February 28, 1970. 

 

2. The number that hold university degrees in law. 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I had a word with the Hon. Member about this. 

There was one point that wasn‟t clear. He asked for the total number of judges of magistrates‟ courts in 

Saskatchewan as of a certain date. We do from time to time have occasion to appoint part-time judges 

on holidays, and sickness and so on. I ascertained from the Hon. Member that he wanted the total 

number of full-time judges, so I am proposing an amendment which will give him that information. 

Then bearing in mind the fact that when a motion is made and a motion is ordered or an Order is 

ordered, it becomes the property of all Members of the Legislature. I am going to give some additional 

information which some of us over here thought might be interesting. I am making this motion to 

amend, seconded by the minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) that Motion for Return No. 83 be amended 

as follows: 

 

That clauses 1 and 2 be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

1. What was the total number of full-time Judges of the Magistrates‟ Courts in Saskatchewan as of (a) 

February 28, 1964; and (b) February 28, 1970. 

 

2. Of that number, how many held university degrees in law. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 
 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we proceed into 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

966 

motions, I have some items that I wish to deal with in regard to these Motions that are on the Order 

Paper. I would like the House to allow me to deal with them now because I would consider it most 

unfair if I left it for some later time and my Deputy had to deal with them. I think I should do my own 

work. 

 

In connection with the Motion of the Member for Touchwood, moved on March 3rd, which proposes to 

amend Resolution No. 1, I would draw attention of all Hon. Members to the fact that a Motion which 

passes becomes an order of the House and all Resolutions must be considered in that light. 

 

The amendment urges the Federal Government and the Provincial Government of Saskatchewan to take 

certain steps which, in the case of subsection (d) would require an expenditure of provincial funds. 

 

I draw attention of all Hon. Members to Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 249, 

which says in part: 

 

No principle is better understood than the constitutional obligation that rests upon the executive 

government, of alone initiating measures imposing charges upon the public exchequer. 

 

Citation 260, subsection 1, further states: 

 

The tendency has been in the Canadian House of Commons, for the past twenty-five years, to rule 

out all motions purporting to give the Government a direct order to do a thing which cannot be 

done without the expenditure of money. Our Journals are full of precedents to this effect. 

 

The Journals of this Assembly contain many instances of rulings in connection with Bills and 

Resolutions which infringed the prerogative of the Government of the day to be the sole arbitrator of 

increased expenditures. 

 

I refer Members to the journals of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, March 

30th, 1965, pages 161, 162, 163, 164; March 24th, 1966, pages 192, 193 and 194; November 30th, 1920, 

page 70; February 15th, 1939, pages 91 and 93; March 6th, 1947, page 91 and March 11, 1947, page 99. 

 

Students of procedure might also be interested in Erskine May‟s Parliamentary Practice, pages 779 to 

783. 

 

I wish now to draw the attention of all Hon. Members to Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 

Citation 251, subsection 4, which states as follows: 

 

Private members may introduce resolutions that do not directly involve the expenditure of public 

money and have no operative effect but simply express an abstract opinion on a matter which may 

necessitate a future grant. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

967 

An abstract resolution does not finally bind the House to make a grant, and it imposes upon the 

Government the responsibility, and also grants the privilege of either accepting or rejecting the 

recommendation. 

 

Whether or not this particular amendment is in order hinges upon the definition of the word “urge”. The 

Oxford dictionary gives the following definition: “Drive forcibly, impel, hasten, cause to proceed with 

effort”. I consider the word “urge” as used in the context of the amendment to be mandatory, and that it 

neither implies recommendation or consideration of the proposed course of action. 

 

I further draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the fact that any irregularity of any portion of a 

Motion renders the whole Motion irregular. (See Beauchesne‟s Citation 199.) 

 

However, in the light of the foregoing, although in my opinion the Member‟s Motion is out of order, it 

would appear that only a slight change is needed in the wording to bring it into order. 

 

I would draw attention to a Ruling made by Mr. Speaker Johnson as recorded in the journals of the 

Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan, March 5th, 1952, page 125, where, when faced 

with a similar and analogous situation, he did by leave of the Assembly, alter the wording of a Motion in 

order to make it conform to the accepted form of Private Members‟ Motions involving the expenditure 

of money. 

 

Perhaps the Assembly would now wish to extend the same courtesy to the Member from Touchwood 

which was extended to an Opposition Member at the suggestion of Mr. Speaker Johnson in 1952, and if 

the Assembly gives such leave the Chair will change the wording of subsection (d) by striking out the 

word “extend” in the first sentence and substituting therefore the words “consider the extension of”. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 6 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I would now draw your attention to Resolution No. 6 standing on the Orders of the 

Day in the name of the Member for Kelsey, and everything which the Chair had to say in connection 

with the amendment to Resolution No. 1 applies, in my opinion, to this Motion, and accordingly the 

Chair is again, by leave, prepared to apply the same remedy by inserting the words “to consider” after 

the word “Saskatchewan” and before the word “and” in the first line. 

 

I wish to advise the Assembly that by taking the foregoing action in these two specific cases, it is not be 

considered that the Chair is establishing a custom, continuing practice, or assuming an obligation. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

968 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 7 
 

Mr. Speaker: — In connection with Resolution No. 7 standing on the Orders of the Day in the name of 

the Member for Prince Albert East-Cumberland, I would draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the 

Rule of Anticipation concerning Motions, which is to be found on page 399 of Erskine May‟s 

Parliamentary Practice, the pertinent passage of which is as follows: 

 

Stated generally, the rule against anticipation (which applies to other proceedings as well as 

motions) is that a matter must not be anticipated if it is contained in a more effective form of 

proceeding than the proceeding by which it is sought to be anticipated but it may be anticipated if 

it is contained in an equally or less effective form. A bill or other order of the day is more effective 

than a motion. 

 

Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Citation 131, states: 

 

The Anticipation rule, which forbids discussion of a matter standing on the Paper being 

forestalled, is dependent on the same principle as that which forbids the same question being 

twice raised in the same session. In applying the Anticipation rule, preference is given to the 

discussions which lead to the most effective result, and this has established a descending scale of 

values for discussions — Bills, Motions, Amendments, etc. Thus a Bill must not be anticipated 

by (or more shortly „block‟) discussion of a motion, amendment or subject raised on another 

motion.” 

 

From the foregoing it follows that the most effective form of procedure supersedes the less effective. 

 

The subject matter of the Petition in Resolution No. 7 is, in the opinion of the Chair, now contained in 

Bill No. 39, and the Bill being a more effective form of procedure than the Resolution, the Resolution of 

the Member for Prince Albert East Cumberland is, therefore, out of order. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — On a point of order, I did bring in this 

Resolution before the Bill was brought in. I didn‟t anticipate that the Government would do that. I had 

hoped it would do it because it is very vicious legislation in the first place and penalized quite a few 

farmers, but I did bring it in before the Bill was brought in. I am not very clear on this, I am not a legal 

man, not a lawyer, I‟m just an ordinary farmer, and I would like to know just — I have to abide by your 

ruling — but I just wonder if it could be clarified. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

969 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I‟ll clarify the ruling by repeating what I said in the ruling which is that the 

House should discuss the most effective form of proceeding, and a Bill is a more effective form of 

proceeding, obviously, than a Resolution, even though I agree that the Resolution was on the Order 

Paper first. I don‟t deny that but the Bill is still the most effective form of proceeding. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 3 — 1968-69 DURUM POOL ACCOUNT 
 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Moved, seconded by Mr. J.B. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): 

 

That the Legislature of Saskatchewan urge the Canadian Wheat Board and the Government of 

Canada to take all necessary steps, including all necessary legislative amendments, to keep the 

1969-69 Durum pool account separate from all other grain accounts and to ensure that all surplus 

earnings from the sale of Durum be paid to the producers of Durum. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, the matter that is before us on the Order Paper is here because of the concern and 

public attention that was raised by Mr. A.B. Douglas, M.P. for Assiniboia, in the House of Commons on 

January 17th. He was concerned Attorney General that time because the Canadian Wheat Board does 

not differentiate between different kinds of wheat and that there is no provision for a separate sales pool 

of Durum wheat apart from hard red strain. The Hon. Mr. Lang has indicated several times that selling 

prices for grain have been lower than the levels required to meet the initial payments to farmers. 

However, Durum sales were made Attorney General good prices and this ought to have meant some 

extra money for final payment to producers. 

 

I don‟t have the report of the Canadian Wheat Board for the 1968-69 crop year, but in the previous year 

we exported Durum to the Federal Republic of Germany, the USSR, Switzerland, Poland, Italy, Albania 

and several other unspecified countries. The low initial price this year plus the reasonably good export 

demand for the Durums seems to indicate that there ought to have been a surplus in that pool. The 

question was, Mr. Speaker: did the Federal Government intend to use this surplus to offset deficits 

incurred by other kinds of wheat? Now, I must say that the Government would have been perfectly in its 

legal right to do so and in fact its failure to do so is going to be a direct charge against the Federal 

Treasury. In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, I must agree with the action that has been taken, that is, that the 

final payment is going to be made. I don‟t agree with the legalistic view that Durum is lumped with the 

hard spring wheats. The producers of Durum have not been contributing to the general wheat surplus 

and thus putting downward pressures on prices. The producers of Durum have been diversifying their 

operations 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

970 

at an increasing rate. Durum acreage in Saskatchewan jumped from 680,000 acres in 1965 to 2,600,000 

acres in 1969. The producers of Durum do labour under some disadvantages. The crop is very attractive 

to wild ducks and geese, threshing is more difficult than is the combining of ordinary spring wheat. It 

requires a slightly longer growing season. In other words, Mr. Speaker, the life of a Durum producer is 

not an easy one and I don‟t think we ought to put any more disincentives in his way. 

 

Now, Mr. Lang has announced that a Durum wheat final payment will be made, and I want to express 

the appreciation of Saskatchewan Durum producers for this. Mr. A.B. Douglas, M.P. for Assiniboia, 

deserves great credit for this move, because I know that he has been working tirelessly to get this 

payment for Western farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we should also recognize and remember that The Canadian Wheat Board Act does not 

differentiate between Durum and other wheats, and I think that all of us should be seeking changes in 

The Canadian Wheat Board Act to isolate Durum from other hard strain wheats. 

 

Finally, I believe that this Resolution on the Order Paper has had some beneficial affects. Certainly the 

problem has been brought to the attention of the Government of Canada. This Legislature is concerned 

and was going to debate it. Mr. Speaker, there is no point in continuing and I ask leave to withdraw this 

Resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now to begin with the Member hasn‟t moved the motion. It is presumed that he would 

do so when he spoke so I presume that he has. a motion once moved can only be by leave of the House 

withdrawn. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak on it first if I may if this is in 

order. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — It can only be by leave withdrawn and if you rise to speak you are not giving leave and 

it has to be unanimous, so that‟s it. 

 

Mr. Wood: — I won‟t be very long. I‟d like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I do agree with the Hon. Member 

across the way (Mr. Leith) in regard to what he has said about this using of the funds from the Durum 

pool to be spent in taking up the loss on the other grains. Also I would like to agree with him on 

commending the Federal Government on what it has done here. I would like to qualify my 

commendation a little in this, in that I think that there wasn‟t very much else that it could or should have 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

971 

done. Now it could be that the legal position of this is that the Government would have been entirely 

right in using these funds for the hard wheat pool, but I think it is open to a good deal of argument. I do 

maintain that Durum is entirely a different plan than wheat. There are so many different kinds of wheat 

— Chinook, Marquis, Rescue and Manitou — and you can‟t tell one from the other. I mean they 

cross-pollinate and you can mix them and you can even mix Thatcher in with it, and it still is wheat. 

Wheat is wheat, but you can‟t mix Durum with wheat. It doesn‟t cross-pollinate, it‟s a different plant. 

You just mix it in the elevator and you‟re in trouble right up to your neck. When you say that wheat is 

wheat then that‟s fine, but Durum just is not wheat. They are as different as daylight is from dark and 

any ruling that puts them in the same boxcar is out. I think the Hon. Member is entirely right when he 

says that the Wheat Board regulations in this regard should be looked Attorney General. Durum and 

wheat are two different plants, you just can‟t mix them that way. I do agree very much with what the 

Hon. Member has said in that the regulations of the Wheat Board should be investigated on that. 

 

I may say in this regard that there was a good deal of public sentiment in the country on that. I have 

letters here from municipal councils, Farmers‟ Union districts, cooperative associations and Wheat Pool 

committees in my area, requesting me to take what action I could to help to see what they considered to 

be wrong was righted. I am very glad that the Federal Government has seen fit to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I few moments ago the Member (Mr. Leith) asked to withdraw his motion, does the 

Member still wish to withdraw. 

 

Motion withdrawn. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 5 — REDUCTION OF HIGH LEVELS OF UNEMPLOYMENT 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Moved, seconded by Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): 

 

That this Assembly urgently recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan, 

action by which the present high, and anticipated higher, levels of unemployment in the Province 

may be substantially reduced through such means as (1) Publicly financed, or financially assisted, 

projects for low-cost housing, and to provide schools, hospitals, pollution control, parks and 

recreation expansion; (2) The improving of labour standards legislation, and the effecting of policies 

that would augment the buying power of thousands of people on low incomes, as well as to increase 

employment of many others in the community; (3) The maximum use of available special programs 

with respect to industrial development and the provision of technical and vocational training. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, when I drafted 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

972 

this Resolution and after I had given notice of this Resolution on the Order Paper, we had not heard the 

Provincial Treasurer‟s Budget Address. It would be, I conceive, Mr. Speaker, infringing on the rules of 

the House to comment in any particularity on what took place during the last debate. I shall try to steer 

clear of any direct references to it. But may I, however, say this that I am first of all, naturally enough, 

glad to note that, since my Resolution was placed on the Order Paper, some Government commitment 

— even if a last-minute effort — has been made in an endeavour to escape the consequences of having 

done little or nothing beforehand to solve the grave problems of unemployment in this province. 

 

I am, therefore, prepared to offer a lukewarm welcome to the announced program. I said something to 

this effect and made some criticisms in this vein during the Budget Debate. I want now only to say this, 

that the terms of this Resolution are just as cogent and just as important and just as necessary as they 

were when notice of the Resolution was given in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I suggest that the Government has not acted responsibly in following the advice that 

is tendered in the Resolution, its declarations of recent weeks indicate that it has at last decided to pay 

lip service to my proposals. Now lip service does not constitute a program. And in this case it is a tardy 

recognition in words only. But it is, I suppose, progress of some doubtful kind. 

 

The Resolution, Mr. Speaker, calls for “publicly financed, or financially assisted projects for low-cost 

housing, and to provide schools, hospitals, pollution control, parks and recreation expansion” in the first 

set of recommendations. Now may I say something on this. It is conceded by economists that 

home-building activity is a foremost means of promoting and stimulating beneficial improvement 

throughout the economy. It is not simply that the construction industry and its employees gain, although 

this of course is an important aspect. Hundreds of industries that supply construction and housing, with 

articles both large and small, are very substantially assisted. As well, the building of schools, hospitals 

and like structures provides similar galvanic effects. An adequate construction drive in Saskatchewan 

would undoubtedly do much to get business moving from its present state of semi-exhaustion. 

 

But point one in the Resolution touches on more than that. We want the economic stimulus new 

construction offers. It would also supply buildings which are badly needed Attorney General this time. 

We need low-cost homes, we need schools, we need health facilities. This kind of construction is the 

proper accompaniment because it affords the province other valuable benefits. 

 

Housing programs of the low-cost type can also be secured by the Province with the minimum possible 

investment and with the minimum contribution of municipalities and local governments because, of 

course, the Federal Government finances 75 per cent of such plans. So that $1 million spent by the 

Province — that 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

973 

is invested by the Province — results in an aggregate spending of $4 million. It is an attractive way for a 

Province, especially in the position that Saskatchewan now finds itself, to provide work, needed 

facilities and savings in human terms, because, as everyone knows, bad housing breeds delinquency, 

misery, maladjustment, crime and ill-health, which bring with them a perpetual harvest of social ills and 

financial burdens. 

 

Point one in the Resolution refers, Mr. Speaker, as well, to programs for pollution control and parks and 

recreation expansion. Saskatchewan has a splendid opportunity of forging ahead by elimination of as yet 

relatively easily handled pollution, and preventing the emergence of blights that have risen in so many 

regions of North America which saw earlier economic development. 

 

The significant cutback in capital spending in parks and recreation last year by the present Saskatchewan 

Liberal Government was strongly regretted by Members on this side of the House. It was dearly bought 

program cutting, having regard to tourist potential and the welfare of Saskatchewan people. Now is the 

time for us to remedy last year‟s mistaken policy. Again, in providing work for people, we also build 

tourism and the happiness of our own population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my own constituency of Moose Jaw South would be happy to see Government activity to 

help the city of Moose Jaw cope with a formidable problem of pollution, especially on the River and in 

the River valley. The third largest city in s is sited in a district which has tremendous possibilities for 

natural development along the River valley and into the Buffalo Pound Lake area. It has been well 

established that any enterprise planning to locate in a community looks on the attractiveness of the 

centre concerned. Moose Jaw is a pleasant, friendly place. Its labour force has a great reputation. But the 

presence of a pollution problem poses a kind of deterrent. A program to overcome it, assisted by the 

Saskatchewan Government, is a rational proposal since it dovetails with the objective of bolstering the 

Moose Jaw economy with the aid of the new Federal special Area legislation. 

 

Moose jaw is in an excellent position to benefit from tourist-attracting facilities. I would once again like 

to suggest that the transformation of the Regional Wild Animal Park to a Provincial Zoological Park 

should be undertaken with Federal-Provincial cooperation. 

 

These, then, Mr. Speaker, are local examples I am naturally pleased to suggest. But there are dozens of 

others that come to mind in any discussion of parks and recreation requirements of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

I want to remind the House of what I have said on other occasions that any program to erase 

unemployment and to spark the economy must pay due regard to the fact that the largest 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

974 

number of employees in Canada is the service industry. Indeed automation has made many industries so 

productive that comparatively few staff are retained to man goods-producing plants. Saskatchewan 

cannot disregard the potential of employment in service industries. One of the main branches that holds 

promises of course is out tourist industries. This is why the proposal in my Resolution for parks and 

recreation expansion should not be ignored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, point two of the resolution calls for the improving of labour-standards legislation and the 

effecting of policies that would augment the buying power of thousands of people on low incomes as 

well as to increase employment of many others in the community. 

 

The last part of the Resolution envisages the examination of many existing programs and the 

contemplating of new ones to boost buying power, incomes and employment. It embraces a significant 

part of the purview of poverty or near poverty in our society. The New Democratic party has had much 

to say on desirable policies in this spectrum and millions of words have been uttered and written by 

many others on the general topic. The Fifth Annual Review of the Economic Council of Canada, called 

the “Challenge of Growth and Change”, as an example, made specific recommendations on how a 

government should proceed. This Resolution is in tune with such policies and with the view of the 

Economic Council of Canada. 

 

I want to say more about the first part of the Resolution, namely, the proposal to improve 

labour-standards legislation. Mr. Speaker, there is a clear case for a rapid and substantial adjustment in 

Provincial minimum wages. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies: — Our minimum wage has been eroded by inflation. Its value in relation to average wages 

has declined. It is the lowest on the Prairies. The minimum wage offers the greatest protection to 

unorganised workers in the traditionally unorganised plants and businesses whose owners are still 

successful in illegally obstructing and preventing the free entry of their employees into labour 

organizations. 

 

These wage earners are mostly part of the large poverty fringe. They are truly poor and disadvantaged. 

They lack decent housing amenities, good education and a happy life generally because they are poor. It 

may be said that upping the minimum wage won‟t transform their lives. Perhaps not. But it would make 

an excellent beginning in this desirable direction. Mr. Speaker, minimum wages in Saskatchewan are 

now well below 50 per cent of the average weekly wage paid to the province‟s workers. In actual and 

relative terms, Saskatchewan minimum wages are depressed. An increase of $15 per week in the general 

standard would mean an added purchasing power of, I would estimate, better than $20 million annually 

for this depressed 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

975 

group. This, again, would aid in creating more work for business and industry. at the moment, minimum 

wage rates are so low that the resulting aggregate income for this body of workers, disposable or entire, 

offers no such opportunity. 

 

Minimum rates in the United States of America have been increased a number of times since 1962 

precisely because, apart from the human misery imposed by low rates, there were compelling arguments 

to use higher minimum rates as one measure for dispelling poverty. A powerful lobby in the US has 

contended that jobs would be lost if minimum wage rates were raised. 

 

Strong evidence to refute this thesis was provided just two or three years ago, in 1967, in my 

recollection, by the United States Secretary of Labour, W. Willard Wirtz. 

 

Mr. Wirtz first of all stated that nine million workers not previously covered by minimum wage 

protection have been brought under the umbrella of new minimum wage rates. His report then went on 

to say that the economy had continued to prosper, along with an increase in employment of nearly two 

and one-half million workers. There had also, he said, been increases in employment in practically every 

one of the industries most directly affected by the wage changes in the United States. Mr. Wirtz said that 

additionally prices in the year when the rates became effective rose less than they had in the previous 

year when the lower minimum standards applied. Finally, retail prices of goods in relatively high-wage 

industries, virtually unaffected by the minimum wages, rose more than the prices of goods produced in 

the non-durable goods industries where the minimum wage rise had the greatest impact. Mr. Wirtz said. 

Significantly, Mr. Wirtz said, at this time $4.1 billion in new buying power had been created by the 

higher minimum rates, a definite boost to the whole United States economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the adoption of this Resolution might spur the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) and the Government of Saskatchewan to implement increased fair minimum rates which are 

not desperately necessary in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the interests of saving time this afternoon, I will not minutely examine other labour standards which 

should be improved in this province, except with respect to one and that is hours of work. Mr. Speaker, 

the time is long overdue for the adoption by this Province of a 40-hour week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Davies: — There has been no basic change in our Hours of Work Act since 1947. Almost a quarter 

century has elapsed. Surely, even this Liberal Government will see the justification for some forward 

move at this point in time, when unemployment is as prevalent as it is and when it is necessary to take 

steps to forestall an even higher degree of joblessness in this province. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

976 

There has been some debate about how effective hours legislation is in combating unemployment. 

Without dwelling on this, it is certainly obvious that a reduction in hours has some marked effect in 

fighting it. The editor of the Scientific American, Gerard Pill, in a book he wrote in the mid-sixties, 

called “Science in the Cause of Man” estimated that if the 60-hour week prevalent in 1900 had been 

general in 1960, there would have been 27 million unemployed persons in the United States. Hours of 

work have come down because of unions and because of a measurable rise in living standards and 

productivity. A moderate descent to a 40-hour week in Saskatchewan would cause little if any disruption 

and it would accomplish a deal of good in coping with unemployment. 

 

From the point of view of employee policy, such a change would actually assist in keeping workers in 

the province. For unorganised labour, especially those in the smaller centres, long hours tend to stay 

static. But working people don‟t wait. They can‟t be clamed for migrating to other provinces where 

lower weekly hours of work and higher earnings obtain. Mr. Speaker, I submit that there is really no 

good argument against, and a multitude of facts to support, the move to a 40-hour week in the Province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I come to the third part of my Resolution proposing “a maximum use of available special 

programs with respect to industrial development and the provision of technical and vocational training.” 

The first part of the item is, I believe, self-explanatory and so perhaps is the last. I shall make some brief 

observations about the last part. One of my colleagues on this side of the house will be having more to 

say about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a province where about half of the population has an academic standing of Grade 8 or 

less, it is to be regretted that many vocational and technical courses cannot be undertaken because of the 

educational deficiency that is involved. Upgrading is of the essence in the rapid and successful use of 

these programs as they affect the lives of the worst educated sections of our population, among whom 

Indian and Métis people are so numerous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Federal financing has made it possible for us to expand technical-vocational training in 

Saskatchewan. While progress has been made, it isn‟t good enough. We have to do better, and very 

much better. And since unemployment is often the hardest to dislodge among the poorest educated 

people, it has to follow that a prime solution is to significantly increase training measures. Dealing with 

unemployed tradesmen, may I also say that it is while they are unfortunate enough not to have jobs that 

we should offer technical-vocational upgrading courses. For example, the whole face of training needs 

in the building trades is shifting. Journeymen recognize that they must receive supplementary training. I 

say, Mr. Speaker, that now is the time to give it when construction is slack and when journeymen are 

unemployed. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

977 

The intent of this Resolution, Mr. Speaker, is something like the program for the war on poverty. The 

Economic Council of Canada has said that the program against poverty falls into four major categories: 

(1) manpower development, training and mobility programs; (2) individual improvement and/or 

educational programs; (3) community action and community change programs, and (4) income 

maintenance programs. I would solicit the support of the house in adopting this Resolution without 

amendment. It is timely and it is essential. It recommends practical, reasonable steps. It is a declaration 

of policy which the whole province as well as its employed population would greet with enthusiasm and 

support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second the Resolution 

introduced by the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) and to rise and speak in support of 

the Resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier of Saskatchewan during moments of exuberance comes up with some very 

interesting statements. On February 26 while speaking to the Canadian Petroleum Association, 

Saskatchewan Division, he said this, “The state owes every man a job, unless he is too lazy to work.” He 

is also a man who is something less than modest when it comes to making election promises. Members 

will recall the 1964 Liberal election platform. The first plan was, and let me quote: 

 

Create 80,000 new job opportunities for Saskatchewan young people in four years through a 

dynamic industrial development program. 

 

In 1965, when the Premier brought down his first Budget, he made some firm commitments to the 

people of the province. He talked about „the kind of principles his Government intended to pursue.‟ The 

first of these principles was “The election promises made by the Liberal Party.” 

 

In 1967, the number one plank for that election was again more jobs. While the 80,000 figures was 

omitted, they said and let me quote: 

 

Continue to create more jobs by expanding the dynamic industrial and resources development 

programs. 

 

After the last election we got a new Provincial Treasurer and he restated the position expressed by the 

Premier three years earlier. He said, “We would keep our promises to the people.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is 1970 and something has happened to the Liberal dynamism. They have 

forgotten the election promises made in those two elections. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

978 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Now again in 1965 the Premier reported to this Legislature, and let me quote: “During 

1964 Saskatchewan population reached an estimated total of 949,000.” Well a few days ago the DBS 

reported the Saskatchewan population to be down to 948,000 at January 1, 1970 — a reduction of 1,000 

in five years under a Liberal g. The labour force has therefore dropped proportionately. In other words, 

today there are fewer jobs, fewer workers, Mr. Speaker, than there were in this province five years ago. 

But the number of job opportunities for the workers has dropped sharply. How bad is the employment 

and the unemployment situation in the Province of Saskatchewan? The picture is bleak indeed; the 

Government is afraid and ashamed to tell the truth; questions have been asked but the Government has 

refused to answer. The Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies), who has just taken his seat, 

has already told the House during previous debates that statistical data on provincial employment and 

unemployment published in the Department of Labour Annual Reports are deliberately omitted from the 

Report for 1969 — a further example of the Government‟s suppression of the truth and the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me tell this Legislature exactly why the Government is refusing to answer these 

questions. It is because on January 30, 1970, there were 29,753 persons registered with the ten Canada 

Manpower Centres in the Province, exclusive of Lloydminster, and another 708 were registered 

Attorney General Lloydminster which includes part of Alberta. No doubt half or more of these are 

Saskatchewan residents; in other words, over 30,000 people were registered. How many more thousands 

are unemployed but are not registered? For example, the Indian and Métis who live on reservations. The 

number of registered vacancies as Attorney General January 30, 1970 for the 10 regions was 789, and 24 

vacancies were registered Attorney General Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, in the Regina region alone there 

were 8, 150 persons registered. The largest single occupational group was construction workers — 

1,781. This is the reason, Mr. Speaker, I suggest why the Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) is refusing to 

answer questions on unemployment in this House. This is why he is trying to supports the facts. It is 

because these figures give us the telling story of how miserably this Liberal Government has failed to 

keep the election promises of 1964 and 1967. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, during the Budget Debate I described in some detail the fallacy of the 

Government‟s so-called „crash public works program.‟ The truth is that in most instances there is less 

money appropriated for capital expenditures this year than was provided last year. What this will mean 

is that there will be fewer jobs created because the Saskatchewan Government‟s expenditures on 

construction are in fact reduced. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

979 

This Government is either oblivious to the problems facing the people of the province or just unwilling 

and incompetent to act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year after the session prorogued, hardly a day passed by that I did not receive a 

telephone call, a letter or a direct personal inquiry from people, asking whether I had any information 

where they may be able to find a job. Many of them were tradesmen and experienced workers, 

carpenters, plumbers, electricians, ironworkers, truck drivers, typists, store clerks, salesmen and 

labourers without specific trades. I conducted a survey among the building trades in the city of Regina 

and found that some 10 to 30 per cent were unemployed, depending on the particular trade. Some had 

not had a job for six months and longer. So, on May 20 of 1969, I wrote to the Premier. In part, my letter 

said: 

 

A number of unemployed tell me they are in desperate financial circumstances; their 

unemployment insurance benefits have been, or are on the verge of being, discontinued; some 

have received credit from their corner grocer and are unable to meet payments. 

 

I drew attention to the increase in the crime rate and suggested that at least a part of it can be attributed 

to rising unemployment. Many university and high school students were just unable to find jobs last 

year, Mr. Speaker. In my letter I added the following statements and recommendations. Let me quote: 

 

I feel strongly that the Provincial Government has a responsibility to take all steps necessary to 

alleviate the unemployment problem. May I therefore suggest that the Government convene a 

conference on the problem of unemployment in Saskatchewan. Such a conference should include 

representation from the Provincial, Municipal and Federal Governments, agencies like 

Unemployment Insurance Commission, Canada Manpower, MLAs and Saskatchewan MPs, 

organized labour, employers, teachers, farmers, representatives from the technical schools, 

university, news media, welfare agencies, Indian and Métis organizations, church groups and 

perhaps others. 

 

The purpose of such a meeting would be to discuss and consider for government action 

job-creating projects and such measures that could prevent the escalation of the problem. 

 

May I suggest for your consideration the following projects, which if initiated would create 

many needed jobs: 

 

1. A massive public and private housing construction and urban renewal program. 

 

2. Immediate start on construction of the Regina Base Hospital. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

980 

3. Extension of regional park development, including a provincial tree-planting program. 

 

4. Expedite construction of needed university facilities, particularly at the Regina campus. 

 

5. Expedite and extend construction of needed Provincial technical schools. 

 

6. Immediate consideration of building a high school within the boundaries of Regina North East 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have raised this matter several times in the Legislature. In our constituency there is no 

high school even though we have a population of some 35,000. 

 

1. A program of modernization and redevelopment of many Saskatchewan towns and villages. 

 

2. Construction of needed public buildings, schools, community centres, sports facilities, etc. 

 

In my letter I proposed the following: 

 

As you are aware, Federal cost-sharing or substantial assistance is available in respect of many of 

the above-suggested programs. 

 

And I suggested that the Government of Saskatchewan make strong representations to the Federal 

Government to re-institute the Winter Works Program and have the length of the works season extended 

to meet the needs of climatic conditions in Western Canada. In addition, Mr. Speaker, I suggested at the 

time that this question of unemployment be put on the agenda for discussion and consideration during 

the June Provincial-Municipal Conference. I received a reply from the Premier a few days later. His 

letter states and let me quote: 

 

May I acknowledge with thanks your letter of May 20th. May I assure you that the views which 

you have expressed will be given careful consideration. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, nine or ten months have elapsed and we don‟t see any kind of a meaningful program 

initiated to alleviate unemployment so far. I sent a copy of this letter to the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) and he replied in part saying: 

 

I am sure that the Government and myself are very cognizant of the many problems facing our 

society today due to the economic slump. 

 

The Minister of Labour said that he and the Government were cognizant of the problem. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, what kind of a cure did they prescribe. They trimmed Provincial Government expenditures and 

on two successive periods stopped Government employees‟ entitled increment increases, they told the 

employees, 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

981 

to subsidize Government operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Premier announced his so-called crash public works program in this House, he 

said he was hoping that Ottawa would be persuaded to increase its capital spending. Mr. Speaker, after 

reading The Leader Post editorial of February 18, one can‟t help but ask where this Liberal Government 

of Saskatchewan was when the Federal Government was preparing its public works program for this 

year. Read the first sentence. Let me quote: 

 

Judging by the federal Transport Department‟s main estimates for 1970-71 Saskatchewan is a 

forgotten province. 

 

Manitoba will get $1.6 million. The Federal area public works project expenditures total $94 million — 

Saskatchewan will get less than half a million dollars of this total — Manitoba will get $3 million. The 

Federal Public Works Department has produced estimates totalling $323 million. The grand total for 

Saskatchewan is $3.8 million. A little better than one per cent of the total national amount, Mr. Speaker. 

Compare this with Manitoba, look at The Leader Post editorial of February 18th. In two Federal works 

projects, Manitoba got close to $5 million, Saskatchewan got only half a million dollars. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, when Premier Schreyer, whose name has been mentioned quite often in this house, goes to 

Ottawa he doesn‟t scream and he doesn‟t put on a fit, he doesn‟t pound tables, he goes to Ottawa to 

negotiate the best possible deal for the people of Manitoba rather than resort to histrionics. 

 

This Government treats the unemployed workers like they were cold statistics. Mr. Speaker, these are 

people. They need to eat, they need a roof over their head. They need jobs and incomes to support their 

families. Mr. Speaker, perhaps the unemployment problem is best summed up by an 18-year-old youth 

who sat in my office as tears rolled down his cheeks while he recited to me his predicament in 

mid-August last. This 18-year-old boy „phoned me and asked whether I had any idea where he might be 

able to find a job. He had already been to Canada Manpower Centre, several times and had visited 

dozens of employers since the end of June school term. I gave him a list of about one dozen suggested 

companies he might see. He did this and two days later he came to my office telling me had no luck. He 

told me he comes from a family of six brothers and sisters. He is the second oldest. He had completed 

his grade 12 with an average mark of 60 per cent. He said he was interested in getting into the field of 

electronics. He had made application for employment with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, 

Saskatchewan Government Telephones, as well as many other employees. I decided to telephone the 

personnel department of the Saskatchewan Telephones and was told that they had some 200 job 

applicants. I described the plight of this youngster to them and was told that because of his average 

school marks not being spectacular and since he did not have a physics course, his chances were almost 

nil in getting considered. I telephoned the 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

982 

Department of Education to see what chance there might be of getting him enrolled into the Moose Jaw 

Technical school to take an electronic course and what financial assistance, if any, was available. I was 

told that, had he been in the labour force for one year, he could get his tuition fee paid. If he was in the 

labour force for three years, he could get his fees paid and receive a living allowance — that‟s providing 

there was space. But because he had not been in the labour force, there is no educational assistance for 

him, there is nothing for him and there was no work for him, Mr. Speaker. This young man told me of 

his problem at home. His father was ill and had to take an early retirement. Except for his older sister 

having part-time employment the father‟s meagre pension was all they had to feed the family of eight, 

six children and two adults. They were behind in their house payments and in taxes. His father lectured 

him daily about getting a job. He broke out into tears, saying “I have tried, honest I have tried every day 

since school ended, I am scared to go home.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is one example of the kind of „an 80,000 job program‟ this Government has offered 

our youth. This is the kind of a future it has planned for the young people of this province. 

 

The people of Canada, I am sure, were shocked and dismayed when the Prime Minister of Canada 

delivered his pre-Christmas present, saying that he is prepared to push Canada‟s unemployment to 6 per 

cent and higher as a means to fight inflation. this is the man who a year and a half ago talked about a 

“Just Society”, an economy of full employment. He said, let me quote: 

 

If inflation continues it will destroy the dollar, destroy our export market, destroy the Canadian 

middle class. 

 

Canada‟s greatest single export commodity has been grain. It is not inflation that has destroyed it. It is 

lack of government policy that has brought our grain export market to a standstill and our farmers down 

to their knees. Mr. Trudeau is concerned about the middle class. Mr. Speaker, what about the working 

class, the ordinary little people, the average wage earner? He is prepared to accept 6 per cent and more 

of them to be unemployed. On Thursday last, Mr. Benson in his Budget said he is prepared to go one per 

cent higher. It is not the middle class who are the victims of unemployment, it is the carpenter, the 

bricklayer, the store clerk, the ordinary labourer. These are the people that I am concerned about, Mr. 

Speaker. The middle class will survive, they always have. Mr. Trudeau and the Liberal Government 

have created inflation through their monetary and fiscal policy by lifting the lid off interest rates. It is 

irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, and, I suggest, economically stupid to fight inflation by a deliberate policy of 

creating unemployment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Now the Federal Government 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

983 

is going to be imposing credit controls. What this will do to Saskatchewan is more business 

bankruptcies, I suggest. Yes, inflation could be fought and controlled by immediate selective price 

controls; establishment of a prices review board with power to act, reduction and control of interest 

rates, profits controls and an income policy and measures for greater control of our own economy. 

Voluntary price restraints are just not going to work. This is why labour has refused to be a party to an 

unpractical and useless plan. 

 

Firstly, Mr. Speaker, we must recognize that too much of our inflation is imported. We are not masters 

of our own house. A great many prices are set in boardrooms outside of Canada over which we have no 

control. Canada must take action and take action now in the resolution of this problem. 

 

Secondly, the Government‟s monetary and fiscal policy is outmoded. It has caused interest rates to 

climb to an unprecedented level. This has caused unprecedented profits to be made by financial 

interests. Bank of Montreal 1969 profits were 89 per cent greater than a year before. Chartered bank 

profits as a whole were up 26 per cent over 1969. Finance insurance and real estate profits were up 47 

per cent over 1968. This is the root of the problem. But did the Premier and his Government make any 

representation on this problem of inflation to the Federal-Provincial Conference? No, Mr. Speaker. What 

about the question of corporate profits? Last year corporate profits went up 20 per cent over 1968. Again 

this Government was silent on this question. It is always talking about wage control and income control, 

but we never hear them discuss talk and advocate profit controls and interest controls. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, if average wages in Saskatchewan were raised to a national average — 

they are presently $12 a week behind — this would inject into Saskatchewan‟s economy some 

$150,000,000 additional purchasing power right here in the Province of Saskatchewan. This would be 

good for business, good for the wage earners, good for the Province of Saskatchewan. This would create 

new jobs. We don‟t see the Government coming out with a program and a policy to ensure that our 

wages in the Province of Saskatchewan will be equal to those of a national average. 

 

We need an income policy for the farmers. We have suggested on this side of the House a $200 million 

cash injection into the hands of our farm people. This would create new jobs. Mr. Speaker, if there are 

other or better means that could be found we certainly would not object. We need a policy to remove 

poverty, put the unemployed to work. We need a meaningful public works plan as outlined in the 

Resolution moved by the Hon. Member for Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) and the recommendations 

that I made to the Government on May 20 last, not a sham as was presented 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

984 

by the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer earlier during this Session. We need a reformed labour 

policy to help eradicate poverty and to create new jobs, yes, removal of the restrictive labour legislation, 

repeal of Bill 2 to strengthen and improve collective bargaining, and thus improve labour-management 

relations, and in this way help to raise the Saskatchewan substandard wages to a national average. 

 

Secondly, we need legislation for a legal workweek of a maximum of 40 hours a week, with some 

restrictions on the overtime work in this period of high unemployment. Hundreds of new jobs would be 

added through the reduction of the present 44 and 48-hour workweek. We need a $2 per hour minimum 

wage. This would add new purchasing power to the people. We need to improve Workmen‟s 

Compensation benefits and raise Workmen‟s Compensation pensions. This would add new purchasing 

power. We need an overall improvement and an overhaul in the labour standards in this province. We 

need to introduce legislation for a sick-pay plan. This too would help inject new purchasing power in the 

Saskatchewan economy. Yes, Mr. Speaker, perhaps what is really needed is a new Government to do 

these things I have suggested of creating new jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to discuss briefly the vocational and technical education facilities, specifically, the 

lack of technical and vocational facilities. The record will show conclusively that there is a desperate 

shortage of technical and vocational school facilities. For a number of years I have asked this question in 

the House: the number of persons who applied for technical and vocational institute courses in 

Saskatchewan and were rejected because of (a) academic standing; (6) space and (c) any other reason. 

Here is the record. 1966 for academic reasons 123 were rejected; space 880; other reasons 5. 1967 

academic 139; space 590; other reasons 20. 1968 academic 34; space 709; other reasons 52. 1969 

academic 293; space 793; other reasons 137. 689 Saskatchewan people were rejected or refused 

admission because of academic reasons, but this Government has no upgrading program of meaningful 

substance. For lack of space, almost 3,000 were turned away. For other reasons, perhaps financial, 214. 

Thousands of young people, wage earners and farmers are knocking on the doors of our technical 

schools, but there is no room. The statistics I have just quoted do not tell the whole story, Mr. Speaker. 

These are figures for which there is record only. How many thousands would have applied, but knowing 

full well that there is no room did not bother applying. How many of the 30,000 workers registered with 

Canada Manpower Centre at the end of January — we know that the figure has risen since then — 

would have applied and would have taken the opportunity for upgrading technical, vocational and 

apprenticeship courses, but knowing that there was no room did not bother? Despite the shortage of 

space this year the Government has not provided a single penny for new technical and vocational school 

construction. Let us look at the record of this Liberal Government on technical and vocational school 

construction programs. In the 1964-65 Budget the Legislature appropriated just about $2 million, only 

$132,000 was 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

985 

spent; 1965-66 $456,000 was appropriated, only $28,000 was spent; 1966-67 $2.7 million appropriated, 

only $1 million spent; 1968-69 $3.5 million appropriated only $3.1 million spent. During those years, 

1964-69, Mr. Speaker, this Legislature appropriated $12.5 million for construction of technical and 

vocational schools, but only $7.5 million was spent. The Government deliberately under spent the 

technical and vocational school program by $5 million. It is for this reason, Mr. Speaker, that these days 

there is not enough space and facilities in the technical schools. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the Government to provide me with information in regard to last 

year‟s expenditures. We appropriated $1.9 million for 1969-70, but to this date I have not received an 

answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since and before I was elected Member of the Legislature in 1964, I talked about the need 

for technical and vocational institutes in the city of Regina. In 1966, the former Minister of Education 

told this Legislature that there was a need for such an educational facility in the city of Regina. He even 

talked about it outside the Legislature. He said that the Government was considering starting the 

construction in three or four years. In other words, construction to start no later than 1970. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, let us take a look at the Estimates. No appropriations are made, yes, there is a figure of 

$175,000 under the heading of Institute of Technology, Regina. But neither the Minister of Education 

nor the Minister of Public Works has tried to explain while they took part in previous debates. This 

probably represents some renovation work to be done on the old Saskatchewan House. It is not an 

institute of technology for the city of Regina. If there was a plan of construction, then there would also 

have been an estimate for reimbursement from Ottawa, but there is none, Mr. Speaker. When the 

Premier or the Provincial Treasurer talk about job-creating construction programs, it would seem to me 

the first to have considered would be construction of technical and vocational school facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — Not only because they are needed, but because there are large sums of money 

available from Ottawa, 75 per cent of money is available for technical and vocational school facilities 

program from Ottawa, but this Government has not proposed any construction program Attorney 

General all this year, no money Attorney General all for technical and vocational school construction. 

Mr. Speaker, I urge this Legislature to give overwhelming support to the Resolution presented by the 

Hon. Member from Moose Jaw South. 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. Heald (Attorney General). 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

986 

RESOLUTION NO. 8 — INDEPENDENT ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION 
 

Mr. J.E. Brockelbank (Saskatoon Mayfair): — Moved, seconded by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North 

West): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government the introduction of legislation 

to establish an independent electoral boundaries commission similar in principle to the ones established 

in Manitoba and Alberta charged with the responsibility of drawing Saskatchewan‟s electoral boundaries 

based primarily on the principle of representation by population. 

 

He said: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this debate on Resolution No. 8 which is now before us 

dealing with the matter of an independent electoral boundaries commission for the Province of 

Saskatchewan, I think I could begin by saying that the record of this Government opposite is untouched 

by an attempt to bring in one major piece of legislation dealing in any way with electoral reform. This is 

very unfortunate for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Since I was elected to this House in 1964, I have kept close track of what has gone on in the area of 

electoral reform, or more accurately, Mr. Speaker, what has not gone on, in the area of electoral reform. 

 

The records show that in 1965 the Members of the Opposition proposed, as shown in the Journals of 

Saskatchewan, page 196, dealing with Bill No. 89, The Legislative Assembly Act amendments that the 

New Democratic party members attempted to delete on second reading and substitute the following 

words, I quote: 

 

In the opinion of this Assembly, the Government should give consideration to the appointment of 

a Royal Commission similar to the Federal Electoral Boundaries Commission for Saskatchewan. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was moved by J.H. Brockelbank, the Member for Kelsey constituency and Mr. 

Nollet, the Member for Cut Knife constituency and was defeated in this Chamber by the Government 

majority. 

 

In 1966, the following year, a resolution was brought forward, Resolution No. 6, and the purpose of that 

resolution, Mr. Speaker, was to formulate legislation or at least get an opinion from this Chamber as to 

the formulation of legislation to disclose the source of political contributions. That is shown on the 

Journals of Saskatchewan on page 101 and page 145. It was moved by myself, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

W.J. Berezowsky, the Member for Cumberland. It was defeated by the Government majority in this 

Chamber. 

 

In 1967 the record shows on page 82 and 97 of the journals of Saskatchewan that a resolution was 

brought forward by myself, 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

987 

seconded by the Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) asking for a committee to investigate 

The Report of the Committee on Election Expenses (1966) and bring in equivalent recommendations for 

the Province of Saskatchewan. Again, Mr. Speaker, that was defeated by the Government majority in 

this House. 

 

In 1968 another worthy resolution was brought forward and the record shows in the Journals, pages 99, 

141, that a resolution was moved by the Member for Riversdale and the Member for Regina Centre 

asking for an Intercessional Committee to study and review The Election Act. At that time, Mr. Speaker, 

that resolution was defeated by the Government majority in this House. 

 

Later, in 1968, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to introduce another resolution which I thought was 

of some importance to the people of Saskatchewan and to the Members of this Chamber that in 

Independent Electoral Boundaries Commission be set up in the Province of Saskatchewan. The matter 

was debated, and the record shows in the Journals, pages 79, 109, 127 and 145 that this resolution, 

introduced by myself and seconded by the Member from Canora, went down to defeat at the hands of 

the Liberal majority Government in Saskatchewan. 

 

In 1969 the Government moved by the Premier and the Provincial Treasurer to name a special 

Intercessional Committee to study The Election Act, Chapter 4, Revised Statues of Saskatchewan 1965, 

and make recommendations. The Members of the Opposition at that time moved to strengthen that 

resolution that the Government was putting forward, with the cooperation of the Government Members, 

that a study of the best practical ways of setting enforceable limits to the expenditures in election 

campaigns be included in the resolution, and that was carried. 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, I again am putting forward a Resolution on a Independent Electoral Boundaries 

Commission in the Province of Saskatchewan. With each passing year, Mr. Speaker, I feel more certain 

that an Independent Electoral Boundaries Commission will be established in Saskatchewan. We on this 

side of the Legislature have had to bear a considerable number of defeats in our quest for real electoral 

reform, as the record clearly shows. 

 

An Hon. Member: — 20 years! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — I have just been here 5 ½ years, Hon. Member. Most provinces have taken 

electoral reform in their stride, Mr. Speaker, and I believe this does put some indirect pressure on the 

more tardy provinces such as the Province of Saskatchewan. I refer of course to the Manitoba Electoral 

Reform changes in 1956. They were introduced, Mr. Speaker, by a Liberal Premier, since then supported 

by a Conservative Government. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Where is he now? 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

988 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Where are the Liberals in Manitoba now, would be a better question, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Province of Quebec implemented reform which could be truly referred to as far-reaching in 1963. 

That, Mr. Speaker, was again done by a Liberal Premier. In the mid-1960s a Federal Liberal 

Government redistributed the Federal constituencies on the basis of the recommendations of the 

Independent Electoral Boundaries Commission of the Federal G. Most recently in 1969, the Province of 

Alberta passed an Electoral Boundaries Commission Act. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the Members 

opposite are surrounded. The Government, Mr. Speaker, should be commended for establishing an 

Intercessional Committee to study The Elections Act and The Controverted Election Act within one year 

after it had declined our suggestion for the same study. However, I am unable to agree that the 

formulation of legislation on the basis of this Special Legislative Committee‟s recommendations can be 

classified as far-reaching changes in electoral reform, as was done by the Premier in the first major 

address in the Legislature. That was a gross exaggeration. 

 

In the event that this Government is not convinced of the need for more significant changes than it has 

presented at this Session, let me remind them of some editorial comments by newspapers which present 

a Liberal view of the day-to-day events in Saskatoon City. In The Star Phoenix lead editorial of April 9, 

1966, entitled, “Equity of partnership,” the editor, Mr. Denis W. Adkins states in part: 

 

It is time that the Saskatchewan Government follow the Manitoba Government‟s course in taking 

the structure of constituencies out of partisan hands. Saskatchewan‟s ridings should be mapped by 

an independent commission similar in personnel to the Federal Commission in Saskatchewan of 

Mr. Justice R.L. Brownridge and Professor Norman Ward of the University of Political Science 

Department here. 

 

There would be no political considerations here, but there would be objective assessment of the 

best interests of the voters of the province. 

 

Later in March 26, 1968, The Star Phoenix printed another lead editorial by a different editor, Mr. Max 

MacDonald, entitled “Controlling Democracy” and it states in its concluding paragraph, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Since it is in the voters‟ interest to have an independent commission many of them would react 

favourably to adoption of a program such as the Opposition now advocates. Conversely they 

should show their displeasure with any government which stubbornly continues the inequitable 

practices of the past. 

 

I might, Mr. Speaker, Attorney General this time take a brief moment 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

989 

aside from my notes and compliment the Saskatoon Star Phoenix. I don‟t very often get a chance to 

compliment the editorial page of the Star Phoenix, but I think that at this time the Star Phoenix should be 

recognized for a public service that it is trying to conduct on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, by 

putting forward its voice in favour of an independent electoral boundaries commission for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I am glad to see some recent support, Mr. Speaker, that has come from The Leader Post editorial page. 

On March 5, 1970, The Leader Post in an editorial, entitled “Streamlining election procedures”, has this 

to say in its second last paragraph: 

 

A useful suggestion from the minority report is the recommendation that redistribution of seats be 

removed from politics. Governments should recognize the right of electors to be fairly represented 

in the Legislature, a right which an independent and permanent electoral boundaries commission is 

more likely to respect than a partisan legislative body. 

 

Finally, a compelling practical reason should have indicated to you — and I am sure other Members 

before now — that the continued exodus from rural areas to urban areas has created an undesirable 

imbalance in our legislative representation. 

 

In 1968 when I presented a resolution similar to this Resolution, I pointed out that there were wide 

population differences between one rural constituency and another rural constituency; between one 

urban constituency and another urban constituency; and between one city constituency and another city 

constituency. The figures that I used to support my argument, Mr. Speaker, are the figures that were 

drawn from the office of the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

I have heard the Premier and the Treasurer say publicly on more than one occasion that there would be a 

redistribution before the next election. I call upon them now to lead the move for real, far-reaching 

changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brockelbank: — The Commissions‟ personnel in Manitoba and Alberta are each independent but 

their composition varies somewhat. The composition is of small concern to me. The acceptance of the 

basic underlying feature of independence is what is important. The governing factors for each 

commission vary in some aspects and coincide in other terms. This is of minor concern as well as the 

difference in personnel. 

 

Each year there is a more substantial body of public opinion in favour of an independent electoral 

boundaries commission. since it has been two years since I have tested the temper of this law-making 

body, I suggest now and propose this Resolution. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

990 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second this motion which was 

placed on the Order Paper by the Hon. Member from Saskatoon Mayfair (Mr. Brockelbank). 

 

I am sure that any party in Opposition in this province feels that they are at a disadvantage or have been 

at a disadvantage, regardless of whether it happens to be Conservatives, New Democrats or Liberals, 

because of our failure as a Legislature to establish electoral boundaries by an independent commission. 

there will likely be re-establishment . . . 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — You had 20 years! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The worst set of boundaries that were ever drawn were the ones that you drew for 

Moose Jaw Lake Centre, Mr. Premier. 

 

There will likely be re-establishment of electoral boundaries this year. Some of the work that has been 

done on boundaries in the past must make it evident to the voters that there has been an attempt by the 

party in power to maintain its position by adjustment of boundaries. Evidence will show that in certain 

instances there has been no attempt to: (1) convenience the voters; (2) establish the principle of each 

vote for each person being of equal value; (3) justify or explain the size or shape of constituencies or the 

reason for boundary adjustments. 

 

Because of these facts, the only conclusion the public can draw is that each time a change of boundaries 

takes place, it precedes an election, and is an attempt by the party in power to maintain or continue its 

term of office. 

 

Let me quote one or two of the more glaring and unbelievable situations, one of which I am sure had 

something to do with bringing about changes in the Federal Act. 1. For years the city of Regina was 

encircled by a riding that was called Moose Jaw Lake Centre federally. 2. The six Provincial ridings in 

Regina at the present time, and particularly Regina North West, Regina North East, Regina South East 

and Regina Centre have the most illogical, disconnected, unexplainable set of boundaries one could 

possibly imagine. 3. A most frivolous change of boundaries took place when, in three instances, people 

who have been nominated early had their Provincial constituency boundaries deliberately redrawn so 

that none of the three resided in the constituency in which he was running, as a result of the boundary 

changes. The absurd drawing of boundaries to carefully eliminate their residence was mischievous and 

without regard the for the convenience of voters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every party has in the past in this province, while in government, (I make no exception) 

practised some of this boundary fixing, but not without the public understanding completely the 

intention of their actions. This is most unsatisfactory. Someone mentioned earlier the change in the 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

991 

boundaries federally. Regina City finally received a set of Federal boundaries for the two constituencies 

that make some sense, after many long years of living with an awkward, unexplainable situation. This 

came about as a result of an independent commission. The Independent Commission‟s action is 

appreciated by Regina residents because of the convenience of association with their representative and 

the simple, easily understood, boundary with Albert Street as a dividing line. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat, this came about only as a result of a Federal independent commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — One has only to look at the rapid and continuing drop in the population of rural 

constituencies, while the cities are increasing in size, to realize that a city Member, in many instances, 

represents twice as many voters as in a rural riding in Saskatchewan. There is no longer an argument 

that it is difficult to meet rural voters because transportation facilities are relatively poor. In the past, 

when trains and horse-drawn vehicles were the mode of transportation, there may have been some 

justification for this argument, but today in the age of motor vehicles, the helicopter and the airplane this 

argument is not valid as it once was. 

 

Let me sum up in advocating for a constant review by a permanent boundaries commission. In the 

present age of rapidly changing location for many residents, with 10 to 15 per cent of the population 

moving each year, particularly in Saskatchewan, from rural to urban, in many instances boundaries of 

electoral districts have neglected to register such population movement, with the result that 

representation is not closely related to population. 

 

A Legislature that presumably represents the population and speaks in its name cannot, in good faith, 

allow a situation to develop where it may be accused of electoral discrimination. A Legislature can be 

accused of paying only lip service to democracy if it fails to redistribute electoral boundaries in 

accordance with population changes. It is also understandable that a Legislative Assembly may not be 

acutely motivated to change electoral district boundaries, and where the Legislative Assembly itself 

presides over such changes, charges that changes are unfair or self-interested may be harmful to the 

concept of representative democracy, even if the charges are not true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is probably the soundest and main reason for an independent, permanent electoral commission, 

appointed by the whole Assembly, its recommendations to be reported back to the Assembly. I would 

also suggest that such a commission should be redirected after each census, every 10 years, in 

accordance with a set of guidelines which would be established by the Legislature and used as a 

reference by the commission. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

992 

Mr. Speaker, I am convinced that through the establishment of such a commission the public would be 

assured that votes in an election would be of approximately equal value. The present situation where 

votes in one constituency are electorally worth only ¼ or 1/3 as much as votes in another constituency 

makes a mockery of the theory of representative democracy meaning that everyone has an equal vote. 

 

Those who prefer to continue the present inequality are not upholders of representative democracy but, 

perhaps, its enemy, for they give the enemies of representative democracy their most convincing 

argument, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to stand up 

and support the motion and in doing so I hope that the Resolution will be broadly debated today or, if it 

is postponed to some other time, I hope that the situation will not be ignored, because the problem is 

more serious than some of us may want to think. 

 

If this Resolution is fully debated and the Members give sincere expressions of their views and of what 

they know and what they have seen, then I am sure, Mr. Speaker, we will be able to arrive at some kind 

of consensus and there will be no difficulty in supporting this motion, I am sure. 

 

There are a few principles involved in this motion, as has been pointed out by the mover and the 

seconder, and I want to reiterate them. I think that first of all the constituencies in the Province of 

Saskatchewan should be so constituted as to make it most efficient for the Member to represent the 

people in that particular area. This is not the case now. I could speak of my own constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. I know the Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) and the Member for Nipawin (Mr. 

Radloff) are quite aware of what I am talking about. As a matter of fact all Members in this House 

should be aware because I have brought this to the attention of the House on previous occasions. 

 

Take, for example, the polls on the island which is called Cumberland House Island. In order for me, as 

the Member for that particular constituency, Prince Albert East-Cumberland, to serve those people I 

have to drive through the constituency of Nipawin some 150 miles. Yet the people in that particular area 

could very well be served by the Member for Nipawin or the Member for Kelsey, but certainly the 

Member for Nipawin. There is a road through the constituency to Cumberland House and yet, I have to 

go from Prince Albert on to Nipawin and on for 150 miles to reach that one poll to discuss matters with 

those people. I think that if we believe in democracy certainly something 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

993 

should be done about it. If you had a commission to decide on the boundary something would have been 

done about it. But because it is in the hands of a political party, and I am not exempting either party, the 

fact is that the constituency is the way it is today. 

 

I could take another constituency like Athabasca. If the Member who services Athabasca (Mr. Guy) 

wants to reach the people of Pelican Narrows he has to drive through my constituency for some 150 to 

200 miles to get to Pelican Narrows or Sandy Bay or to other points. I don‟t think that it is fair to the 

Member to ask him to do that. I don‟t think it is fair that he must take an airplane and fly all across my 

constituency to get to a certain corner in the Province of Saskatchewan to serve the people of that area. 

As a matter of fact the Member for Athabasca knows that on many occasions in the past, I have gone 

down to Pelican Narrows and discussed the people‟s problems there and brought their problems into this 

Legislature. I am sure that he appreciates what I have done. It has not been political but has been a 

sincere effort to try and serve those people. I hope that he will support the Resolution to see that some 

justice is done to improve constituency boundaries. 

 

Mr. Guy: — Did you build a road in there, Bill? 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Yes, we did build a road in there. I am glad you finished it. I conceded, as a matter 

of fact, the road that was being built to Cumberland, I conceded to wait a little while in order to get a 

road into Pelican started. You finished it and all thanks to you. You are the Government so you should 

have finished it. You should have built a road to Deschambault as well. The Hon. Member who sits 

beside you was going to do it, I was sure. As a matter of fact I said he is quite a nice gentlemen but I am 

very disappointed in him and he didn‟t build that road and he didn‟t build dozens of other essential 

roads. I am sure that you wouldn‟t build it because you haven‟t been up there! You haven‟t talked to the 

people and you don‟t know the matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member (Mr. Guy) would be better 

to keep his mouth shut because he hasn‟t mentioned a single matter concerning the people of the 

constituency during the debate so far. And I hope that he will keep his mouth shut from now on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — The other point is that we talk about representation by population. I don‟t agree 

that you can do so entirely. in this Province of Saskatchewan, we have a situation where you cannot plan 

for so many people for each Member. There are situations such as in the North where you have a 

scattered population and in such cases one would have to consider area as well as population. I could 

mention my constituency set up by a decision of 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

994 

this Government. Really I have two constituencies and so I have a population of such an area. I think 

that it is very unfair. I could point a finger at the Government for doing this kind of planning, because I 

represent an urban constituency of Prince Albert East, which could have one Member and I represent a 

northern area which is Cumberland, which should have a Member. But the Government did not forget 

when it called by constituency Prince Albert East, and gave it a hyphen and then Cumberland, thus 

indicating that I do represent two constituencies. However, I could look after the constituency of 

Athabasca as well and I may decide to run there next time and still have an easy job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Leaving all arguments aside and in all sincerity, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, why 

should political parties decide on boundaries? Why should they gerrymander all over the country, even 

if something has not been done for 20 years as the Premier charged? Certainly we would have done it 

five or six years ago had we been the Government and we are going in that direction and will see justice 

done. 

 

I plead with all Members in this House. Let‟s be sincere and honest with the people of Saskatchewan. 

Let‟s put this whole matter into the hands of a commission and let the commission use its good 

judgment to plan constituencies in the Province of Saskatchewan in such a way that we may have the 

best kind of set-up that is possible for human beings to devise. 

 

I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Heggie (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened to three speakers in the Opposition speak for 

this Resolution which they introduced and they make it sound very simple when in fact it is a very 

complex subject. As a matter of fact in the session of 1968 I gave an address to this House on the matter 

of an independent boundary commission, using as the basis the Federal Commission which had been set 

up to divide Saskatchewan into the required number of Federal seats which at that time had to be 

reduced from, I think, 17 to 13. 

 

I will have more to say on this subject again and I intend to bring before this House some of the material 

which I gave in that former address and make some comments on the remarks given by the Members 

opposite today. 

 

With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate on this subject. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

995 

RESOLUTION NO. 10 — DEBT LEGISLATION 
 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Moved seconded by Mr. R. Romanow 

(Saskatoon-Riversdale): 

 

That this Assembly, concerned with the economic conditions which prevent sincere debtors from 

meeting their obligations, recommends to the consideration of the Government of Saskatchewan 

the following immediate action: 

 

   (a) organize an information program to advise farmers of their legal rights and the avenue 

available to them when threatened with seizure or foreclosure; 

 

   b) update legislation administered by the Provincial Mediation Board, and expand the staff to 

provide maximum assistance to hard-pressed debtors requiring extensions on mortgage payments, 

and other debts. 

 

(d) introduce provincial moratorium legislation based on the provincial jurisdiction to enact laws 

with respect to property and civil rights. 

 

(e) guarantee continuation of electrical power services to farmers unable to pay power bills 

because of their inability to sell stored grain; 

 

(f) postpone payments on crown lease rental payments and on payments for land purchased from 

the crown; 

 

   (g) prevent seizure of farmers‟ production machinery; 

 

   (h) make immediate and strong representations to the Federal Government to: 

 

(1) forestall business bankruptcies in rural communities; 
 

(2) update and rewrite the Farmers Creditors Arrangements Act; 
 

(3) provide protection for Saskatchewan people who have loans under the National Housing 
Act, Veterans Land Act, Farm Improvement Loan Act, and Farm Credit Corporation. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Resolution is timely, necessary and must be considered as urgent. Our 

discussion of and support for the contents will be watched, I am positive, by many worried citizens of 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do not misjudge or misunderstand the introduction of this subject — debt legislation. It is 

not an attempt to help evade commitments. Probably no one in this Legislature has a better working 

knowledge of the sincerity, integrity and the honesty of Saskatchewan debtors than this Member. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

996 

Since 1941, in many ways, but particularly in actual debt and tax negotiations, which took us into every 

part of this province, into farm kitchens, into every RM office, into thousands of hones, rural and urban, 

this experience has led me to conclude that obligations are signed for seriously, met if humanly possible, 

and honourably lived up to. 

 

To modernize farming methods, to meet the need for more land, to purchase homes or necessities of life, 

contracts were made. The leaders of our country assured our farmers that we were moving. Jobs would 

be available. “Grow wheat and we will sell it,” they said. Debts in the farm area increased automatically. 

From 1959 to 1968, according to a survey in the Canadian Farm Economics, Volume 4, No. 5, 

December 1969, covering the area of Elbow, Loreburn, Strongfield and Hawarden, total farm 

investment on medium-sized farms from $52,000 to $114,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the study shows that returns were not as inflationary as the investment. This has resulted in 

heavy indebtedness. While 50 per cent of farmers were in debt in 1959, the figure has now risen to 68.2 

per cent for the large farm group. Both medium-term and long-term debts have increased during the 

period. Long-term debts for large farms increased from an average of $3,814 per farm in 1959 to 

$19,343 in 1969. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these tables are complete and many Members will have studied them in detail I am sure. 

Because of lack of income, it is a story of more debt. What has happened in the farm sector is also 

reflected in the retail field. Sales have dropped and accounts receivable have gone up. Without funds to 

buy new inventory, with the wholesaler pressing for payment, the retail outlet, whether farm machinery 

or groceries or whatever it may be, is facing a discontinuance of operations. This is a difficult choice: 

extend credit to an honest customer with 20,000 bushels of grain, or do not extend credit to him. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the farmer is in a very bad debt position. First, a dilemma created, not 

because he cannot produce, but because he cannot market. Second, although large farms have been the 

trend, they are in even worse debt position, although it is generally accepted that they are more efficient. 

Third, grain deliveries for the current crop year are lower, and this will mean that the farmers‟ debt 

situation will become more acute before we meet again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Federal and Provincial agencies or Government guaranteed loans account for a huge 

portion of this debt, but again a review in the Canadian Farm Economics, Volume 3, No. 4, October 

1968, an article by R.S. Rust shows that more recently the trend has been to trust companies, finance 

companies and credit unions. The situation has, therefore, been aggravated because these groups have 

been charging a higher interest rate. Latest figures seem difficult to obtain but the overall farm debt in 

Canada rose from $1,558 million in 1960 to $3,859 million in 1967. Interest on this debt in 1968 

amounted to approximately 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

997 

$250 million. Repayment of this debt in the Prairie area, but more particularly in Saskatchewan, is a 

very grave problem. Pup to date, repayment has been relatively good, but what of the foreseeable future? 

 

1. Grain quotas are low. 

2. The price for grain is lower. 

3. There is no final payment except for Durum wheat this year. 

4. High interest rates forbid borrowing. 

 

In additional farmers are hesitant about the long-term advantages of diversification. Clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, first the farmer, second, the urban employee, and third, the city businessman are at the mercy 

of an economic hurricane. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Governments, Federal and Provincial, should be prepared to legislate to protect their 

equities. Because of the general economic situation which confronts us, this Resolution has been drafter 

and placed on the Order Paper. If you follow it, Mr. Speaker, I will attempt to explain the urgency for 

each section as it appears on the Order Paper. (a) Organize an information program to advise farmers of 

their legal rights and the avenues available to them when threatened with seizure or foreclosure. This 

section calls for organization of an information program to advise farmers of their rights. This program 

might be handled through the Provincial Mediation Board or a branch of the Attorney General‟s 

Department. It could provide, in general terms, the type of legal procedures that could protect farmers 

under, for instance, The Limitation of Civil Rights Act; The Land Contract Actions Act; The Farm 

Improvement Loan Act and there is other legislation as well in the area of tax enforcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if a handbook was published setting out the right of hearing, the type of notices required, 

and general information, it could introduce the farmer to an agency where he might seek more complete 

advice. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, this would be greatly appreciated at this particular time. My own 

experience in the last several months has been that farmers, who 15 years ago ran into financial trouble, 

are now writing notes or asking for information, emphasizing the need for placing this general 

information in a handbook, as was the case in the early 1940s — incidentally that handbook is still 

available and it was an excellent reference guide. There are still some around that people could use as a 

guide to draft a similar sort of hand guide or reference manual for the farm population. It would be 

helpful to every Member of this House, of great assistance to the farm population and, in my estimation, 

in the long run would bring about understanding between debtors and creditors. (b) Provide for legal 

service for urban and rural people confronted with financial problems. Mr. Speaker, under (b) the need 

for legal service and advice is recognized. This was first recognized under the old Debt Adjustment 

Board which was Provincial 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

998 

and secondly, under The Farmers‟ Creditors Arrangement Act which was Federal legislation. 

 

During six of the ten years I spent with The Provincial Mediation Board a lawyer was on hand to 

provide, in capsule form, general and in some cases, specific advice to the citizens of Saskatchewan who 

were in debt trouble. As affluence became more evident, the need for his legal services became less 

necessary and this type of advice and assistance was discontinued. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we are 

now at a state where the Attorney General (Mr. Heald), the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane), 

perhaps the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) in consultation should consider the hiring of 

someone with legal knowledge of debt consolidation, farm economics and with legal training to work 

preferably with the Provincial Mediation Board office. © Update legislation administered by the 

Provincial Mediation Board and expand the staff to provide maximum assistance to hard-pressed debtors 

requiring extensions on mortgage payments and other debts. The Board administers a number of Acts: 

the Act which establishes the Board itself, the notices it receives; The Land Contract Actions Act; tax 

enforcement and consolidation; and The Farm Security Act and others. 

 

When second reading came up on The Farm Security Act, I recall drawing to the Attorney General‟s 

attention the fact that the portion being amended applied only to agreements written prior to April 30, 

1937. Now we have a whole new set of circumstances. We haven‟t a crop failure; we have in effect a 

market failure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of the legislation that the Provincial Mediation Board administers that was written or 

is presently administered is completely out of step with the present situation, because that legislation 

was written for crop failure. Even the definition of crop failure, it was in the year 1944, or prior to that 

time, is completely inadequate at the present time. There is an urgent need for new legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. Certainly this is not politically controversial. We should be able to update the debt legislation 

in every way through a committee in discussion with farm groups, consumer groups, rural 

municipalities. 

 

(d) Introduce Provincial moratorium legislation based on the Provincial jurisdiction to enact laws with 

respect to property and civil rights. Under this section there is some argument about whether or not 

Provincial moratorium legislation can be written that would be effective. At the time the last moratorium 

legislation was tossed out, as I interpret it, the ultimate decision of the Supreme Court was that the 

Province had no power to compel a creditor to accept a reduction on his debts, nor to achieve this 

objective by denying the creditor access to the courts to enforce payment of his debts. There was also 

the matter of legal infringement on the banking area because of interest rates and debt reduction. The 

Court of Appeal, Saskatchewan, in 1954 by a majority decision upheld the constitutional 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

999 

validity of The Moratorium Act (Saskatchewan, 1943), but this decision was reversed by the Supreme 

Court of Canada in 1956. Both courts, however, agreed that under certain circumstances the Province 

might enact moratorium legislation. The last Mr. Justice Rand in his judgment indicated that it would — 

and I am quoting in part from the judgment — I think this may be unfair, but at least it gives an 

indication of what he was thinking: 

 

Depend on the facts, circumstances and means adopted determining the true character of the 

moratorium. 

 

The Privy Council also felt that according to the Abitibi Power Case (1943), the Province might limit 

moratorium legislation to a special class or suitor, or one particular class of action or suitor. It seems 

obvious to me that, without reducing debt or interfering with the interest rate, but because of the civil 

rights and property jurisdiction of the Province, one might write legislation that would stay certain 

proceedings or freeze as it were in action for a period of time, if say, the Provincial Mediation Board felt 

such notice to refrain or stay was justified. Faced with a very real situation, like the one just to figure out 

legal ways and means to prevent a foolish or hasty creditor from putting a farmer out of business when 

the farmer has no way of marketing his goods. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — If the legislation were written and ready it would not only ease the worries of farm and 

urban people, but it would act as a deterrent to the impatient and unreasonable creditor who, without 

objectivity, attempts to collapse the farm operations by hasty or unjust action. 

 

Part (e) of the Resolution calls for a guarantee of continuation of electrical power services to farmers 

unable to pay power bills because of their inability to sell stored grain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, many farmers with as high as 20,000 bushels of grain stored have found 

in the past and will in the future find it difficult to pay electrical bills for services for electric power. 

Since the Saskatchewan Power Corporation holds as security for the bill a claim as good as a claim for 

taxes, and since the reason the bill is not paid is because the grain cannot be sold; and, in view of the fact 

that Saskatchewan Power Corporation enjoyed this year a $10 million profit, we believe it should 

announce a policy guaranteeing the continuation of electrical power services to farmers, who, in many 

instances, may be without power. Some of the diversification advocated so often will not be possible 

without electrical services; diversification to raise broilers, mix feed for hogs and 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

1000 

cattle, light buildings occupied by laying hens and so forth. Mr. Speaker, to remove electrical services 

from the farm in these circumstances could be tantamount to putting the farmer out of business. 

 

(f) Postpone payments on Crown lease rental payments and on payments for land purchased from the 

Crown. This section is self-explanatory. I am sure that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

could give the House particulars regarding payments in arrears for lease rentals and for land purchased 

from the Crown. An announced policy to all lessees and all purchasers of Crown lands would be most 

desirable, most reasonable and most practical. 

 

(g) Prevent seizures of farmers‟ production machinery. Mr. Speaker, if a farmer‟s productive machinery 

is taken from him — in many instances the legislation is Federal, legislation over which we have little or 

no control — then the farmer‟s means of earning an income no longer exists. One of the great problems 

at the moment, of The Farm Improvement Loans Act, although it has been a great help because of the 

lower rate of interest and the long-term payments, is that the farmer is unable to sell his grain to meet the 

legal payments. He was forced to resort to purchase farm machinery through this loan plan. Loans in this 

category run to $250 million. A farmer enlarged his operations each time he was asked to grow all the 

grain that he could grow because it could be sold. He put more money into big machinery each time 

through The Farm Improvements Loan Act. The situation now, Mr. Speaker, is that the banks are 

obliged to enforce the security which they took with respect to each loan. Even after the machinery is 

sold or put on the market, if in some instances it cannot be sold, it is only after every effort has been 

exhausted by the banks that they call on the Government for the guarantee. This puts the onus to enforce 

payment on the banks because failure to do so may deprive them of the right to obtain the Government 

guarantee later on. There is no legislation in existence that I can think of an, Mr. Speaker, - I stand to be 

corrected — that would prevent any bank, under The Farm improvement Loan Act, that has a mortgage 

with a farmer on his cattle or machinery, from moving against the security. Mr. Speaker, machinery is 

the key to the farmer‟s production. Without it, he is helpless. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — We must seek ways and means of guaranteeing the continued use of his production 

machinery, particularly where Federal legislation is involved. I was pleased to hear that some changes 

would be made at this Session in The Limitation of Civil Rights Act, regarding notices, and I commend 

the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) for it, but there is such a large area in which Farm Improvement Loans 

Act is the key administrative vehicle that I urge that this area get immediate and careful attention. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

1001 

Mr. Speaker, at the present time under The Orderly Payment of Debts Act we can prevent action up to 

$1,000 under the Bankruptcy Act. The Attorney General spoke of increasing it to $2,500.00. I think this 

is commendable. Not only should it be increased but the whole unbelievable morass of red tape should 

be cut to a minimum. In addition, the businesses in the small communities of our province who are 

carrying huge accounts receivable, who are unable to obtain credit from wholesalers, who are in a state 

of hysteria and close to collapse should be protected through this legislation or similar legislation, or our 

rural communities will disappear. I urge the Government opposite to enter into negotiations with the 

Federal Government, looking at the prospect and possibility of developing procedures that will allow 

payment on a long-term basis when a small business in a rural community is faced with a bankruptcy 

action. 

 

The Farmers‟ Creditors Arrangement Act is still on the Statue Books. I recall, Mr. Speaker, referring 

two or three farmers to the Official Receiver in the early 1950s, but even at that time it was limited in its 

application. As originally written it applied only to a farmer who was unable to meet debts incurred prior 

to — I believe the date was May 1, 1935. The Act when it was written was good legislation, it was a 

Godsend that removed fear and developed understanding; it meant encouragement and hope for farmers 

of that day. I recall talking to many of those who had been referred to the Official Receiver. They were 

honest people who made the commitment and met the payments. It kept thousands of people farming 

their land when they would have been on relief or assistance. But above all it raised them up and put 

them back in society. The Act is still good today; it should be examined; it should be brought up-to-date. 

I would certainly urge that it should apply to debts contracted not before 1935, but a similar piece of 

legislation should refer to debts contracted before, say, 1968. Through their good offices, the leaders of 

the Government opposite should make every attempt to update The Farmers‟ Creditors Arrangement Act 

or similar legislation, and re-write it so that it applies to the situation that exists in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have made reference to two parts of section (h) of the Resolution which called for 

forestalling business bankruptcies and updating The Farmers‟ Creditors Arrangement Act. I would like 

to turn now to part three which reads as follows: 

 

Provide protection for Saskatchewan people who have loans under The National Housing Act, 

Veterans Land Act, Farm Improvement Loan Act and Farm Credit Corporation. 

 

Under part three of this section of the Resolution we are asking that the Provincial Government, in 

consultation with the Federal Government, provide protection for Saskatchewan people, or attempt to 

persuade the Federal Government to provide protection for Saskatchewan people, who have loans under 

The National Housing Act, Veterans‟ Land Act, Farm Improvement Loan act and Farm Credit 

Corporation. 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

1002 

Mr. Speaker, even now in my constituency there are people who are unable to make NHA payments. 

They are trying to sell their homes for their equity and they are planning to move. Their equity has 

shrunk. It is a case of whether there will be a foreclosure or a fire sale .I question the advisability of the 

NHA people taking action to realize on their security because the security as the situation worsens 

becomes less valuable. These circumstances also exist regarding The Veterans‟ Land Act. I have already 

outlined the set of circumstances farmers find themselves in who have Farm Improvement Loans. I think 

it is an unsatisfactory situation. The whole area has to be re-examined in the light of present conditions. 

Since there is an ultimate guarantee for a Farm Improvement Loan from the Federal Government, the 

banks could be given special instructions. The Government of Saskatchewan should lend its good 

offices to see that the instructions are such that they will leave production equipment in the hands of 

farmers. 

 

Let me turn for a moment to the Farm Credit Corporation. A great portion of mortgage money in 

Saskatchewan is loaned through this Federal agency. Farmers, urged by the leaders of the country to 

cultivate as much land as possible and grow as much wheat as possible because it would be saleable at a 

good price, mortgaged heavily with the Farm Credit Corporation. Statements may have been made by 

the Federal Government because it believed them, because information suggested that the statements at 

that time were correct. But the net result is that the price of land was driven up; loans were made at 75 

per cent of the real value which was an inflated value of the land. Farmers competed with one another — 

in many instances to obtain an extra quarter section. The Farm Credit Corporation took security not only 

on the land purchased but on all the land the farmer owned. The problem the farmer has today is not 

only making the principal payment, the problem he has is paying the interest on the mortgage he has 

contracted for land he purchased at an inflated price. Many of these loans were taken at a low rate of 

interest, but instances have come to my attention where the Farm Credit Corporation has approached the 

mortgagee, who is in arrears in regard to principal, interest and taxes, and the Corporation has urged him 

to sign a new contract at a higher rate of interest, for instance, at 8 ¾ per cent when the original 

mortgage was made at 5 per cent. I think we can ask the pertinent question: how is it going to help the 

farmers to get out an economic deluge and financial chaos by raising the interest on a loan that is already 

in arrears? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be people at both Federal and Provincial levels who will suggest the action 

outlined in this Resolution, which urges immediate steps by the Provincial Government in conjunction 

with the Federal Government, is pushing the panic button. Mr. Speaker, let me tell you from my own 

experience that debtors are proud people and Saskatchewan debtors are unbelievably proud; they will 

not admit their debt problem before a judge until they are face to face with eviction, foreclosure, 

cancellation or seizure. Many times in my 



 

March 17, 1970 

 

 

1003 

Those indebt and tax trouble would not appeal until they were in desperate circumstances. Their reasons: 

first, they were too proud to do so; and second, they didn‟t know how to go about it; and third, no one 

had advised them anywhere along the line. True, there are court procedures, Mr. Speaker, but the 

average debtor, whether for consolidation or foreclosure, is afraid of an appearance in court and the cost 

of a lawyer is just one more expense at that particular time which he cannot afford. You may say that my 

experience has coloured my reasoning. Mr. Speaker, I hope that it has sharpened my judgement in this 

area. You may say that this approach will deprive us of further funds. I say to you that the wise creditors 

negotiated sincerely and eventually all the debts owing to them were paid in full. The rapacious, 

rambunctious, impatient creditors on the other hand lost their shirts. 

 

Let me emphasize in closing that this type of legislation is not written, never was written, and its 

updating is not recommended for those who would evade their responsibilities or try to escape from a 

contract. New legislation will be written and worked out to postpone payment, payment by hones and 

sincere debtors who are in trouble because of market failure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare). 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o‟clock p.m. 


