



















































Hansard: March 06, 1970


593 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

15th Day 

 

Friday, March 6, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — I wish to introduce to all Members of the Legislature the following groups of 

students seated in the galleries; 68 students from the Howard Coad school from the constituency of 

Saskatoon Mayfair, represented by its Member, Mr. Brockelbank, under the direction of their teachers, 

Miss Dyck and Mr. Kackowski; 20 students from the. Frontier school in the constituency of Shaunavon, 

represented by Mr. Larochelle; 30 students from the Brock school in the constituency of Elrose, 

represented by Mr. Leith, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Loewen; 50 students from Coronation 

Park, in the constituency of Regina North West, represented by their Member Mr. Whelan, under the 

direction of their school teacher, Mr. Reiley; 20 students from the R.J. Davidson school, from Regina 

North West, represented by their Member, Mr. Whelan, again, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. 

Erb; 60 students from Saskatchewan House, adult education class, in the constituency of Regina North 

West, again represented by the Member from Regina North West, Mr. Whelan, under the direction of 

their teacher, Mr. Wirth; 25 students from Cabri school, in the constituency of Swift Current, 

represented by their Member, Mr. Wood; and 40 members of a ladies‟ group in the constituency of 

Regina South West. 

 

I am sure all Members wish to join with me in extending to each and every one of these students a very 

sincere and warm welcome to the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE LEADER 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — While I am on my feet making these introductions I would draw to your attention a 

distinguished visitor in the Speaker‟s gallery in the person of the newly elected Leader of the 

Progressive Conservative Party of. the Province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Nasserdon. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

594 

of Mr. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair and the proposed 

amendment thereto by Mr. Blakeney. 

 

HON. J.C. McISAAC: (Minister of Education) — Mr. Speaker, in taking in this Debate the subject of 

Education, I think there is one thing that could well be pointed out at this time. In the past decade we 

have seen tremendous growth in all areas of education at the school level and at the university level, the 

adult education field, to mention only a few. The entire enterprise has been expanded in the last ten 

years at a rate never before seen in our history. In fact the entire organizational structure that‟s required 

to manage education in itself has grown tremendously in recent years. The point that we sometimes tend 

to forget, I think, that the enterprise doesn‟t exist for trustees or for their organizations, or for teachers or 

their various organizations, or for government civil servants, but for the students and the pupils 

themselves. I need not recite here, Mr. Speaker, today the many changes in recent years, curriculum 

reorganization, the changes in programs in special education, vocational training, technical training, both 

at the school level and at the post-school level and many, many more changes that have been coming 

thick and fast, not fast enough to suit some people but too fast on the other hand for many. 

 

Now prior to adjourning debate yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I was discussing the Lloydminster School Unit. 

I had indicated the upward trend of school grants in that particular unit and at the same time pointing out 

the pattern of lower student-teacher ratios in each year over the past few years. I mentioned that a look at 

the situation in other units in the province in general demonstrates very much the same kind of pattern. 

Now how does this relate to budget reviews, grant policies and so on? Let‟s examine these points as they 

relate to rapidly rising costs that have characterized education both here and elsewhere. Let‟s look at 

these rising costs because they are certainly very real. In Saskatchewan in 1940, which is only 30 years 

ago, the average per pupil cost, grades 1 to 12 was $59; in 1950, the figure was $145; in 1960, the figure 

was $320; in 1967, $501; and preliminary estimates for the current year, 1970 would indicate a figure of 

around $640. So we can see there has been over a ten-fold increase in the per pupil cost per year in just 

about 30 years. Putting it in another way, Mr. Speaker, this current year 1970, the expenditure for 

instruction alone, will be over $90 million or very close if you will, Sir, to $100 per capita for each and 

every man, woman and child in this province. Stated in different terms, the increase in the last three 

years represents over $3,000 for each and every classroom in the province. Total expenditures on all 

levels of education, by all agencies, will be well in excess of $200 per capita this year, perhaps even 

closer to $300. 

 

We talked about the cost-price squeeze affecting our 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

595 

farmers and our other taxpayers but certainly here is an example of a cost-price spread that is seriously 

affecting farmers and other taxpayers as well. Obviously there have to be reasons for the tremendous 

increase, and there are many good and valid reasons to account for some of these increases — more 

children in schools, remaining longer in schools, particularly at the high-school and the post-high school 

level. We have more programs, more physical plants, more equipment, more teachers, more 

better-trained teachers, and above all, of course, that factor of inflation itself which has driven prices up 

in every other category of public service as well. 

 

Now, surely, Mr. Speaker, in the light of these increases in cost, as a Government we are neglecting our 

responsibilities if we fail to take all possible steps to ensure that the present level of spending in 

education is all being well spent and going to wise and efficient use. What about trends in pupil-teacher 

ratios in the province as a whole, Mr. Speaker. In 1940 again it was about 23 to 1, back in the time when 

the province was pretty well covered by one-room schools; in 1950, under our friends opposite, it had 

risen approximately to 24 to 1 or a little bit better; in 1960 it was 23.6 to 1; and in 1964 it was still over 

23 to 1. In other words, very little change those last three or four years. In 1964 to 1968, it had gone 

down to just under 21 to 1 in 1968. Perhaps this trend in the last few years could be explained to some 

extent by the broader programs that have been introduced into the school system, vocational courses, 

technical training at the upper high-school level particularly: the band program, the driver training 

program, home economics and industrial arts and other subjects that are now taught in many schools at 

grade seven and eight levels. Heretofore they had only been offered in high schools. There is also 

second language instruction in grade seven and grade eight, with French and Ukrainian being offered by 

many school boards of the province. On the other hand we have seen continued centralization of 

enrolment; we have seen continued trends to more and more urbanization in the province, Mr. Speaker; 

we have seen continued specialization in the teaching force itself. All of these factors should tend to 

counterbalance the broadened programs referred to just above. Just over two years ago the Government 

and the Department of Education drew attention of school boards to these trends and to the cost of 

implications of these trends. However, with some very notable exceptions the downward trend in ratios 

continued. 

 

At the Provincial-Municipal Conference held last June here in this Chamber, the Government announced 

that we would be asking our school boards to increase the student-teacher ratio by an average of two 

pupils per teacher. We announced also that we would be instituting reviews by Department officials of 

school board budgets. And I think that anyone who attended that Conference, or who read the transcript, 

Mr. Speaker, and news reports, may be well aware that escalating education costs were certainly the 

major concern of all participating municipal bodies, indeed, the overriding concern of that conference. 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

596 

Members may well recall, Mr. Speaker, that following our last election, this Government made it clear 

that we were going to continue giving education the very top priority that it rightly deserves, and the top 

priority I think that the people of this province demand. At the same, time we also made it clear that we 

were going to ask school authorities, school boards, school officials, as well as university authorities, to 

scrutinize the spending of provincial tax dollars in the same manner that we, provincially, were looking 

at and examining the tax dollars that we were spending under our direct control. I can say, Mr. Speaker, 

that any school board in this province that has been doing that — and that certainly includes the majority 

of them — has nothing whatever to fear from a review of its budget by Department of Education or 

other Government officials. Now to date the meetings and the discussions between school boards and 

the Department, I suggest, bear out the truth of that statement. We took this step of initiating budget 

reviews largely in the light of experiences with several school boards who were encountering real 

financial difficulties. And the results of our help and assistance, and the thousands of dollars saved by 

these systems convinced us that such a policy not only made sense in the over-all basis, but perhaps was 

overdue. Coupled closely with these two moves on pupil-teacher ratios and budget reviews, is the 

question of policy and of legislation under which the Province provides financial support to the school 

boards. There was and there is a wide variation in teacher-pupil ratios from one jurisdiction to another in 

the province. From 17.5 to 1 approximately in the rural units to 24.5 to 1, and in the urban systems, 

speaking of the complete grade 1 to 12 systems, from below 20 to 1 in some cases to over 25 to 1 in 

others. Even ordinary office administration costs showed tremendous variation among systems that are 

comparable in other ways. For example in the Regina Public School System the figure for 1969 was 

$6.47 per student, whereas the Saskatoon Public System was $10 per student. Similar variations in 

administrative costs and in other areas of costs could be found between different rural units of 

comparable size and program offered. Transportation costs in the rural areas on a per mile basis also 

showed some variation. 

 

Now I am sure most Members are aware, Mr. Speaker, that the present basis of Provincial support to 

school boards hinges almost entirely on the number of teachers that they employ. Obviously more 

consideration needed to be given to enrolment, the number of students in the system and the nature and 

the type of program that were being offered in that system. Instructional costs, as I pointed out earlier, 

are by far the largest single item of expenditure. So looking at it in this context, Mr. Speaker, to arrive at 

some basis of per pupil cost of instruction required some recognized ratio of teachers to pupils. And we 

looked at other jurisdictions in other provinces. We looked at British Columbia for example where they 

have a 30 to 1 ratio for elementary students; 20 to 1 for secondary; in Manitoba where it is 28 to 1 for 

elementary and 23 to 1 for secondary students. Mind you the complete situation in both of those 

provinces is a good deal more complex than perhaps those simple 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

597 

figures would indicate. Provision is made there, as we have done, for special education classes and so 

on. One of the wealthiest boards in the country in Metro Toronto aim at classroom loads of over 30 to 1, 

with provisions certainly though for a wide variety of supportive staff and so on. Our own officials, 

school trustees and teachers consulted on this question could see no educational justification for 

distinction between elementary and secondary. Besides it wasn‟t always practical to divide the systems 

in this manner. Perhaps it did accommodate practice to a greater extent in some of the other provinces 

where they moved in that direction, but did that practice necessarily make sense? In short, we advised 

boards we would be basing grants in 1970 on ratios of 15 to 1 for the vocational and technical areas; 

lower ratios still for the handicapped and special classes for retarded, and 25 to 1 for the remainder. 

These figures include all of the instructional staff — guidance counsellors, band instructors, and teachers 

who in many cases do not preside over classrooms, but obviously of course they are part of the 

instructional staff. There is also the fact that there is quite a wide pattern of utilization of these people by 

the school boards in the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as a result of these measures and these announcement, there were some cries of 

alarm from teacher groups and from school boards in the province. We also asked at that time for school 

boards to give us a preliminary budget by the end of October, last October. I must say that in general the 

cooperation in this regard from the provincial school boards was excellent. And when we received those 

budgets the information was tabulated, the budget was analyzed by Department officials, the staff 

requirements were analyzed not only for each school system but in the rural units particularly for each 

and every school as well. Recommendations for staff requirements for the various units and the various 

boards were made with a view to maintaining the programs being offered by the school boards; the 

locations of schools within the unit and all other such factors were considered in arriving at a recognized 

number of teachers for the forthcoming grant-year. This is an area (as far as offering these various 

programs is concerned) I am convinced, where school boards can improve their utilization of their 

highly qualified professional teachers. They can look at other ways and other means of providing 

programs by greater cooperation with one another in many cases, by greater use perhaps of the semester 

system, in short, in looking at some new techniques in organizing schools and in organizing programs. 

 

The budget review procedures, Mr. Speaker, I suggest, have worked very, very well this year. And I am 

convinced that both school boards and the Department have learned a great deal as a result of this first 

year‟s experience. Later on this spring we will be sitting down with trustees, teachers and school 

secretaries to analyze and improve the entire procedure for another year. But I am absolutely satisfied 

that closer working arrangements with our school boards as a direct result of these moves will prove 

beneficial to every group involved in education 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

598 

in this province. Trustee spokesmen I think, Mr. Speaker, will agree in the main with what I have said in 

this connection. Legislation will be introduced shortly in the House, outlining more completely the 

principles and the approach of a new School Grants Act. 

 

For several years it has been increasingly apparent that our present method of distributing Provincial 

grants in aid of education was becoming obsolete. This obsolescence has come about for good reason. 

The present formula was designed for a system which in large measure no longer really exists in the 

province. It was also designed, Mr. Speaker, for a time when the over-all costs of education were much, 

much less than they are today. In recent years as these costs have gone up the formula has produced 

ever-increasing disparities which we feel must be corrected. Now during the past three years, the 

Department has carried out extensive research and study in an effort to produce a new formula. A new 

formula would result in first of all maximum equalization; secondly, incentives to school boards to 

develop an optimum education program; thirdly, flexibility enough to ensure reasonable controls; and 

fourthly, encouragement for growth and development. This clearly is not an easy task, given the very 

wide range of factors which apply in the school systems of this province, population distribution, indeed 

the very distribution of schools within its system, assessment variations, urban-rural differences and so 

on. However, we have developed the first phase of a foundation program which will be brought into the 

House, as I mentioned, later in this Session. I wish to emphasize that this will only be the first phase, for 

we shall need the benefits of experience in actual operations, in systems, to determine even more 

accurately the most equitable basis of paying grants. 

 

Our new foundation formula is based on a couple of principles. First of all the incidence of local 

taxation should be as nearly equal as it can be, mind you, given the inherent problems of using a tax rate 

on property as the measuring stick of ability to pay — I think we are all aware of the shortcomings of 

that system in that regard; and secondly, every school system should have available the necessary 

financial resources to, permit it to carry out an optimum program rather than a basic minimum. An 

optimum program we define as one which represents a level of course-offering equal to the maximum 

the province can support in terms of its overall capacity to produce resources to support these systems, 

and again in terms of the particular characteristics of each school system. Now obviously there can‟t be 

a Campbell Collegiate in every town in the province. The approved education offerings and the 

enrolments should be the chief factors in determining systems‟ budgetary requirements. All systems as 

well should be able to employ their fair share of highly trained teachers. Now, Mr. Speaker, any new 

system of grants is bound to bring about some changes of the distribution of Provincial dollars amongst 

the school system. The increase in operating this year, $11.2 million, which is the largest ever in the 

province‟s history, will be distributed this 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

599 

year under the new formula. Supplementary grants will also be employed for arriving at the board‟s total 

grant figure to accommodate situations that the formula will not cover. These supplementary grants will 

be determined in the main by two facts: the existing mill rate in the district, and the amount that that will 

produce; and secondly, the board‟s budgetary expenditures as approved and recognized in the course of 

budget reviews and subsequent discussions with the school board. 

 

As was pointed out last week by the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) one of the major problems faced 

by school boards in finalizing their budget figures and one that the Department must also contend with 

in finalizing grant figures, is the fact that to date no teachers‟ salaries settlements have been reached in 

the current round of bargaining. However, with reasonable salary settlements, there is no question that 

school boards on the average should be able to maintain their existing mill rates in the forthcoming year. 

Indeed it is quite possible that some boards may be able to reduce their mill rates. Now obviously in 

phasing in a new structure there will be problems in the first year particularly. But I am satisfied, Mr. 

Speaker, that with the continued cooperation of trustees and other school officials, these problems will 

not only be met but be resolved. As I mentioned, the Budget shows an increase in operational grants 

over last year of over $11 million, and most of the increase will be in the formula grant. 

 

Now, on Wednesday, the Hon. Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) mentioned that that sum also 

included grants for elementary texts. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, there is over $1.5 million in that 

vote to implement a complete free text-book program for the school children of this province. The 

Budget provides for free texts for grade 12 students, which completes that program of free texts to high 

school students, initiated by this Government five years ago. For many years there has been a so-called 

free text policy for the elementary grades, instituted some years ago by the former Government. 

However, it wasn‟t quite free in that not all of the required texts had been supplied by the Saskatchewan 

Book Bureau. Parents were still responsible for the purchase of texts in Health, Science, French and 

Ukrainian in grades seven and eight. Now in this Budget there will be an annual per pupil grant paid to 

the school board and the private schools, instead of the actual textbook being shipped out as has been the 

case up to now. This new plan will be implemented for the 1970-71 school year at an estimated cost of 

$1.55 million this year. And for the first time in the history of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will 

cover all of the texts required by school children. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — I think also it is much more sound from an educational viewpoint. It overcomes the 

weakness of the present system where only one specific text is provided, in that boards may 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

600 

now provide a choice of several different texts. It should enable boards and encourage them to make the 

maximum use of books through rebinding and other such procedures. This new arrangement, as I 

mentioned, of paying boards so many actual dollars per pupil in each of the grades from 1 to 12, I may 

say has the complete endorsation of both the STF and the School Trustees Organization in the province 

It is interesting to note here, Mr. Speaker, that this was one of two requests made to the Government in a 

joint presentation last fall by the STF and the School Trustees Association. I should point out too that 

school boards will continue to have the advantage of bulk purchases through the continued operation of 

the Saskatchewan Book Bureau. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the major part of increases in this Budget is in the area of operating 

grants, it provides also for continued progress and continued advancement in other areas as well. This 

year, the emphasis is mainly on consolidation of existing programs. In the vocational and technical 

education field in our institutes alone, the Budget is increased over $700,000 over last year. This should 

enable us, as I mentioned yesterday, to offer training to something over 8,000 students, an increase of 

1,400 over the past year. I am sure that Members are well aware that in Saskatoon last year, a new 

addition to the Institute of Applied Arts and Science was officially opened. Courses up there will be 

expanded in Nursing Education, Food Services, Commercial Cooking, Library Technology, and many 

others. At Moose Jaw, enrolments will also be increased primarily in the field of. Business Education, 

Secretarial Sciences, Computer Sciences, and in a number of the trades. Extension courses, night classes 

are also being offered both at Saskatoon and at Moose Jaw. There is a wide variety of courses available, 

with something. over 400 people being registered in Saskatoon alone last week, taking a total of some 

20 different courses. These courses are almost entirely self-supporting. I think it does, Mr. Speaker, 

indicate the kind of utilization we are getting in both space and equipment at the Institute of Applied 

Arts and Sciences in Saskatoon. 

 

Enrolments in the Vocational Centres at Prince Albert, Weyburn and Regina will also be increase in the 

forthcoming year. In up-grading and other training for people of Indian ancestry this year we will be 

spending very close to $1 million in this area. This will allow us to increase the number of trainees from 

1,100 to almost 2,000 people. The Northern Areas School Board budget is up this year over $200,000 

over last year. Grants to school libraries, school bands, driver training assistance will be continued over 

and above the regular grants, and will account for an expenditure of almost $500,000. 

 

We expect the Driver Training Program this year to accommodate something over 13,000 students. And 

I want to say that this program is without a doubt the very best of its kind in Canada and is serving 

approximately two-thirds of the eligible young people of this province. According to the best 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

601 

information we can get from elsewhere the number of young people in organized driver training 

programs is roughly five to eight per cent of those eligible. 

 

There is support for the first time in this Budget, Mr. Speaker, for community classes for the deaf and 

hard-of-hearing, work which had previously been sponsored by the Red Cross. There is also provision 

for assistance in the transportation of handicapped children in urban systems. 

 

Last year we announced a policy of support to school boards employing teacher aides. An experience in 

the current year with a fairly small number of these people clearly indicates a very definite place for 

teacher aides in many of the school systems of the province. Accordingly special provision is provided 

to help school boards employ these people in this year‟s Budget. 

 

I might say too, Mr. Speaker, that in the past year the Department has undergone further reorganization. 

I believe that we are now able to render a much broader and a much more efficient service to school 

boards as a result. Our information and our statistical service to school boards will be improved 

considerably in the forthcoming year and should very materially assist not only school boards but the 

Department itself to carry out better long-term planning. 

 

There is provision in this Budget for $12.7 million in school construction with very close to $10 million 

being allocated to Federal-Provincial projects. Those are under way; comprehensive schools in Nipawin, 

North Battleford and Melville. Projects are on the drawing board in the case of Regina Vocational A, 

Moose Jaw, Weyburn and Prince Albert. In addition there is provision for school additions or school 

extensions or renovations or replacements in something like 50 other centres scattered throughout the 

province. 

 

The Budget also contains, Mr. Speaker, a major increase in the funds devoted to the support of the 

Provincial Library and the Regional Library System of this Province, $849,000 to be exact which, for 

the benefit of Members opposite, compares to their highest support of libraries in their term of office of 

$306,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Grants to the two main city libraries of Saskatoon and Regina will be increased by 

50 per cent. An increase in the regional libraries grant will allow that grant to go from $1.00 to $1.10. 

The Provincial Librarian and his staff continue to provide the people of this province and the regional 

libraries the best rural library service offered anywhere in Canada. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

602 

MR. McISAAC: — The semester system will be extended in the forthcoming year to those schools 

desirous of it. I might also mention we have a pilot project in machine-scored objective tests in the grade 

12 departmental exams this year in French and in Algebra. The results of these tests will account for 50 

per cent of the student‟s final mark, the other 50 per cent to be determined by their teacher on the basis 

of their year‟s work. If this idea, if this innovation, should prove successful then it will be extended. 

 

I think of particular interest too this year, Mr. Speaker, is a change in the requirements for high school 

graduates. I don‟t have time to deal with it very extensively but a minimum of seven subjects per year 

will be required instead of the present eight. There will be fewer compulsory subjects and rather than 

each year grade 10, grade 11 and grade 12 being considered as a complete and separate entity it will be 

possible for students to take some courses offered in a year other than the one that they are enrolled in. 

 

Obviously of course such changes cannot and do not affect university entrance requirements, but it does, 

I think, give much greater student flexibility in those last three years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before taking my seat I want to take a moment to express at this time my appreciation for 

the cooperation the Department has received this year from trustees, from teachers, from their 

organizations and from many others. Relations generally with all these groups closely involved in 

education have been excellent this year. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — And I want also to publicly express my thanks for the job being done by our school 

superintendents and other Department officials. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McISAAC: — Mr. Speaker, you may have gathered that I will be supporting the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. D.M. McPHERSON: (Regina South West) — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in rising to speak on the 

Budget I would first like to congratulate the new Lieutenant Governor, Dr. Stephen Worobetz, on his 

appointment as Lieutenant Governor as other Members have done. I would like to wish him well in his 

new job. I know that he will perform his duty like a veteran. 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

603 

I would like to pay a great privilege and honor to Dinny Hanbidge, the former Lieutenant Governor, for 

the work he has passed on in the Province of Saskatchewan. He was a man who was a great friend to all 

and a great citizen. I think probably he may be back with the Roughriders. As you all know he wears 

No. 1 and he‟s in pretty good shape and I think we could probably use a good tight end. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — I would also like at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to congratulate the Member 

from Kelvington (Mr. Byers). I certainly hope he enjoys his work in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also would like to express my personal sympathy to the Member from Regina South East 

(Mr. Baker) and also the Member from Arm River (Mr. McIvor) for the loss of their mothers during the 

past weeks. They were two pioneer ladies who certainly contributed a lot to this great Province of ours 

and the sympathy of all the Members goes to these two men. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was indeed a proud day on Monday when the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) brought 

down the 1970-71 Provincial Budget. I say it was a proud day because the five previous Provincial 

Budgets had been balanced and I find this a record for any Provincial budget in Canada or any Federal 

budget. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — So Mr. Provincial Treasurer I want to congratulate you on a job well done. In 

looking over the 1970-71 Budget of $405 million I find this is a record budget as was pointed out, Mr. 

Speaker, and proposing a $10 million deficit at this time certainly leaves no criticism when one 

considers what is in this Budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the increased amount for schools should certainly aid every school board in this province 

and keep the mill rates down and there shouldn‟t be any rises whatsoever. 

 

The increased amount for rural roads should help every municipality complete their road programs. 

 

For the cities there are increased grants for health, libraries, police, snow removal and assessments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the above grants are an indication that this Government wants to help keep the mill rates 

down in every home in the cities, every home in the towns and villages, and in every farm home in the 

municipalities in the Province of Saskatchewan. 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

604 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — With the increase in the homeowner grant the Budget certainly shows the 

citizens of this province that this Government is endeavoring in every way to assist in the tax load. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that there is not a Member sitting to your left who can vote against this 

Budget. When you realize the lift that this Budget will give the economy of this great province, I am 

proud to be associated with the 1970-1971 Provincial Budget. There is assistance in this Budget for both 

the rural and the urban population. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — I think, Mr. Speaker, many of us went home Monday including the Member 

from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) pleased with the Budget knowing that this was the key to getting the 

economy moving. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — I for one, Mr. Speaker, was also pleased to hear the Hon. Provincial Treasurer 

(Mr. Steuart) say that, if the injection of the monies into the building program were not doing the job, 

more money would be put in. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — How nice it is to know that the building trades are going to be busy not 

tomorrow but right away. The suppliers are going to be busy right away. The allied trades are going to 

be busy right away. Everything connected with the building trades will be on the move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am also pleased that the Budget recognizes that there must be more assistance to our 

Indian and Métis people. This Government recognised this problem when it set up a special department 

for Indian and Métis. When the Premier of the Province set up the Task Force I believe he took on one 

of the toughest jobs that has ever been taken on. In the Task Force, Mr. Speaker, he received the 

cooperation of a great number of businessmen in Saskatchewan, and I would like to single out one 

project that I happen to know a little about and I feel it is going to do a great job. It is the scrap-cutting 

operation that is being set up at IPSCO. Mr. Jack Turvey introduced this program to the Task Force and 

it was immediately picked up by the Indian and Métis. They selected a man, Mr. Jim Pariesien, who is a 

Métis to run the show. He now has over 100 Indian and Métis welders that are training at Weyburn to go 

into the scrap-cutting business which is being introduced at IPSCO and is being fostered by IPSCO in 

the training program to 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

605 

get the thing going. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — I congratulate the Task Force, Mr. Speaker, and wish them every success as 

every Member here will. I think this Government is looking on this matter in the right way and if we can 

get more projects like this going it will certainly be a great credit to our Government. 

 

Industry has been asked, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier has written every industry to take on Indian and 

Métis people, a certain percentage. I think this is having a great effect on the hiring and there are more 

Indian and Métis people working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was indeed pleased to read in the paper on Tuesday that Mr. Bruce Smith of the city of 

Regina was very happy about the new grants and they would add approximately $200,000 to the city 

coffers. To every taxpayer in the city this would also mean aid to the tune of one mill on the basis of the 

city mill rate. What the reduction would help education when the grant comes down has not been 

calculated. So the whole Budget should certainly help the taxpayers of Regina. 

 

I would also like, Mr. Speaker, to quote from the Saskatoon Star Phoenix of Wednesday. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — “Buckwold says tax drop possible.” They are holding the line on their expenses 

and Mayor Buckwold has said that with the economy drive, local taxpayers could look forward to no 

increases in taxes over last year. At the worst an increase of 1/2 mill. And the Provincial Budget of last 

Monday has made the Mayor even more optimistic that this goal can be met. The Budget outlined 

increased the Provincial aid to the provincial municipalities amounting to $1.55 per capita. They are 

very happy in Saskatoon and they are certainly happy in the city of Regina. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Mr. Speaker, we have heard many times in this House from the Member for 

Regina North West (Mr. Whelan), the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney), the Member for 

Regina North East (Mr. Smishek) complaints that this Government since it came into the House hasn‟t 

done anything for anybody in the cities. I just happened to, look up a few figures and I happened to go to 

a department that I know a little about and I looked into the health grant. I went back as far as 1959-60. 

The Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) will be very interested in this because they are always 

screaming that there are no health grants. 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

606 

Well here‟s what happened. 

 

In 1959 the per capita that the CCF gave the city of Regina — not one nickel. Not one nickel did they 

send. In 1960-1961 — nil. Not one penny. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame, shame! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — 1962-1963, nil again. Not one penny. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame, shame! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Yet they scream that they should be helped. Now we come to 1963-64. There 

is an election coming up. There‟s an election. We‟re going to do something and so the Member for 

Regina Centre, (Mr. Blakeney) decides that he‟s going to do something. So what does he do? He picks 

one of the piggy banks that he‟s talking about and he puts 50 cents for the citizens of Regina, the first 

time in five years that there has been a penny in there and the citizens of Regina received $60,250. 

$60,000 that‟s what they received. Now what happened in 1964-1965? The first year . . . 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — Another quarter in. 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — . . . 25 cents they were increased. Right. That‟s right and it continued to go up 

until 1969-70. They helped Henry out to the tune of $1. Now we‟ll take the totals, Mr. Speaker, on just 

what was paid in. We never do anything it‟s claimed. We never gave the city of Regina one cent. As you 

can see. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Henry? 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — No, I‟m not talking about Henry. The Member for Regina Centre (Mr. 

Blakeney). The records show, Mr. Speaker, that in the years from 1959 to 1964 all the CCF Government 

gave the city of Regina for health grants was $63,000. That‟s all the records show. That‟s all they gave 

them and that was even one credit to operate a clinic. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Henry . . . 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Now after the election from 1965 to 1970 there has been $648,490.85 given to 

the city of Regina in health grants. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Henry, cut his throat! 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

607 

MR. McPHERSON: — Now, Mr. Speaker, may I ask everyone here who is more interested in the 

health of the citizens of Regina, the Liberals or the CCF? Who would you answer that one to? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Mr, Speaker, we have heard a great deal in this House how the CCF-NDP have 

been so fair in the hospitals, so I looked this up. I just wanted to see the records and I took the 

combination figures for the Regina General and the Regina Grey Nuns‟ Hospital along with all the 

grants that had been given to them, all the capital and everything that was coming to them for the years 

1960, 1961, 1962, 1963, I came up with the figure of $31,300,408. That‟s what was in those particular 

years. Now I went on, Mr. Speaker, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968 and the final year, practically doubled that 

this Government gave to the city hospitals, $58,680,000. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Now this isn‟t bad help I would say from a Liberal Government that is so 

niggardly as was pointed out by the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney). 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Mr. Speaker, I happened to look at education. I thought this would be 

something we should take a look at and I looked into the city for education from 1959, 1960 right 

through to 1964 and the city of Regina received the amount, they went up about $2,588,000. They 

dropped it in 1962 to $2,425,000. They gave them a little increase in 1963 and then finally in 1964 they 

got up to $2,800,000. Then finally the Liberal party came into power. The first year $4,099,000. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Shame, shame! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — The second year $6,358,000. On and on and we come to the final year 

$7,551,000. Mr. Speaker, take all of these and you can see just what they would add up to and I will give 

you a quick calculation on them. Three year comparison $13,422,000 and the same comparison, Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberal Government more than doubled. More than doubled to $28 million. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — Now this is what they are calling they were doing their fair share and we‟re not 

doing anything. I would say, Mr. Speaker, this is excellent help from a Liberal Government to the 

citizens of Regina. 

 

Now we will talk a little about road assistance. You know something about this, you gentlemen over 

there. We‟ll see what 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

608 

they gave the good old city of Regina. First year we‟ll take is 1960 — George Willis you‟d know about 

this — $1,120. Now we come along to 1961-1962, Mr. Willis, in road assistance. Guess what this is, 

$1,165. The next year he really went out of his way. He provided $86,000 and in 1963 he provided 

$321,000. 1964, $186,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a total for those five years, going back to 1960 of 

$408,664. 

 

Our Highways Department, our Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) who you fellows criticize, has 

provided, and I will go over the figures if you like to February 28th: 1970 $2,402,610 compared to your 

$408,000. Five times as much. I think, Mr. Speaker, you‟ll have to agree that the Liberal Government 

has been very fair in its treatment of Regina since it formed the Government in 1964. 

 

Speaker, I would like to point out that this Government for the Indian and Métis has purchased 37 

houses in the city of Regina for a total cost of $342,374,000. This certainly keeps the economy going. 

Mr. Speaker, as the Mayor of Regina knows we have assisted in the urban renewal program to the tune, 

in Tuxedo Park, of $78,084 and this has certainly been a big help. Last year the total buildings 

connected with the University of Saskatchewan, hospital construction, South Saskatchewan Base 

Hospital, Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts, renovations to the Legislative Buildings, all of these around 

$9 million. This year we propose to help the city of Regina and help the economy here over $12 million. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Too much! 

 

MR. McPHERSON: — I think this is an increase, Mr. Speaker, of $3,057,000 and I am happy to see 

this come to the city of Regina: After all I live here and I enjoy this city and we have lots of arguments 

about Saskatoon, but I am happy that I live in Regina. But I just want to set the record straight that this 

Government has certainly done a lot. I think you will have to agree after you look over all the grants, the 

new grants that are coming up for 1970-71. Finally, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down — I see my time is 

up — I would like to thank this Government. A lot of the rural Members were a little disturbed at voting 

to have the auditorium turned over and putting $7 million into it. I want to thank the Government on 

behalf of the citizens of Regina. It is a beautiful structure and I think our Department of Public Works, 

under Mr. Guy and his Deputy, Mr. Jack Kyle, have done a real good job in keeping the costs down. I 

think it is a structure that we can be very proud of over the years to come and I am happy that we have 

it. I just hope that we don‟t run into the big deficits that they are predicting but I think it will be well run. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can see I think Regina is getting a fair deal. Maybe there could be more but there 

are a lot of things that were turned up today that bring out that all in all I am all for the Budget and I will 

be supporting it. Thank you 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

609 

very much. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. MATSALLA: (Canora) — Mr. Speaker, my first words in this Debate are to express a feeling 

of appreciation to Mr. Robert Hanbidge who has served this Legislature and our Province as Lieutenant 

Governor. I want to warmly congratulate Lieutenant Governor, Dr. Stephen Worobetz, on his 

appointment and wish him well in this high office. 

 

I am of course very happy to associate myself with other Members in this House in congratulating the 

Hon. Member, for Kelvington, Mr. Neil Byers, on taking his seat in the Legislature following last year‟s 

by-election. The results, Mr. Speaker, are a strong indication of, the unpopular and weakening 

Saskatchewan Liberal Government . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — . . . today even more than on June 25th last. 

 

Looking at the Budget, Mr. Speaker, I do not find anything to be too excited about. As a matter of fact I 

am disappointed to find that there is nothing in it to give immediate cash help to the depressed farming 

industry and to improve the severe unemployment situation. But I am satisfied to see the two-cents per 

gallon tax on farm fuel removed. We on this side of the House fought hard against this unfair 

agricultural tax. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — It shouldn‟t have been imposed in the first place. 

 

I am hopeful that the industrial incentive programs would be extended to the northeast central part of the 

province and that it would encourage industries to locate in my constituency of Canora. 

 

I am looking forward, Mr. Speaker, to a portion of the highway expenditures to be expended in my 

constituency this year. In the past few years indications were made by the Minister (Mr. Boldt) and his 

Department that make me believe. that the construction of the No. 5 highway west of Canora will start 

this year. I want to put on record this afternoon that No. 9 highway from Preeceville north to Reserve 

should be on a priority construction list. The dusty conditions on this highway are very bad. I urge and 

ask the Minister and his Government to place these two highways on this year‟s construction program. 

 

With reference to the increased assistance to local 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

610 

governments, Sir, I question the full sincerity of this budgetary expenditure. I question it because an 

amount of about one-third million dollars of last year‟s Budget was under-expended, and the 

Department is already asking municipalities to advise in case they will not construct grid roads this year. 

The tax increase on municipal fuel is just another shift on to the local property taxpayer. 

 

I must say that I am very disappointed to see that the deterrent fees on the sick and the poor will 

continue. 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART: (Provincial Treasurer) — On the rich, too! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — This is the most vicious and inhuman tax ever, Mr. Provincial Treasurer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much has already been said about the dire economic and social circumstances confronting 

the people of Saskatchewan. The drastic drop in farm income due to inadequate prices and lack of grain 

marketing, due to the policies and attitudes of the two Liberal Governments, are having a snowballing 

effect on the entire provincial economy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Unemployment has reached an all-time high and retail sales have dropped to 

near all-time low. 

 

The situation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is in reality a rude awakening to many people, particularly 

to those who supported this Liberal Government in the last election and in previous elections. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — These people had high hopes that there would come a new Saskatchewan as 

promised by the Premier and his associates — a promised New Saskatchewan with great industrial 

development, employment opportunities, tax reductions and security to the farmer. These people, Mr. 

Speaker, have been betrayed and let down, . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — . . . and now are totally disappointed with the performance of this Liberal 

Government. They recognize that the capitalistic system to which this Government subscribes just 

doesn‟t work in the interest of common society. It is designed for the benefit of big business 

corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan recognize and know 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

611 

that Liberal times are hard times. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — It was only a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers of the Prairies were 

told to grow all the wheat they could — “You grow it, we‟ll sell it.” The farmer, confident in the advice 

and foresight of the Federal Government, grew and harvested some of the biggest crops ever. The 

farmers did their part, Mr. Speaker, what about the Government? 

 

In the midst of the enormous glut of grain on the Prairies and with very little prospects of selling it, 

swinging Prime Minister Pierre in Winnipeg stated, and I quote: “Why should I sell wheat; it‟s the 

farmer‟s problem.” Mr. Speaker, no responsible Prime Minister could make a more irresponsible and 

ridiculous statement. Playboy Trudeau completely ignored the problem of the farmer. 

 

Now let us take a look at the record of this Provincial Government and its stand on agricultural 

problems, Mr. Speaker. I recall clearly the attitude of the Premier in this House at the last session when 

our opposition Leader, Woodrow Lloyd, proposed a Resolution calling for an emergency debate on the 

reduction of wheat prices. Premier Thatcher shouted across the floor that the subject of the Opposition‟s 

Resolution wasn‟t of an urgent nature and that it should not take the time of the House. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Now I want to recall, Mr. Speaker, what Attorney General Heald had to say 

from the reading of a letter and how he ridiculed the plight of, the Saskatchewan farmer. He referred to 

the letter writer as a pioneer citizen of Saskatchewan with good common sense. From page 815 of 

Debates and Proceedings 1969 I quote Mr. Heald: 

 

You know all things cannot be done in a day. The average farmer knows you cannot take a cow to the 

bull and bring back the calf in your arms. The average farmer has his bins full of wheat; his barns and 

corrals full of feed and most wives are full of babies for the bonus. Just how could times be better. I 

hope you tell them good when the House opens. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) read this letter in the last session to tell the House 

that the farmers did not need cash help to dry their damp grain last year. The Attorney General ought to 

hang his head in shame finding pleasure in quoting this kind of garbage and referring it to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the people of Saskatchewan 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

612 

of the vicious attack that was made last week on the Wheat Board and the various farm organizations by 

Highways Minister Boldt and other Government Members. Very sad would be the day to the prairie 

farmers of Saskatchewan when the Wheat Board should be eliminated. Mr. Speaker, we would be back 

to the days of the free marketing system and the Grain Exchange, when there was no security in prices 

nor any guaranteed protection to the farming industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what our agriculture needs today more than ever is practical down-to-earth policies, 

policies that are meaningful and that will be adapted to provide short-term solutions and long-term 

security to the farmer. 

 

The New Democratic party, Sir, has some definite proposals for giving agriculture the much needed lift 

and providing for security in the future. My colleagues speaking before me have outlined our plan to this 

House and our brief was presented to this Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel very strongly about the long-term solutions to our farming problems — that of 

guiding farm production and that of selling farm products for realistic prices. Because of their political 

philosophy, Sir, it is very unlikely that the Liberal Governments, Provincial and Federal, will take any 

positive action on this. It would require a government that has foresight and courage to stand up against 

pressures of corporate exploitations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — I have confidence, Mr. Speaker, that the New Democratic party can provide this 

kind of government and leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to finally turn to taxes, and I would particularly deal with local municipal 

school property taxes. But before I do this, I want to remind this House and the people of Saskatchewan 

of the Liberal promises of 1964 to reduce property taxes, to reduce the sales tax to three per cent and to 

reduce the personal income tax. 

 

Premier Thatcher, speaking at Moose Jaw at a Saskatchewan Wheat Pool dinner had this to say, and I 

quote from the Daily Colonist, Victoria, August 27, 1965: 

 

The Province‟s four per cent sales tax, personal income tax, corporation taxes and a host of others are 

too high. Property and land taxes are four times higher today than in 1945. 

 

Now we know what the Premier said. Let us examine what he and his Government have done since 

1965 to 1969, a five-year period. Records will prove, Mr. Speaker, that local property taxes since this 

Government took office have sky-rocketed from at least 30 per cent to 50 per cent and more in some 

cases. I 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

613 

might say that taxes for strictly municipal. purposes have held at a very stable level, but school taxes 

since 1965 have jumped over 60 per cent. And where lands have been reassessed by the Department, 

school taxes on some lands have doubled and tripled and more. Local school boards were forced to 

increase mill rates to a higher level in order to meet the ever-increasing education costs, and this for the 

reason that Government grants to schools were starting to slip and could not keep pace with the rising 

costs. 

 

I want to inform this House that the mill rate in the case of the Canora school unit No. 37 remained at 29 

mills from 1953 to 1964. No increase in 12 years. Following the election of this Liberal Government, 

starting with 1965 to 1969, the mill rates skyrocketed to 46 mills, an alarming increase of 17 mills in 

five years. No increase in 12 years under the CCF Government, 17-mills increase in five years under this 

Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — Let us examine the taxes, on some property, Mr. Speaker, and make 

comparisons. To illustrate I will describe parcels of land and cite tax levy increases in the five-year 

period under the former CCF Government and the five-year period under this Liberal Government. Let 

us take the NW 32-8-7-W2. Between the years 1959 and 1965, there was a net increase of $1.30. Now 

between the years 1964 and 1969 there was a net increase of $60.85. You will note, Sir, that the increase 

between the two periods is more than 46 times during this Liberal regime — and they talk about 

reducing taxes! 

 

Now let us illustrate to this House, Mr. Speaker, what the position of taxes was during the two years in 

question on a farm unit of four quarters in the RM of Buchanan No. 304 of which I am the 

secretary-treasurer. The taxes levied on this farm unit, north half of 14 and south half of 15 in 32-4-W2, 

were $713.56 in 1964. Now, starting with 1965 under this Thatcher Liberal regime the tax levy in 1969 

on this farm unit reached $1,043.10 — a significant increase of $329.54 or a jump of nearly 50 per cent 

over the 1965 taxes. I would like the Hon. Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) to take 

those figures down. In the years 1960 to 1964 inclusive, the taxes on this farm unit were reduced, were 

reduced by an amount of $24.94, but under the Liberals the increase for the years 1965 to 1969 

inclusive, was $322.94, a frightening difference of $347.88. Now these, Mr. Speaker, are the facts about 

the Liberal trend on local property taxes. Up and up and up! And the Premier has the gall to say that his 

Government is reducing property taxes. What hypocrisy: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to issue a warning to this Liberal Government that school property taxes have 

reached such high proportions that property can no longer bear more taxes. The need for using a new 

and broader tax base for financing school 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

614 

costs is long overdue. Action to accomplish this should be taken now before property owners are forced 

to surrender to bankruptcy and foreclosures. 

 

This Liberal Government, Sir, over the last five years through its practice of transferring taxes on the 

property owners neglected to provide adequate grants to meet the rising costs in education. I charge the 

Government with being guilty of deliberately shifting taxes on to local property. The Government is 

guilty of forcing local taxpayers to bear the financial load for which the Provincial Government should 

be responsible. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr,. Speaker, can no longer put up with tax policies of this 

Liberal Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MATSALLA: — The tax shift on to a limited tax base and people least able to pay practised by 

this Government is intolerable and should be stopped. This Government, Sir, elected on the promise to 

reduce taxes has completely failed and betrayed the people of Saskatchewan, and can no longer have the 

faith of the Saskatchewan people. There isn‟t any doubt about this. The records are the proof. 

 

The New Democratic party, Mr. Speaker, proposes a five-year plan for easing the school-tax load from 

the local taxpayer. It is our plan to assume 65 per cent of the school costs within the first three years and 

then up to 75 per cent of the school costs within the next two years. And as Provincial and Federal 

revenues increase, Mr. Treasurer, our Government will continue to assume an even greater share of the 

cost. The CCF, when in government, as I have illustrated, truly demonstrated their concern for the local 

taxpayer. Through a generous grant structure for schools and municipalities, local taxes were kept at a 

reasonable level. 

 

The Budget, Mr. Speaker, is not a practical or a realistic budget to grapple with the problems of the day. 

It is another document designed to continue shifting more taxes on to local property taxpayers and it will 

continue to extract monies from Saskatchewan citizens least able to pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support the main motion but I will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. A. THIBAULT: (Kinistino) — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to congratulate the financial critic 

(Mr. Blakeney) who did a wonderful job in exposing the things that the Budget hasn‟t got and the 

mismanagement of this Government. 

 

I also want to pay tribute to the Lieutenant Governor who 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

615 

has left us, Mr. Hanbidge, and I want to wish him many years of happy life and healthy ones. Also I 

want to welcome Dr. Stephen Worobetz. I am sure that the atmosphere that was left here in this House 

by Mr. Hanbidge is going to be continued in the person of Dr. Worobetz. 

 

I also want to congratulate the soccer team of Yellow Creek, who have taken the championship again in 

1969. They will be visiting the Legislature later on and I will be quite happy to introduce them to the 

House. This team has won the championship of the province six times in eleven tries. And believe you 

me, for a little village school it is an effort that certainly needs recognition. 

 

I also want to congratulate the school units in my constituency for sending such a large number of 

students to the Legislature every session. I think we stand amongst one of the constituencies who bring a 

lot of students to the session. I am sure that it can only profit the province when our young will come 

and listen and see what is going on in these Chambers. I think if a lot more would visit the Chambers, 

they would go home and talk about it, and perhaps we would even have a better Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — I also want to congratulate the Member for Kelvington (Mr. Byers). I did spend a 

few days out there and I want to say that it didn‟t take long for me to realize that the NDP candidate was 

going to win with a good majority. I know that we could have had a caucus out there. We could have 

had a session as there were enough Members there, we certainly would have had a quorum from both 

sides of the House. I also want to offer my sympathy to the Member for Arm River (Mr. McIvor) and 

the Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker) for the great loss that they have suffered in the last 

while. 

 

Now that we are done with the formalities I want to get into my speech and say a few things about the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey). He is not in his seat at this time. Most of the Cabinet 

Ministers are out. I don‟t know what is going on out there. Oh, yes, Mr. Heald is here, the Member for 

Lumsden, and the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) — eleven of them in the House at this time. I think it is a good 

thing for the people to know this. About one-third of them. I hope that the people of this province are 

going to settle a little bit of this stuff when the election rolls around. We want people to sit in their seats; 

no, I don‟t know where. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — I want to say a few words about the homeowner grant. I was the first one in this 

House to stand up and vote for it. 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

616 

I beat them all to it. Many of the other provinces have homeowner grants and I don‟t quarrel with it at 

all. The only thing that I have to say about it is that the present Government is wasting almost $100,000 

in staff and administration mailing out little letters — call it political letters — along with the cheque. 

Now this is somewhere between $90 and $100,000 and I don‟t think that question can be figured as it 

was debated last year. 

 

Now in Manitoba the; homeowner grant is deducted when you pay your taxes, and what is wrong with 

that? This is the sensible thing to do. You could have built 30 miles of farm access road with the money 

that you have wasted in playing politics when sending out these cheques. Alberta and British Columbia 

do it in the same way. If you want to save money quit using the taxpayers‟ money for political reasons 

and for nothing else. If you doubt my word I have the regulations from Manitoba right here and you can 

have them if you want them. 

 

Now I want to give you an idea of what the taxes have done in my constituency. In 1964 for the Wakaw 

School Unit. For the Wakaw town, the general mill rate was 22.5, the school rate was 27. In 1968, 36 

and 32. This points out to you that this Government did not keep pace with the increased costs of our 

communities. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Birch Hills had a mill rate of 32 mills in general rates and 27 mills for school 

rates. In 1967 and 1968, 39 and 35. Administration by the Provincial Government didn‟t help these 

people enough. Now in the, town of Kinistino the mill rate was 26 for the general levy and 26 for the 

school levy. General levy in 1968, 28 and 35. This proves to you that the reason for it is that this 

Government did not keep pace with the increased costs, increased costs that this Government and the 

Government at Ottawa have allowed to run unbridled all this time. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about Yellow Creek. This is a little village in my constituency that in 1954 had a 

bad flood. The people had to go to their houses with boats. Now on the Order Paper of February 20, a 

question was asked by Mr. Pepper (Weyburn) — I am referring to the question here to see what this 

Government has done. I don‟t quarrel with what the Government has done. It has given Estevan 

$20,000. It has given Glenavon $1,000; Moose Jaw $22,000. There appears to be an omission that 

Lumsden might have received something as it is not on the Order Paper, but it could have been an 

innocent error and I wouldn‟t mind slipping over that. I don‟t quarrel with these types. When a town or a 

village is in trouble like this, I say the Provincial Government should help. Under CCF government, 

during the time of the late Henry Begrand two bridges were given to Yellow Creek. Do you know what 

happened when the Liberals came in? They deducted the price of those bridges from their winter works 

program, 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

617 

some ten years after the bridges had been built in Yellow Creek. 

 

Now I am going to read a letter to this, House from the Minister of Highways, Mr. Willis, who was the 

Minister at that time, dated 1963. Look, you went and peeled that $3,700 or $3,800 off the village of 

Yellow Creek and I am not going to describe the manner that you used, but they would have as, much 

right today to peel off $3,800 from the SHSP collection and be just as honest as you are. Now I am 

going to read this letter and I am going to table it too. This is to the Mayor of the Village of Yellow 

Creek, Tony Dorosh, July 2, 1963: 

 

HON. D.G. STEUART: (Provincial Treasurer) — 1963? 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Yes. That is when the CCF wrote those bridges off for them and you got after 

them and peeled it off them. Yes, I‟ll table the letter and you can have a look at it, Mr. Member for 

Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart). 

 

The bridge mentioned in your note to me was built by Highways but at the request of Municipal Road 

Assistance Authority. Municipal Road Assistance Authority has paid the entire amount owing to 

Highways and as I am informed the RM of Invergordon has paid in full Municipal Road Assistance 

Authority for cost of the bridge. 

 

You didn‟t say but it appears that the RM is trying to recover part of the costs of Yellow Creek. This is 

entirely between the village and the RM. Highways nor Municipal Road Assistance Authority would 

have nothing to say re this. Sorry that I didn‟t have time to talk this over with you. 

 

In answer to your inquiry there is nothing to be written off by Highways. 

 

Signed: Hon. George Willis, Minister of Highways. 

 

I want to tell you that last year or the year before the price of those bridges was deducted from the 

winter works program and said that it wasn‟t done right. Here, I will table this letter and they can have a 

look at it. 

 

You can peel a small town that was in just as big trouble as Lumsden when they had to go between their 

houses with boats. All the CCF gave them was two bridges to overcome the flooding You come along 

and say, “You voted CCF, you guys, and we will fix you.” I can see no other reason. I hope that you will 

correct the situation. If you don‟t, when we form the Government again I can tell Yellow Creek they will 

get their money. 

 

Now I want to talk about the Budget. Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the percentage of the Budget that 

is allocated to 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

618 

Municipal Affairs. In 1960 it was 6.2, and not counting the homeowner grant in 1969 it is 4.3. I think 

that pretty well points out that you are not keeping pace with the increased costs. Another place that the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) could save a little money is on the refund for building granaries. 

Under a CCF Government if you bought a motor at McLeods or any hardware store, all you had to do to 

have a refund on your tax was to sign a form and it was deducted. But now you have to get the form 

filled out at the Municipality. I saw a fellow getting $15 and he had to drive 15 miles to have this form 

filled out. And then he gets a nice little letter, good propaganda, “This is to help the farmer.” This could 

have been deducted at the lumber yard just like we have been deducting it for gasoline engines and farm 

equipment. 

 

MR. STEUART: — Federal . . . 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Now look here. The Federal Government refunded sales tax too. The lumber yard 

looked after it; we didn‟t have to do anything. Everything was settled at the lumber yard and we didn‟t 

have to travel. Now I think this goes to show how this Government is spending a lot of money trying to 

buy votes. Why don‟t you tell the youngsters that you are going to refund them on the hot dogs? By 

golly, this would be a real publicity stunt! That‟s an idea. You might try it and I don‟t doubt that you 

will. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Now I want to say a few words about the cost of machinery. I think that one thing 

that has been missed out a lot is the price of parts. We talk about the high cost of tractors and combines 

but there needs to be a looking into the price of parts. I want to bring out here the price of one little piece 

of gas line that is about eight inches long. Most of the farmers will know what engine I am relating to. It 

is a water-cooled engine, International five horsepower with the pulley on the cam shaft and the 

flywheel on the crank shaft. That little gas line with two brass fittings and a check valve on the bottom 

in 1961 sold for $6.62 and today the list price in the catalogue at the dealers is $13.04 for a little piece of 

gas line about eight inches long — it is no longer than that, maybe even shorter. 

 

I tell you that the Government did not only take the farmers to cleaners. I am not blaming the agents, as 

they took the agents to, the cleaners too. They are not the ones making the profit. I want to say that in 

my constituency I made the rounds last fall. You know I get around and ask my people how they feel 

about certain things. Out of all the agents that I contacted there is only one that said, “If the storm 

doesn‟t last too long I might survive.” But all the rest of them said, “We are in serious trouble.” Yes, 

Liberal times are hard times. 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

619 

You can say that again. 

 

Another part that I want to bring to your attention and I have a whole list here. I could table it if you 

want me to. On request I will give it to you. It‟s an IHC price list. The governor weight is just a piece of 

cast from a 40 horsepower tractor, structure parts taken into consideration. The list price in 1961 was 

$3.87, today $7.60, an increase of $3.70. They are in very common use, a molded piece of cast with one 

hole through it. Big deal! 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — How big is the hole? 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — No, I‟ll leave that to Mr. Athabasca (Mr. Guy) as he is very familiar with that 

There is another part that all the farmers in this House are acquainted with, which is the standard seed 

drill disk boot. That is where the two double disks are bolted in on the casting and a spout comes in from 

the top and a spring from the back, and so on. You farmers know what I am talking about. It has been 

manufactured the same way for 35 years. It hasn‟t changed. In 1960 it was sold for $8.17 and do you 

know what it is today? And I bet all they did was paint the old one. They never set the mould again. 

$20.56. No price control! 

 

You know when I asked the Minister of Agriculture last year how much he was spending on research, he 

was scratching in his papers like a hen for a kernel of wheat and he couldn‟t find it. There is some 

research to be done, Mr. Minister of Agriculture. The farmers are being taken to the cleaners and the 

agents along with it, because the Barber Commission says that labor and sales have nothing to do in the 

high price of machinery. 

 

I could go on, but I think I have illustrated enough parts to prove my point. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — A good job, Art. 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — What we need now, . . . they‟re talking about more study! We ought to check if 

the Barber Commission is right. Well look here, all the studies have been made. We want action, get to 

work. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — The farmers have been rooked by $15 million. Maybe I‟m not using the proper 

term, but anyway you know what I mean. Let‟s get to work and see that something is done about it, 

because time is running out. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — All we want to do is 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

620 

investigate it! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — They want to investigate! They‟re good at investigating, but when it comes to 

doing something, boy, do they run out and hide. 

 

What can we do? One of the first things is price control. Who has done away with price control? A good 

question. The Liberals, the Conservatives supported by the Social Credit, that wanted a dog-eat-dog 

society after the last war! It‟s a case of the rich and the greedy who wanted to be a part of society, but 

who do not want to pull their fair share of the load. They show no responsibility whatsoever as to what 

they do to society as a whole. I say again, research is needed. Get on with the job. 

 

Now, I‟ll say a few words about. agriculture. We know it is on the rocks and something should be done 

about it. Do you know, I have been talking for 20 minutes — I‟m going to cause trouble here. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Just seems like five minutes. 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — When we talk about agriculture, they say we have got to reduce the production of 

wheat. For a whole week in this province we have listened to a program, Project 70 on drugs and 

pollution. We were told over and over again that the supply of food and the population of the world 

would cross in 1972. If this is the case and when we have between 25 and 40 per cent of the people in 

the world starving, in Saskatchewan we are going to reduce food production. It just doesn‟t make sense. 

I don‟t know, I think we better have another look at this business of cutting back production. I think 

John Diefenbaker had a good suggestion when he said, “Put our people to work and build terminals and 

store this food for when it will be needed.” That would make sense as well. 

 

Now another thing I want to point out to the Minister is that I go along with this hog production program 

he has got going. I don‟t quarrel with the hog barns, but he must check and see the increase in the hog 

population and give direction after the proper research has been done, so that we don‟t have a program 

of free pork after a while. This is liable to happen. I am warning you now that you had better have a 

close look at that one. Now, I am not interested in publicity stunts like we have had so many times in 

this province. 

 

Barter deals! Oh boy, it really makes some farmers feel good especially if they are so Liberal that they 

can‟t see any thing else. But McNamara says it didn‟t sell a single bushel of wheat. Oh„ but Ross 

Thatcher keeps coming back, the Premier keeps coming back, “Oh, it is selling a lot‟ of wheat!” I‟m 

going to tell you something. The farmers know that the wheat is rotting on the prairies and the terminals 

are empty. Is this 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

621 

being held up only for an election? Are you waiting only to move wheat when the election will be 

called? Is this what the plan is? Playing with the farmer to that extent is not going to be forgiven by the 

people of this province. 

 

I have no doubt that there is inquiry needed into the handling of our grain. But I am satisfied that we 

wouldn‟t have to dig too far, that we would find the Liberals buried underneath doing the work. When 

they use politics to that extent, I don‟t buy it. I‟ll go along sometimes to stretch a little one way or the 

other, but when you are going to cause the ruination of agriculture in Western Canada, this is going a 

little too far. It is not only the farmer. Fifty per cent of our economy depends on the farmer. And what is 

happening? I‟ll tell you that after a while. 

 

Now if we want to look for markets, let‟s look at our balance of trade. Let‟s be aware of that. Britain 

buys from us $496 million more than we do from them. We had better have a look whether we are 

treating them fairly. From the United States we buy $938 million more than we sell to them. With 

France, we have a minus of $50 million; with Japan, $267 million — a plus. You think the Japanese are 

going to take that forever. We had better find a way of dealing with the Japanese, even this thing up a 

little bit and we would sell more products. With India, $102 million more from us than we buy from 

them; China, $66 million. I say that we should look into our trade pattern and I have no doubt in my 

mind that we could improve our position in Western Canada by doing so. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — I would say, after the present time, after the administration that we‟ve had for so 

long, too long . . . I want to remind the Minister of Agriculture when he was speaking with Hazen Argue 

at Weyburn of the time when they said, “Grow wheat like hell.” I don‟t like these announcements 

coming after a fund-raising banquet, because too often they are not too responsible. We want 

responsible announcements that the farmers can count on. We need a crash program. I say that the 

Western provinces should form an association of getting together, but not do like the Premier is trying to 

do. I have listened to him from the beginning of the Session and all he is interested in is running the 

Premier of Manitoba into the ground, when he has got more problems than he can solve. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — That‟s all he is doing. You had better try to get along with Premier Schreyer, get 

along with Alberta and British Columbia. Let‟s walk together, like brothers. 

 

Now I want to read a portion of a letter that comes from my constituency in the Wakaw Recorder, 

February 5, 1970. I 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

622 

don‟t know what the man‟s political background is, but he has something to say about the 

Conservatives. His final paragraph is this, signed by Geza Nagy: 

 

The Western farmers have been good sheep this far. 

 

I think when the Minister of Agriculture is tightening up on education, I always think this way. You 

know the less education you give to people the better sheep they make. I think we better have a look at 

this. I‟ll continue with the letter: 

 

Ottawa, each year, has clipped our wool for a good profit. Now they are taking our hides. You can 

take the wool off the sheep every year but the hide only once. This applies to everyone — farmers, 

labourers, businessmen, professionals and others. Act now before it is too late — or are you all waiting 

for social welfare? 

 

I would advise you read the whole letter, because it is a good one. I think we had better leave the hide 

alone, but right now the farmer and the small businessmen and the workers are getting their hides pulled 

off. 

 

Now to tell you, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Table it. 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Anything you want tabled, you can come up and get it. 

 

MR. STEUART: — The last one you wrote, but I just wanted . . . 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — No, I didn‟t write that. It‟s from the Wakaw Recorder. 

 

Now I want to say how effective our Liberal Government has been in my constituency. I am going to 

talk about population. My golly, just listen to that. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Listen to that. 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Hey now listen here, you had better worry about those kids, if they ever find you 

sleeping in your desk, you‟ll never get elected again. 

 

I want to give you the population figures for 1964-1968 in my constituency. The municipalities that I am 

referring to are the municipalities that are in the whole or in part in my constituency, some of it borders 

on the Member for Humboldt (Mr. Breker). Invergordon in 1964 had 2,108 of a population. I took that 

from the municipal records. In 1968, 1,550 for a loss of 558. That is one municipality and it is all in my 

constituency. St. Louis — 2,207 in 1964; 1968 — 2,000, a loss of 200. Flett‟s Spring in 1964, 1,590; 

1968, 1,300, a loss of 290. Now, you can check your own, you can check any one across 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

623 

the province and you will find out the pattern. Now take Three Lakes with 1,880 in 1964 went down to 

1,010, for a loss of 770. It is because you along with the Ottawa Liberals have ruined Western 

agriculture. An unbridled free enterprise system. Now Fish Creek in 1964 a population of 1,063, down 

to 856, a minus of 207. The next one is Kinistino RM with a minus of 525. Another one is Birch Hills 

with a minus of 171, for a total of 2,731 people in four years. There is a bright side to the picture, boys. 

Don‟t get carried away. The town of Wakaw with a population of 989 in 1964 went up to 1,005, a plus 

of 16. Kinistino has a plus of 115. Birch Hills has a plus of 58 with a total deficit of 2,497. I have got a 

little more help here, I have six villages in my constituency and out of the six villages, St. Brieux went 

up by 52 and Weldon went up by 34. Now you cannot blame that on the Frenchmen, because we are 

Scandinavian in Weldon and French in St. Brieux. If you total the entire issue it shows a gain of 13. So 

you have improved the situation a little bit. Here you have the population figures. 

 

Where are those 80,000 jobs? That‟s the answer to that. The acid test. 

 

Another thing that I looked into was the family allowance record. That is the working group of our 

people, the fellows who have young kids. You think it is funny, it is not funny. That‟s the working class. 

You should act a little more responsibly, Mr. Attorney General. This is why the Attorney General wrote 

the kind of letters he did. 

 

Now in 1968, we had a departure from this province of families that are registered in the Family 

Allowance records of 1,160. For the 12 month period it amounted to 1,280. Now for the first 11 months 

of 1969 the latest figures that we can get, they showed a loss of 2,755 families, more than double of the 

working group that left this province Mr. Speaker, do you think that these people have jobs. The best 

business in Regina right now they tell me is the trucking business moving people out of Saskatchewan. 

Here you must believe Mr. Pepin when he came in not so long ago and told you that Saskatchewan lost 

48,000 from 1965-1968. Will you believe him? It is a bad situation, Mr. Speaker, and with all the 

promises that were made very little was done about it. 

 

Now I want to say a few words about interest rates. I think the general public should know that the 

banks are able to loan money at a ratio of 1:12. In other words, for every dollar they have they can lend 

$12. They have the audacity to charge, 9, 10 and 15 per cent interest on that money. We never hear this 

Government saying anything about it. It is just plain robbery. Who took the ceiling off on the interest 

rates, if it isn‟t Mr. Trudeau? He took it off and said they were going to go down. What happened to 

them? At a time when the farmers are having a desperate situation on their hands, the United States, 

right across the border, is letting the farmers have money at three per cent interest. That makes sense, 

but there is no justification in charging that kind of interest at a time when we are in 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

624 

desperate need. You know, they remind me, I have got a pig pen at home. Once in awhile the sow breaks 

through the fence and gets into the slop pail. You can‟t do a blasted thing until she is done eating, before 

you can get her back into that pen. She has got to know that the pail is empty. When the farmers are 

right down and out, then there is somebody that is going to realize that the pail is empty and we had 

better do something about it. We are governed by a group of people in my mind that think more of 

money than they do of their souls. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words about my Indian people. I have Indians in my 

constituency, I‟d like to cover this. I didn‟t speak on the Budget. This is the first time I have got on my 

feet and I hope you will bear with me. I‟ve just got a few dozen pages left. In my constituency, we have 

two reserves. I want to put it to you this way. The Indian people are very interested in the new right of 

having the right to vote, but too many decisions are made from on top and just dropped in on them. They 

would like to have more say in decision-making. In 1754 the first wheat that was grown in this province 

was grown at Ft. a la Corne. I want the Minister of Municipal Affairs to pay attention to this. They are 

surveying a grid road that is going to bury this plot. They would like that plot to be kept for an historic 

site; there is nothing wrong with it. For sentimental reasons I think their request should be granted. 

Another thing is the community pasture which is mostly used by white people. The Indians have about 

100 or less head in the community pasture and the whites have over 700 head. They want a program so 

that eventually they will have control over the entire, herd of cattle that is in the community pasture. I 

want to give you another message that the Indians wanted me to tell to this House, and that is that the 

present Government promises are getting bigger and bigger and harder and harder to swallow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would appear that under a Liberal Government the only time that we can have prosperity 

is when our sons are shedding their blood on the battle fields and the mother is home weeping. It is quite 

clear that we cannot afford a war and we cannot afford an unbridled capital system. In 1964 we gave you 

a hospital plan with $10 million in the kitty. You were the custodians of` that plan. What did you do 

with it? This could apply to many other remarks, such as research and so on. The people gave you the 

job of being the custodian of those plans and you went ahead and spent money like a bunch of drunken 

sailors. It‟s going to be Homecoming „71 not too long from now and it will be coming home „71 for 

medicare, hospitalization, the bridges for Yellow Creek, war for price control and homecoming for 

better relations with Ottawa and our neighboring provinces, with an NDP Government. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — All we have heard from the present Government is to 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

625 

drive a wedge between people, teachers, trustees — you name it and we have got it — between 

provinces and so on. Let us learn to get along with each other, Mr. Speaker, let us learn to share the fruit 

of the earth. There is going to be plenty for all of us. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. THIBAULT: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I will not support the Budget but I will support the 

amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. C.L.B. ESTEY: (Minister of Municipal Affairs) — Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the Provincial 

Treasurer on not only the Budget which he has brought in, but the method in which he presented that 

Budget. 

 

It now appears I submit that the Members of the Opposition have placed themselves in a position where 

they will vote against this motion and are therefore voting against such things as increasing the 

homeowner grants, against increased assistance to rural municipalities under the Municipal Road 

Authority. They are voting against increasing operating grants — and this is most important, Mr. 

Speaker — for education especially in the field of our primary and secondary schools. To vote against 

this Budget is also to vote against expanding social welfare and every capital project which is called for 

in 1970. I can tell this Legislature, Mr. Speaker, that the Budget which is before this House will increase 

the allotment to each of our municipalities in 1970 for the construction of grid and farm access roads by 

a minimum of 15 per cent. A vote against this Budget, I submit, Mr. Speaker, can signify only one thing, 

namely that the opposition objects to the proposed allotment of funds for the Municipal Road Authority. 

 

Every Member opposite appears to agree that additional assistance should be given to our native people, 

but by voting against this Budget the Members opposite are opposing a 100 per cent increase in the 

construction of roads on Indian Reserves. By voting against the Budget they are opposing an increase in 

the construction of bridges in our municipalities where the Province pays 100 per cent of the cost. It is 

also obvious that insofar as the urban centres are concerned that the Opposition are opposed to the 

increase for gravelling our streets in our hamlets, villages and towns. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the Members from Saskatoon, Regina, Swift Current, 

Weyburn and North Battleford apparently oppose assistance to those municipalities for police 

protection, snow removal and so on. The Members opposite continually want us to believe that they are 

interested in the health and the welfare of our people, but when they oppose this Budget they condemn 

the increase given to our health grants and 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

626 

the increase to our libraries. 

 

During the speech of the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) we heard a long discourse on the mineral 

production in our province. The Opposition critic informed us that his information was obtained from 

the Annual Report of the Department of Mineral Resources. I want to refer for a moment to this report, 

where it sets out the annual mineral production of our province on a five-year basis over the past ten 

years. Our minerals are divided into metals, fuels, and industrial minerals. We were led to believe by the 

opposition critic that the dollar value of mineral production in Saskatchewan has fallen to a disastrous 

figure. I want to draw to. the attention of this House that in order to prove his case the opposition critic 

did not deal with the total production, as set out, on pages 8 and 9 of the report to which he referred, but 

merely to that section dealing with metals. It is quite true that the metal section of the Mineral Resources 

Report showed a decline in five years of $17 million, but there is also a decline in one metal, namely 

uranium in that five-year period of $23 million. Therefore, there must have been an increase in mineral 

production. The Opposition critic, Mr. Speaker, conveniently failed to mention in 1968-69 the Province 

of Saskatchewan produced 8,350,000 pounds of lead and over one half million pounds of nickel. This 

production did not exist in 1963-64. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — I want to further point out that when you come to the value of fuel, such as coal, 

natural gas and petroleum, that in 1968-69, and I am quoting from the same record as the opposition 

critic referred to, our production in that year in dollars of coal, natural gas and petroleum amounted to 

$217,530,000, while in the great year 1964, the production of those fuels amounted to only 

$174,658,000. Again I am quoting from the same book as the Opposition critic. 

 

Now let us turn to industrial minerals, we‟ll go to another section, conveniently not referred to. The 

story is the same. In the fiscal year of 1968-69 the production in dollars of what is referred to as 

industrial metals, amounted to $102,712,000 — yes, we are referring to the same book, Mr. Member 

from Touchwood (Mr. Meakes) — whereas in the fiscal year 1963-64 the production of these industrial 

minerals — and listen to this was $41,200,000. In other words, in five years of Liberal, Government, 

there was an increase in the production in dollars of our industrial minerals of $61 million. Mr. Speaker, 

if you take this report, you will find that the total mineral production in 1968-69 in Saskatchewan 

amounted to $336,993,590 and in 1963-64 the production amounted to $279,100,000. Mr. Speaker, I 

submit that what I have just said is a true picture of the mineral production in Saskatchewan based on 

the report of the Department of Mineral Resources. 

 

It is also interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

627 

opposition critic, whenever it suited his argument or his presentation, switched from tonnage to dollars 

and back again. Take for example potash. We heard the value of potash, every child on the street knows 

the potash price has gone down, but the tonnage hasn‟t. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn for a moment to the Indian and Métis Department. I believe that 

significant progress has been made in this Department since its establishment some ten months ago. I am 

the first to admit that a great deal remains to be accomplished and that assistance will be required from 

every sector of our society. I am also firmly convinced that the questions involved cannot be solved by 

any grandiose program, for we must realize we are dealing with people who, like any other group of 

people, contain persons with different aptitudes and we must therefore have many programs. However, I 

am firmly convinced that the upgrading courses, courses in large machinery, pulp-cutting courses and so 

on, are vitally necessary for the success of this Department. We have during the first ten months of our 

existence worked closely with the Department of Education in the operation of these upgrading courses 

and with the Saskatchewan Indian and Métis Association. A representative, I might point out, of the 

Métis Association, works with our department and with the Department of Education in planning these 

upgrading and other courses. During the present fiscal year, as the Minister of Education mentioned, 

approximately 1,000 Métis will attend these courses and I believe just about the same number of 

Indians. There is little point, I submit, Mr. Speaker, in obtaining a position for a person unless that 

person has some fluency in the English language both as a reader and as a writer. For example, a person 

must be able to read safety regulations prior to obtaining a position. Therefore, these upgrading courses, 

in my opinion, must continue at the present level and be even expanded. During this year we were 

advised by the Federal Government that it could no longer provide financial assistance for upgrading 

courses as far as the Métis people were concerned, and the Province has assumed the total expense of 

these upgrading courses insofar as the Métis people are concerned, and I believe we will have to 

continue to assume this expense. One very encouraging sign insofar as these upgrading courses are 

concerned, Mr. Speaker, is that we are now receiving requests from the people themselves to attend 

courses. There has also been an improvement in the last two years in the rate of attendance. There 

appears to be more regularity in the attendance. 

 

I now want to say something about one or two projects which are underway in the Department and again 

I want to impress on the Members that I am not attempting to say that we have done everything. It is a 

large question, I think it is going to take a great deal of time, but I do want to say that we have had 

cooperation from those Métis and Indian people with whom we have come in contact. One project I 

want to refer to for a moment is the Delta Mutual Outfitters project near Cumberland House. This is an 

ARDA project in which the Provincial Government pays 50 per cent and the Federal Government pays 

50 per cent. It involves 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

628 

a group of people of about 60. Some years ago this group did trapping in an area between the 

Saskatchewan and Carrot Rivers, which is apparently a very good area for muskrat. Then in 1968, this 

group of their own volition commenced an outfitting business in a small way. They then came to the 

Government for assistance and through ARDA we signed an agreement whereby $86,000 would be 

spent in this area in the years 1969-70 and 1970-71. In the present fiscal year we have allotted $30,000 

to that project with the work being done by the group, and out-camps have been built and such things as 

canoes and motors acquired. This camp opened for a very short period for only part of one of the 

seasons and took in from a few hunters in excess of $5,000, and that, does not include the revenue from 

trapping. This appears to be a project where there is a real possibility of success. 

 

We also entered into a contract with the Extension Department of the University to provide management 

training and homemaking and approximately 200 Métis women asked for and received that training. 

 

We have continued courses in pulp wood and its cutting and it is our hope that within the next two or 

three years even more of our people will be employed in the pulp-cutting industry in Northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — We also made a grant to the Cumberland House Wood Products venture which had 

financial difficulties. The grant, I believe, amounted to $15,000 and it is our hope that this enterprise is 

again one that will benefit the people involved. It is interesting to note that the people involved in that 

project have asked the Economic Branch of our Department to supply advice in the field of 

management. We have had several hospitals initiate a hospital-training program which we hope to 

expand. Insofar as the aid to handicrafts is concerned we are still continuing the program with ARDA. 

At the present time there are around 200 women in Northern Saskatchewan involved in the manufactural 

art-making of these handicrafts. The price has been increased during the past year for handicrafts which 

are sold as you know through an organization in La Ronge and we hope that this is now well on the way 

to being a financial success. We have enlarged our placement staffs in Prince Albert, Regina, and 

Saskatoon and have also placement officers in La Ronge and Buffalo Narrows. During the period April 

1, 1969 to June 2, 1970, permanent and temporary work was found through these placement officers for 

1580 persons. Of that figure we regard around 1000 as temporary or training positions. We have many 

people in the Civil Service as the Premier pointed out the other day who are receiving training and 

awaiting permanent positions. During the present fiscal year our training program in the Civil Service 

.alone will cost approximately $900,000. It is my opinion that we must continue our efforts in making, 

an even greater effort to find greater employment in our private sector. One of the real 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

629 

bright spots in a private sector is this Anglo-Rouyn Mine at La Ronge which now has a staff with around 

30 per cent native people and has for some time been carrying on two training programs. I doubt very 

much if there is any company in Canada with a better record of both training and employing native 

people than the Anglo-Rouyn Mine. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ESTEY: — A great deal has been said about the IPSCO project and I don‟t wish to dwell on that at 

any length except to say that this program ha` been organized by a committee on which the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Indians and the Métis Association are represented. There are other 

representatives on it from the Task Force. When IPSCO came to the Task Force, this committee 

investigated the financial possibilities of this project and also received independent advice which was to 

the effect that this project had every possibility of being a financial success. I might say one great 

advantage of this project is that Native Metals — that is going to be the name I understand — will not 

have to put out one cent for inventory. The inventory will be brought there by IPSCO on consignment 

and placed at, Native Metals‟ disposal. It goes back to IPSCO with a price added on for preparing the 

metal. As of this date the location is right next to IPSCO. It has been fenced and a spur line put in; gas 

lines have already been placed. As the Member for Regina South West (Mr. McPherson), speaking 

earlier today stated, the first group of people in the IPSCO project are now in Weyburn receiving 

training in the using of torches and safety devices. The real benefit of this project, as I see it, Mr. 

Speaker, is that once you get into further phases there are phases in this project which can be carried out 

near or on Indian Reserves or Métis settlements. The question of the eventual ownership of this program 

will of course be determined by this committee, but as of this date I am told that it is hoped the 

ownership will invest in those persons who are employed in the enterprise. 

 

But I want to emphasize again because I would hate to have anyone feel that I am standing up here 

saying „All is well.‟ I am the first to admit that the surface has just been scratched, but I think, with the 

cooperation of the Indian and Métis people and of those Indians and Métis who seek assistance from the 

Department, that over a period of years a real advancement can be made insofar as this question is 

concerned. Mr. Speaker, I think it is obvious that I will support the motion. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. F.K. RADLOFF: (Nipawin) — Mr. Speaker, and Members. Of the Legislature, entering the 

Budget Debate, I accept the opportunity to present a few thoughts to the Members of the Legislature. On 

Monday and Wednesday of this week I listened to two long harangues by a Regina 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

630 

Member, the Member for Regina Centre, the financial critic of the Opposition (Mr. Blakeney). To me it 

sounded something like the same old bunkum that he repeats year after year. Guilty parties and 

individuals are vociferous when trying to cover up past sins. The financial critic cries about robbing 

piggy banks. If this is so, it must be some secret funds that the NDP had overlooked, and now the 

Member for Prince Albert West (Mr. Steuart) has found these funds and is channelling them into the use 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Our Hon. Minister of Finance is still with us and has not disappeared to warmer 

climates as others have done. This assures the people of the province that all funds are being properly 

channelled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we begin this Session I look across the way, I am almost overcome with 

disappointment. It is most unfortunate that the two distinguished servants of the public, the Member for 

Prince Albert East-Cumberland (Mr. Berezowsky) and the Member for Melfort (Mr. Willis) have been 

removed from the front benches. It is unfortunate that the genial Mayor of the city of Regina, the 

Member for Regina South East (Mr. Baker) has been ignored and stays in his same old seat. Now 

definitely out of the leadership race his dreams are the grandest in the land and a real free enterpriser. I 

guess these dreams are not acceptable to the Socialist hierarchy. The three men mentioned have done 

yeoman service for the NDP and now have been forcefully put out to pasture. Along with the bad, along 

comes some good. I am happy to see the Member from Kelsey (Mr. Messer) in the front row. It is very 

apparent that the Member for Kelsey is now being selected to take over the leadership when the Member 

for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) retires. 

 

Monday was a special day for the people of Saskatchewan, when the Hon. Dave Steuart presented his 

Budget for the 1970-71 fiscal year, a Budget that provides increased assistance for increased services for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, to present a Budget without major tax increases and some tax cuts in 

this day and age speaks well for the Minister‟s ability and judgment. The Hon. Dave Steuart is a 

financial genius to be able to manage the economy of Saskatchewan so efficiently during these most 

difficult days. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — One can say the impossible has been accomplished. The people of the city of 

Prince Albert can be proud of their representative in the Liberal Government. An immoral propaganda 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

631 

machine is doing its utmost to destroy the Hon. Dave Steuart, a man who has done a tremendous job for 

Prince Albert City and district. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — I have heard rumors that there are many people spreading malicious and avarice 

babble to create confusion in that area. The Hon. Dave Steuart cannot be defeated at the polls in an 

honorable way. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Many, false rumors are being spread to undermine his position. Callous bunkum 

and claptrap by a decadent and deceptive organization will fool some people but thinking, honest people 

will continue to give the Member for Prince Albert West their support. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Socialist cry baby fanatics have disillusioned the people of the province and are 

now trying to re-establish themselves with some fictitious glorifications of their powers, trying 

desperately to cover up their ruthless and underground activities. People know who publishes the Prairie 

Fire, the Brown Paper, the dirty papers. People know who is spreading the filth among high school 

youths. I have seen some copies of these papers. I would be ashamed to be associated with these 

publishers in any way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 1969 has been a year of shock, of adversity, of illusion promoted by impulsive, 

incorrigible and some gullible people who are easily misled. 1969 has also been a year of recognition, 

recognition by the people of Saskatchewan that Saskatchewan has strong, honest, devoted leadership by 

men who are prepared to fight for Saskatchewan‟s rights and Saskatchewan‟s needs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Premier Thatcher and his Cabinet Members recognize the many diverse and 

complicated problems of the province. People must give credit where credit is due. Mr. Speaker, not in 

the least are sometimes unreasonable wage demands coupled with sometimes inconsiderate union 

activity. In particular I refer to union activity programmed to hinder grain shipments east, west, north 

and south. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, I have been 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

632 

informed that whenever Canada does make a large grain shipment, union leaders in the United States 

demand that Canadian union members strike so that United States ports receive the benefits. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — There can be doubts as to who controls United States unions and Canadian 

affiliated unions. Is it the evil, the lustful and the brutal, corrupt, cunning Mafia organization? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Was the killing of Joseph Yablonski, his wife and daughter an example of union 

leadership activity? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — There are men who will take any type of action to eradicate opposition, stoop to 

any crime, to any immoral purpose, to make money, who will promote any illicit activity to destroy our 

social order, and to make it easier for their organizations to carry on the nefarious design. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mafia leaders are most pernicious killers and plunderers, the most ruthless, savage men 

ever to inhabit the face of the earth. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Crime with all. its implications is their god, deceit and extortion their way of life. 

It is unfortunate that NDP Opposition Members have allowed their party to be controlled by the labor 

movement, the policies dictated by the United States labor organizations, possibly corrupted by the 

slimy sordid evil subversive Mafia organization activity and leadership. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, it is unfortunate that the possible infiltration of the NDP organization 

provides greater opportunity for Mafia control to impregnate all levels of governments and financial 

institutions are making a mockery of their duties, not because they want to, but sometimes they are 

forced to by the tentacles of control exerted by criminal, elements,. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, our high interest rates are an innovation of power-hungry 

Mafia-controlled financial barons to obtain the remainder of the economy after taking all they can 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

633 

by direct criminal operations. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, typical and most obvious is the promotion of the monstrous drug 

traffic by Mafia leaders with the obvious intent. of destroying the moral fibre and determination of our 

people, in particular our most intelligent young people. Socialist propaganda coupled with support from 

the criminal element is encouraging the sit-ins, the rantings, the ravings, and the radical protest of the 

lunatic fringe. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, Communist and Socialist plans and policies can. only be put into 

operation with the love of freedom, the love of independence, and the love of accomplishment being 

destroyed. Mr. Speaker, hate and violence propaganda must be controlled, Communist sympathizers and 

Mafia crime-leaders isolated, their operations eliminated. The price for the people is eternal vigilance. 

Mr. Speaker, another major confrontation for Saskatchewan people is the outmoded policies and selling 

programs of our Canadian Wheat Board. Saskatchewan people are faced with economic disaster unless 

drastic action is taken by the Canadian Wheat Board to clear out the dead wood and build an aggressive 

selling organization. The big question being asked in the Nipawin. area is: is the Canadian Wheat Board 

a sick organization led by power-hungry leaders who are heedless of the grain producers‟ needs? 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — According to reports wheat markets have been lost in close to 100 countries. Mr. 

Roberts of Lethbridge states he had a sale of 4 million bushels of barley to the American people for the 

feeding of livestock and the sale was stopped by Wheat Board officials. It is calamitous that 

small-minded officials are ruthlessly bent on the fiscal disintegration of prairie people. New policies to 

provide increased financial returns for small farmers are imperative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are all thankful that we still have leaders like Premier Ross Thatcher, men who will 

stand up and be counted, men who realize the urgent need for concrete action and speedy plans. It is 

grimly ironic how the welfare state mania grows by feeding on itself. Acceptance of Socialist thinking is 

destroying the initiative of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Premier Thatcher knows that the 

only real cure for poverty is production with markets for that production. Criticism without thought 

comes easy for many inconsiderate and thoughtless people. The speedy exchange of products between. 

producer and consumer means a higher standard of living for all people. If there is no money for 

exchange then the products must be traded by any 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

634 

means to avoid complete stagnation. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan can say, “Go to it, Ross, 

barter, swap, trade, we must make our food available to the hungry, needy people of the world.” 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: Regina Centre) — Go, Ross! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, our short-memoried opposition Leader, Mr. Woodrow Lloyd, makes 

endless demands for crash programs of job-creating projects, the NDP programs that crashed and 

created unemployment. The Liberal incentives as outlined by the Provincial Treasurer and the Premier 

will create work for needy. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan easily remember the Member from Biggar 

with his piddling effort while Premier of the Province. The only new jobs provided by his Government 

were for his followers and supporters of his party. It will take Saskatchewan a hundred years to recover 

all the opportunities lost during those 20 years of Socialist misdirected planning. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, all communities welcome the incentive program. Many new 

industries will find welcome homes in the designated localities. Nipawin constituency has received 

many benefits from being located in a designated area. I think in particular of the highly successful 

development by Agro Industries Ltd., producers of high quality rapeseed oil. Hundreds of farmers have 

received increased returns from the production of rape. In fact many owe their survival to this 

progressive firm. 

 

The people of Northern Saskatchewan are hopeful that the designated area location with Government 

financial support will encourage more development and utilization of our vast mineral and natural 

resources of the Nipawin constituency. Mr. Speaker, for years and years the people of Northern 

Saskatchewan have suffered from inadequate roads and highway development. Misguided Socialist 

planners thought mud and water was a just tribulation for pioneering citizens who had to move from the 

south of the province because of the severe drought during the 30s. 

 

Fortunately, Saskatchewan has a Highways Minister who recognizes the many road requirements. The 

people of my constituency have only words of praise for the forthright and determined way the Hon. 

Dave Boldt is completing his program of road and highway extension. They particularly want to express 

their thanks for the completion of the Nipawin-Carrot River to 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

635 

The Pas Highway, the road requested for many years and nothing done about it by the NDP. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — In 1861, Henry Kelsey travelled overland west from The Pas towards the fork of 

the Saskatchewan River, almost the same route as the new highway is following. By September 30th of 

this year the road will be completed over the old Kelsey trail connecting the Carrot River-Nipawin area 

to The Pas. The highway will provide vast opportunities for recreation, industry and agriculture. The 

highway will provide a new gateway to the North. The Kelsey Trail skirting the High Pasqua Hills along 

the Carrot River will be one of the most scenic in Western Canada. Last year an estimated 100,000 

tourists visited the Tobin Lake-Squaw Rapids area. The giant pike caught in the lakes and rivers 

continue to attract people from all over the continent. With the opening of the Kelsey Trail, the 

celebration of Cumberland‟s 200 years of settlement and Homecoming „71, one-half million tourists can 

be expected in the Nipawin constituency. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. RADLOFF: — Mr. Speaker, agriculture remains our greatest resource. North-eastern 

Saskatchewan farmers continue to diversify. Many people have expressed appreciation of new 

Government programs devised to encourage faster diversification. North-eastern Saskatchewan farmers 

are among the most successful in Western Canada. They will long remember and appreciate Premier 

Thatcher‟s early advice that to be successful they must diversify their operations. Our farmers have 

diversified and are reaping the extra returns for their efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people of the Nipawin constituency continue to ask for many things, not because they are 

greedy but for 20 years under the NDP little recognition was given to the many acute needs and 

problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, water pollution continues to be one of our major concerns. The Saskatchewan River 

system is one of the Nipawin constituency‟s most important assets. Pollution control must not be a 

slogan but a way of life. Pollution is a dirty word, according to statistics, water pollution has killed more 

people than all the wars of history. Let us bend every effort to make the water clean and the air pure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rapidly increasing prices of farm machinery have been the concern of our farmers. The 

Barber Report substantiates the farmers‟ thoughts. There must be a keen look and a search for alternate 

supplies a t a more reasonable price. Farmers must become more flexible, more selective with more 

consideration of the countries who purchase Western Canada grains. It is ridiculous that Canadian 

farmers pay $1,881 more for a single 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

636 

unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the surest solution of the farm equipment price crisis is for our farmers to shop European 

and Asian markets for equipment priced in line with returns received for prairie grain. Of continued 

concern to the farmers of North-eastern Saskatchewan is the slow movement of grain. They understand 

that the continued strikes during the past ten years by grain-handling employees have cost Canada over 

two years‟ sale of grain. Farmers selling grain to CPR delivery points in North-eastern Saskatchewan are 

becoming somewhat hostile about the unconcerned, nonchalant attitude of the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Board and Canadian Pacific Railway officials. 

 

Many farmers in the area have not delivered a bushel since last July. Despite letters, discussions, little or 

no action has taken place. The block arrangements of shipping grain may provide some improvement. 

Acreage reduction payments may help a few farmers but nothing will substitute for an aggressive 

grain-selling agency. Growers are happy to hear and read that elevator companies are going to establish 

a strong aggressive Canadian grain-selling agency. It is time someone tried to revive the grain trade and 

make it prosperous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Russian wheat policy is that the State tells the farmers to grow more wheat. The State 

takes the wheat and gives a pittance, arrests the farmer if he dares to dispose of his wheat privately. Any 

resemblance, Mr. Speaker, to the Canadian Wheat Board is purely coincidental. Outmoded regulations 

are overly. restrictive. 

 

There is one area of concern to people of the Nipawin constituency and these are the proposals put 

forward by the Hon. Mr. Benson in the White Paper on taxation. Many taxation proposals will 

discourage investment and development, destroy individual initiative and cause our young people to 

leave Saskatchewan for more inviting countries. Saskatchewan can ill afford to support some of the 

proposals outlined. 

 

Saskatchewan people are at the cross-roads. It may be we are faced with a decision to make emergency 

political moves. It is time to ponder upon our future and to assess our position in Canada. Mr. Speaker, 

we must continue to press for solutions of the many injustices heaped upon Saskatchewan people. 

Unreasonable railway charges, high tariffs for protection of Eastern Canada interests and general 

unconcern for Western Canada problems. Future generations depend upon this Liberal Government to 

continue to meet the challenges successfully. The previous NDP Government blundered along. Typical 

of their planning is the fiasco of clearing Tobin Lake and the Squaw Rapids Dam area. 

 

As the Squaw Rapids dam neared completion, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation pleaded with our 

government agencies, in particular the Department of Natural Resources, headed by the Member for The 

Battlefords (Mr. Kramer), to fulfil the agreement 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

637 

to completely clear of trash the Tobin Lake basin. From 1959 to May 1963, the Member from The 

Battlefords and his Department again piddled around and very little was accomplished. Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation then allocated $100,000 of its own funds for protection of the dam, ice-skimming 

structure and power plant. Booms were placed across the river and two tugs were purchased to trap the 

floating trees and logs. 

 

The Member from The Battlefords, the Minister of Natural Resources with the NDP, with his poor 

administration and poor judgment has cost the people of Saskatchewan many thousands of dollars in 

extra expenses. Many people visiting Tobin Lake wonder how anyone in his right mind could have 

produced such a fiasco. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in December 1963 with the hydro plant in use, it .was established that it would cost $1.5 

million to remove the visible trash from Tobin Lake. This did not include removing sunken logs, trees or 

stumps. At the present time, to effectively clear the lake, it would have to be drained and allowed to dry 

out for two years. This would put the Squaw Rapids plant out of action for two years, requiring 

replacement of 281,000 kilowatt capacity. The plant at present supplies over 35 per cent of the 

province‟s power needs. It is obviously impossible to close the plant. Approximate cost of replacement 

capacity would be another $50 million plus clearing costs in excess of $2 million. As it stands the lake is 

an industrial reservoir with limited use for recreation, thanks to the Member for The Battlefords' faulty 

judgment and indecisive action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people will long continue to pay for the many errors and shortcomings. It is a costly error 

by the old NDP Government and should not be forgotten by the voters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend special congratulations to our new Lieutenant Governor, the 

Honorable Stephen Worobetz and also congratulations from the people of Nipawin constituency. The 

Ukrainian people form an important segment of the population of the Nipawin constituency and of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Recognition of the immense contribution by Ukrainian people to the development and growth of 

Saskatchewan is provided by Dr. Worobetz‟s appointment to this distinguished position, by Prime 

Minister Trudeau on the recommendation of Premier Thatcher. It goes without saying that Dr. Worobetz 

is well qualified for the position and one of Saskatchewan‟s finest citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the decision by the Government to construct a new traffic bridge at Nipawin and the 

approval of renovations to the Nipawin hospital show continued recognition of Nipawin constituency 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Nipawin constituency people approve of the progressive, sound legislation proposed in the 

Throne Speech and the Budget Speech. Continued progress and development are assured to the people 

of Saskatchewan. I can assure the Members 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

638 

of the Legislature that I will vote for the motion and against the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. J. MESSER: (Kelsey) — Mr. Speaker, in rising to take part in this Budget Debate, I first of all 

want to say something about the speech that was just delivered by the Hon. Member opposite (Mr. 

Radloff). If anything could be said about it, which is rather a tough proposition, but it could only be 

termed as laughable and a joke, an embarrassment to the Assembly. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — In fact, it is not even worth commenting on except to say that it is perfectly obvious 

that the clown prince has now moved over somewhere from that area further over to the right of the 

Assembly on that side. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there were a number of statements made by the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. 

McFarlane) yesterday that I would like to comment on. I want, in particular, to bring to the Minister‟s 

attention the inaccuracy of some of the statistics which he quoted at that time, in particular, population 

of livestock on farms. Using the Agricultural Annual Report 1968-1969 on page 346, there is a chart 

showing livestock on farms June 1, 1906 to 1968. 

 

As June 1, 1964 would be the last complete statistics that would be available under the CCF 

Government, and comparing them with the June 1, 1968 statistics which are the last statistics this 

Government has in its agricultural report, we find: population of horses in Saskatchewan, June 1, 1964 

— 83,000; June 1, 1968 — 65,000, a reduction of 18,000 as the Minister is probably well aware. To be 

fair I suppose we could expect a reduction in the number of horses in the province due to mechanization. 

But let‟s take a look at milk cows in the Province of Saskatchewan. June 1, 1964 — 190,000 milk cows; 

June 1, 1968 — 127,000 milk cows or a reduction, Mr. Minister, of 63,000 animals. Let‟s take a look at 

cattle. June 1, 1964 — 2,189,000 head in the province; June 1, 1968 — 2,096,000, a reduction, Mr. 

Minister, of 93,000 animals. The total cattle numbers in the Province of Saskatchewan as of June 1, 

1964 — 2,379 million. June 1, 1968 — 2,223 million. A reduction of 156,000 animals. Sheep and 

lambs, June 1, 1964 — 153,000; June 1, 1968 — 128,000 or a reduction of 35,000 animals. In the case 

of hogs, June 1, 1964 — 556,000; June 1, 1968 — 508,000 or a reduction of 48,000 hogs. A reduction in 

every instance, Mr. Speaker. Not in one single area was there any increase yet the Minister has been 

trying to tell this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that never have the livestock numbers been 

so high as they are under this present Government. 

 

If he wants to play a game of figures and statistics, 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

639 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s take a look at the price of cattle, calves, hogs, sheep and lambs in Saskatchewan up to 

the end of 1968, which are the last complete figures that his report gives. Under the former CCF 

Government cattle were selling per hundredweight in 1962 at $20.80, in, 1963 — $20:20. Under the 

Liberal Government in 1964 the price of cattle per hundredweight dropped to $18; in 1965 — $18.50. 

Reductions in price, Mr. Speaker, not increases! In fact we can go back to 1951 and we find that under 

the then CCF Government cattle were selling for $27.40 per hundred. If we compare that to the price of 

cattle in 1968 under the Liberal Government of $23.20 we find a reduction in cattle prices of $4.20 per 

hundredweight. 

 

The Minister likes to quote statistics and perhaps he would like to hear what the net incomes of farm 

operators for farming operations in Saskatchewan were. In 1963 under a CCF Government their net 

income total was $552,183,000. The next year under the Liberal Government the net income in 

Saskatchewan dropped to $342,300,000, a reduction of $210,185,000. If we compare the net income of 

farm operators in 1968 under the Liberal Government we find that their income for that year was $479 

million or a reduction of $73 million in five years from the time the former CCF Government was in 

power in 1963. 

 

Seeing the Minister and his Government would like to take credit for some of the windfall of statistics in 

regard to increased production or increased prices, I wonder what they have to say in regard to the prices 

of grain. Again using the Department of Agriculture‟s last annual report, on page 351 we find that in 

1963 under the former CCF Government wheat was selling for $1.75 per bushel. In 1968 prices realized 

$1.34 per bushel. Oats in 1963 — 55 cents a bushel, in 1968 — 49 cents a bushel; barley 95 cents a 

bushel and in 1968 — 80 cents a bushel; flax — $2.95 a bushel in 1963 and in 1968 — $2.90; rye in 

1963 — $1.20 per bushel and in 1968 — 98 cents a bushel; rapeseed in 1963 — $2.50 per bushel and in 

1968 — $1.80 per bushel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in every instance in regard to the prices of all grains grown in the Province of 

Saskatchewan we find a reduction from the last year the CCF were in power in comparison to 1968 

when this Government opposite was in power. It isn‟t in all instances, though, that there are reductions 

in agriculture statistics in regard to what this Government has done for the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to bring to its attention page 326 of the Agricultural Annual Report, where there is a 

statement showing the areas of new breaking in Saskatchewan. In 1964 we find there were 310,000 

acres of land broken by the CCF Government. In 1969 we find there were 400,000 acres broken by the 

Liberal Government — an increase of some 90,000 of new land. We finally, Mr. Speaker, come across 

an increase under the Liberal Government. But where was it? In an area where there should be 

reductions not increases. Under the present circumstances, and by their own admission, there should be 

less land cleared. Yet 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

640 

what do we find this Government doing? We find it increasing cleared land acreage. These are some of 

the facts, Mr. Speaker. These are some of the statistics that the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

should have been quoting yesterday rather than the inaccurate ones that he made mention of. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — I want to briefly mention something about the introduction of the new quota system 

in regards to the new wheat inventory program that will apply for at least one year in this province under 

the quota year 1970 and 1971. 

 

First of all I want to say that there is some merit in this wheat inventory-reduction program and the 

incentives that the Federal Government has offered in regard to reduction of wheat acreage. The 

proposed increase of some 22 million acres in summer fallow would certainly curb our production of 

wheat. The proposed 2 million acres to perennial forage would further reduce wheat production in 

Western Canada. The Federal Government compensation payments of $6 per acre for summer fallow or 

$10 per acre for additions to perennial forage are of some compensation to farmers in accepting this 

plan. 

 

There are, however, Mr. Speaker, I believe a great many areas that are detrimental to Prairie farmers in 

this program. In discussing these areas of criticism, I want to make it perfectly clear that I do it in a 

constructive way in the hope that action will be taken in order to remove some of the problems that 

farmers will be confronted with in this program. 

 

I believe in the instance of the $6 per acre for summer fallow, that it is unrealistic to expect that all 

farmers in Saskatchewan will accept this. I say this simply because of the varied cost of summer fallow 

in this province. I am sure that all Members of this Assembly, as all people involved in the farming 

industry, will agree with me that the costs of summer fallowing in various areas of the province fluctuate 

greatly from other areas. An example of this would be comparing summer fallow in the southern portion 

of the province to summer fallowing operations in Northern Saskatchewan. The costs of summer 

fallowing in the Northern Parkland Belt is going to be much higher than in Southern Saskatchewan. 

Therefore, I think that there should be some regionalized program introduced whereby there would be a 

fairer reimbursement for summer fallowing operation. 

 

As this is not the case, in this reduction program, I suggest that there is a high possibility of northern 

farmers continuing to grow wheat rather than summer fallow because of costs involved. I further suggest 

that the possibility of the farmers in Southern Saskatchewan curbing their production is much higher, 

because the $6 per acre is much more realistic to them in accepting additional summer fallow. If this 

proves to be a fact and if protein grading is introduced in the near future, we will then have established 

through this program the production of 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

641 

grains in the areas where protein is low and the non-production of wheat in areas where the protein is 

high, the very opposite to what we want in this suggested program. 

 

As there are no regulations in regard to what lands can be taken out of production, I suggest that there is 

a high possibility of farmers in Saskatchewan taking the poor or sub-marginal land and converting it 

either to summer fallow or perennial forage crop and then concentrating on more efficient and high 

production on their better lands. In order to substantiate this assumption, all that need be done is to look 

at statistics in regard to soil banks in the United, States. This could well mean little if any reduction in 

wheat production. As has already been pointed out in this Assembly, there is a high possibility of 

uncontrolled soil erosion in the province due to the increased summer fallow with no safeguards in 

regard to its application. It further appears to me that there are no safeguards, against the increased 

production of other grains. I would further suggest that this program does not encourage or put pressure 

on the Federal Government for more aggressive sales policies. In fact it may have the reverse effect. 

 

Such a program may increase wheat production in other countries due to those countries assuming we 

will not be active in our wheat production and sales. In spite of the recognition that is given to farmers 

who tried to curb production in 1968 and 1969, it still does not give them a fair reimbursement for their 

foresight and I, therefore, think it is detrimental to those farmers. I further think that it almost assures the 

elimination of a great many small farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

In regard to the perennial forage acres, I believe it would have been practical for them to increase the 

acreage from two million acres to perhaps five million acres and subtract those five million acres from 

the proposed 22 million acres of summer fallow. I would also suggest that the program should have had 

a greater length of time attached to it in regard to forage crops. I would suggest a three-year program. By 

extending this program it would also contribute to safeguards of soil erosion. 

 

As there is already some indication of lack of particular types of forage seeds and of increased prices in 

regard to those seeds that are somewhat scarce now, I suggest the Government should have incorporated 

some safeguards in this plan, so that there would have been sufficient seeds for farmers converting to 

forage so that the price would not be unduly high. I further suggest to the Government that it is unlikely 

that the goal of 22 million acres in the wheat inventory-reduction program will be totally accepted by the 

farmers. This means that there will still be more wheat produced than the Government or the Wheat 

Board anticipates sales for. 

 

The quota system that is introduced along with this wheat inventory-reduction program is likened to a 

club forcing farmers out of production without alternatives. I say this, Mr. Speaker, 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

642 

due to the fact that all wheat delivery will be made on summer fallow acreage or forage acreage. I 

realize that in order to curb production a measure like this has to be taken. However, in this instance I 

think it is somewhat severe and going to the extreme. 

 

The Government must also keep in mind that the summer fallow that is encouraged this year under this 

program will be land that farmers tend to put into crop next year. Therefore, the Government should 

now be taking extensive measures in regard to recommendations on what crops should be planted on 

that land, thereby off-setting over-production of other crops in the next year. I think it of utmost 

necessity that a research program be launched in regard to world movements of grain and means of 

dispersal, so that under-privileged, under-developed, hungry and starving countries will be able to 

receive Canadian grain. I am certain that all farmers will agree with me that in this day and age we 

should have better alternatives than those of paid non-production when there are a great many areas in 

this world that are in dire need of our produce. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — I again want to say, Mr. Speaker, in closing on this subject, the criticisms I have 

brought forward are in the constructive sense and that I hope from them that some other realistic 

alternatives are offered. And I by no means suggest that the total program does not have merit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a number of things in regard to North-eastern Saskatchewan and in particular 

the constituency that I represent — Kelsey. I think it unfortunate that the north-eastern portion of the 

province has been and still is considered to be somewhat separated from the rest of Saskatchewan. This 

area is contributing a great deal to the economy of Saskatchewan and has potential of contributing a 

great deal more in future years. I am certain all Members know that this area grows most of the rapeseed 

produced in the province of Saskatchewan. A large percentage of the honey crop that is produced in 

Saskatchewan comes from north-eastern portions of the province. It has tremendous potential and is now 

a major producer of coarse grains of the Province of Saskatchewan. The timber industries in the Carrot 

River and the Hudson Bay areas contribute a great deal to the timber industry of the province. It has 

potential in natural resource wealth and increased production but in order to assure this, development 

has to be given priority. 

 

Due to the agricultural crisis in the province, which seriously affects the north-eastern portion of the 

province and the constituency I represent, there has been and is considerable interest and developing 

being done I -regard to the establishment of alfalfa pelleting and dehydrating plants There are already 

two plants in operation in the area, one in the Aylsham district 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

643 

and another in the Zenon Park district. There is proposed construction of alfalfa plants at Tisdale, 

Arborfield, Carrot River, expansion of the Zenon Park plant and the construction of a second plant at 

Zenon Park. I believe the interested parties in establishing these plants have taken advantage of applying 

for a Federal grant under the Regional Development Policy of the Federal Government. This gives some 

assistance in regard to capital. However, when you take into consideration that this is a relatively new 

market, which I believe has a great deal of potential, the fact still remains that the establishment of this 

number of plants all at one time could create some hardships. I therefore think that the Provincial 

Government should be more closely involved in the establishing of these plants. I do not believe that it 

would be unrealistic for it to offer feasibility studies in regard to income that these plants should expect 

to receive. I believe the Government should be able to extend further information in regard to 

information and production of alfalfa, information in regard to plant construction and operation, 

information in regard to potential sales both domestically and foreign, information and assistance in 

regard to more competitive freight rates for that product. I also think that there should have been a more 

lucrative policy or credit towards construction and operation of these plants. I think these services by the 

Provincial Government are essential as the main single reason for the construction of these plants is to 

maintain the agricultural industries in the area and to maintain the communities that are established there 

to service that agricultural industry. 

 

In the constituency of Kelsey there are a number of communities that I believe entitle them to services 

that are not now being received. The town of Hudson Bay is the centre of a foundling agricultural 

industry, is the service centre of an extensive lumber industry, and is a thriving and growing community, 

but, as is true of any new and growing community, it has growing pains and problems. I feel that some 

of these problems could be alleviated to a great extent if the Provincial Government was to give more 

consideration to this town. This community is without adequate transportation for people and 

commodities. The people of the Hudson Bay area think it is essential that they have a bus service 

extended to them, so that they will have more realistic transportation to and from other areas in 

Saskatchewan. Other areas that bus service could be extended to from the Hudson Bay area would be 

Porcupine Plain, which is a thriving and growing community servicing a large agricultural area. I 

suggest that these communities should be given serious consideration in regard to the establishment of a 

bus route through this constituency servicing these two major communities and other smaller 

communities en route. 

 

The community of Hudson Bay and again the community of Porcupine Plain are without natural gas 

service. These two communities with populations higher than other communities in the province, that 

are now serviced with natural gas, feel as though they have been somewhat ignored in not receiving this 

service. I must agree with them, Mr. Speaker. These two 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

644 

communities have in the past been growing in population, and indeed, are offering a great deal to the 

Province of Saskatchewan in resource wealth. Consequently, they should be extended some of these 

basic services that the rest of the province is enjoying. 

 

I think the Provincial Government should be taking a serious look at the problems that the CN Master 

Agency Plan may create in regard to the closure of stations in smaller communities. In the constituency 

of. Kelsey there are eight communities that will be losing their station and station agent this year. These 

communities are Arborfield, Zenon Park, Mistatim, Prairie River, Crooked River, Weekes, Bjorkdale 

and Carragana, and will receive a serious blow and set-back when these stations close. I realize that 

there is a possibility that some of these communities will have to accept the station closures as a realistic 

one. But when you take into consideration that communities such as Arborfield and Zenon Park are 

contemplating construction of alfalfa plants and other industries in the area, I would tend to reason, as 

they do, that there is merit in their stations staying open. It is, therefore, I, think essential that the 

Government take a serious look at the effects of the Canadian National Railways‟ Master Agency Plan 

and take action where necessary to prevent closure. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Due to the present Government‟s position in regard to the teacher-pupil ratio there 

are in the constituency of Kelsey several rural schools that will be closed. In both instances the central 

area that the children would have to be schooled at, if their school is closed, is not in a position, nor does 

it have the facilities, to absorb these pupils. In both instances the people of these communities; have 

shown strong desires. to retain their schools. The teachers that are now there have given assurance that 

they would be willing to stay and teach. As both of these schools involve elementary grades, in order to 

bus them to the central community of Hudson Bay, it would be what is considered by most people an 

exhausting and time-consuming trip for these small children. I, therefore, ask the Minister of Education 

(Mr. McIsaac) to give serious consideration to these circumstances, not only to the two that I have 

outlined in the constituency of Kelsey, but where similar circumstances apply. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, these are only some of the problems that the constituency of Kelsey is 

confronted with There are others but I dot not know whether there is merit in discussing them at this 

time. I, however, want to urge the Government at this time to give serious consideration to extending 

some of these services that the people of Kelsey are asking for. I further urge them that there is a 

tremendous wealth in the north-eastern portion of 



 

March 6, 1970 

 

 

 

645 

the province which includes a number of constituencies. I urge them to formulate a new deal for 

North-eastern Saskatchewan . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. MESSER: — . . . so that it will not only be recognized, but so that it may become a major 

contributor to the resource and wealth of this province. 

 

As this Government has not outlined such a plan in the Budget Debate I cannot support the motion but 

will support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. I.H. MacDOUGALL: (Souris-Estevan) — Mr. Speaker, the time is rapidly coming to an end 

today and if I don‟t want to keep these boys tonight, I think that the best thing I can do, although I 

wanted to say some nasty things, the best I‟ll do today is congratulate Dr. Worobetz on becoming our 

new Lieutenant Governor and the New Member for Kelvington (Mr. Byers) for his contribution in this 

House thus far. He was, I think, formerly one of my own constituents but he didn‟t stay. He could have 

come back there to run against me I suppose, but they don‟t like school teacher candidates down there. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Famous last words! 

 

MR. MacDOUGALL: — Mr. Speaker, therefore, I ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:30 o‟clock p.m. 


