



















































Hansard: April 18, 1970


1807 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

45th Day 

 

Saturday, April 18, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON STANDING ORDERS AND PROCEDURES 

OF THE ASSEMBLY. 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 1 
 

Hon. A.R. Guy (Minister of Public Works) moved: 

 

That this Committee recommends the adoption of the Report of the Special Committee on Standing 

Orders and Procedures of the Assembly plus the Resolutions regarding the non-Controversial Bills 

Committee and voting “on division” and excepting those recommendations contained therein 

described as follows: 

 

“Statements before the Orders of the Day” on page 13. 

 

“Committee on Members Services” on page 20. 

 

“Public Accounts and Printing Committee” on page 24. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 2 
 

Mr. Guy moved: 

 

That this committee recommends the adoption of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly as they appear in appendix House of the Report of the Report of the Special Committee on 

Standing Orders and Procedures of the Assembly, as amended. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, in regard to this as amended, this means that the 

amendments that were put in it now as we went through it page by page, would not include the 

amendment that I suggested. I just want to make clear that the amendment that I suggested in regard to 

the recording in the Votes and Procedures is beside, over and above, what we have just gone through 

page by page in the book. There is a little contradiction here possibly. 

 

Mr. W.S. Howes (Kerrobert-Kindersley): — I haven’t checked this but I believe that this second 

Resolution refers only to Appendix H which are the Standing Orders. I believe that the Hon. Member’s 

recommendation was covered in the first Resolution. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, my point is that in the second Resolution we are moving that we now adopt 

these as they have been amended here now. If you agree to the Resolution which is now before the 

House, the amendment which I suggested would be left out. 



 

April 18, 1970 

 

1808 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Was not the 

recommendation of the motion of the two motions of the Member of Swift Current covered in the first 

Resolution? 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — On a point of order. I think they were covered in the first 

Resolution in the sense that they will not be part of the Report. They were not covered in the first 

Resolution in the sense that they will not be part of the Rules which are printed, because that is covered 

by the second Resolution. I think the point that was made by the Member for Swift current was that his 

Resolution would really require, in order to be properly effective, a few words added to the printed rules. 

 

If I might make a suggestion, maybe we can adopt the procedure which we have already adopted in the 

motion without incorporating it into our rules. Perhaps we could do that an perhaps, if we find that not 

satisfactory, then next year we could make a small amendment in the rules along that line. Speaking 

somewhat widely to the point of order, may I suggest that. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Might I ask what the amendment was? 

 

Mr. Wood: — My amendment was that, if a question being put to the Assembly is not passed 

unanimously, it be recorded in the Votes and Proceedings as having been passed on division. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  You don’t need to have an amendment on Standing Orders to bring that into effect. 

You could have been doing it for the last 20 years, had you wanted to. All you have to do is to have 

somebody say, when the Speaker is going to put the vote, On division. That’s all. It goes down as On 

division, but if anybody doesn’t like it they may call for a recorded vote. it is as simple as that. 

 

Hon. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, now that the proceedings are being 

recorded I want to make a very brief statement for the sake of the record, simply to express my regret 

that the Committee of the Whole failed to support the recommendations of the Special Committee with 

respect to the statements before the Orders of the Day as found on pages 13 and 14 of the Report. 

 

I regret that it failed to support the recommendation with regard to a Committee of the Legislature 

regarding special services to Members. I think that this was a serious error on the part of the whole 

Committee. It seems to me that it is important. It would be an organized way in which Members can 

consult with each other and articulate their decisions for the benefit of Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also regret the fact that the Committee did not support the recommendation with respect to the right of 

the Committee on Public Accounts to require Ministers to attend. I am at a loss to understand the 

reasoning for that. I trust that there will be no obstruction placed in the way of the Committee of 



 

April 18, 1970 

 

 
1809 

Public Accounts if it feels that it is necessary to have a Minister appear before it and discuss the facts of 

his Department. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to record very briefly my regret at 

the breakdown as I would term it in the procedures at least which some of us on the Committee thought 

we were following. I regret what some of us felt was a unanimous agreement arrive at by the process of 

compromise did not win the support of the Government. I have put this view rather more strongly in 

Committee. I don’t think it will serve any useful purpose to indicate the strength of my feelings on that 

at this time, except to only record my regret that this did come about and my regret that I feel that it will 

undoubtedly make the work of inter-session committees, at least of this type, more difficult in the future, 

since it will make it less easy to ascertain the particular nature of the process which is being carried 

forward. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

MOTION 
 

ADOPTION OF RULES AND PROCEDURES IN APPENDIX H 
 

Hon. A.R. Guy(Minister of Public Works): — moved, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Natural 

Resources (Mr. Barrie): 

 

That this House approves and adopts the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly as they 

appear in Appendix H of the Report of the Special Committee on Standing Orders and Procedures 

of the Assembly as amended. 

 

That the Rules and Procedures aforesaid shall come into effect at the next Session of the 

Legislature. 

 

That the Clerk and the Speaker be instructed and authorized to prepare the format, arrange the 

index and supervise the printing in booklet form of the said Rules and that they shall have such 

number of copies printed as deemed to be necessary for the service of the Legislative Assembly of 

the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT AND PROROGATION 
 

At 3:50 o’clock p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant governor, having entered the Chamber, took his seat 

upon the throne and gave Royal Assent to the Bills presented to him. 

 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at this Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 

thank you for, and congratulate you on the work you have done. I wish also to express my confidence 

that the approval of the programs and plans presented to you will continue to provide the services 

necessary 



 

April 18, 1970 

 

1810 

to the orderly growth and development of our province. 

 

The legislation you have passed in this Third Session of the sixteenth Legislature has been designed both 

to stabilize the development of those resources Providence has bestowed on us, and to secure an 

equitable distribution of the benefits of that development for present and future generations of our 

citizens. 

 

You have given approval to various measures designed to accelerate the diversification of our 

agricultural industry, and otherwise, to alleviate the grievous consequences to that industry of over 

supply on the one hand, and of inflation on the other. 

 

You have agreed to legislation that will guarantee loans to farmers for the purchase of livestock breeding 

animals up to $6,000 at the subsidized interest rate of 7 per cent for the first three years. 

 

You have agreed to remove the tax on farm fuel which will ensure a saving tour farmers of about 

$4,000,000 a year. 

 

You have approved measures that will extend the protection of the law to farmers so as to guarantee 

their equity in farm machinery purchased, and to dealers so as to provide them more security in their 

dealerships. 

 

In keeping with the absolute priority my Government places upon our education programs, you have 

approved measures to counteract the ever-escalating cost of education, and at the same time have 

approved large new expenditures to make possible the further improvement of educational facilities 

throughout the province. 

 

You have made possible the extension of education services to our handicapped children. 

 

you have also approved the greatest expenditure in history for the continued expansion of the University 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

You have agreed to give students on the Regina and Saskatoon campuses the right to elect members to 

the University Senate. 

 

You have approved a significant increase in the present ceiling for the pensions of teachers. 

 

You have approved legislation which will permit my Government to give financial assistance to 

municipalities in providing adequate police protection for their citizens. 

 

You have also approved legislation supplementary to the “Federal Designated Area Legislation”, which 

will provide grants of up to $300,000 to manufacturing industries locating or expanding in communities 

under 35,000 in population. 

 

You have agreed to increase the individual amount of the grants which are paid to homeowners in this 

province. 

 

In addition, being conscious of the high interest rates on mortgages, and high building costs, you have 

approved the payment of a $500 grant to all homeowners who will construct a home during the winter 

months. 



 

April 18, 1970 

 

 
1811 

You have agreed to measures which will permit the sharing of the property tax levied against oil and gas 

lines. 

 

You have agreed to increase again the present ceiling on annual pension benefits for civil servants. 

 

Similarly, you have approved further adjustments to the existing superannuation allowances for our 

pensioners and widows. 

 

Recognizing that the vast majority of our young people are discharging effectively their responsibilities 

as citizens at an earlier age than twenty-one, you have approved a measure which provides that a person 

who has reached the age of nineteen is to be considered a legal adult, with all the additional 

responsibilities and privileges that accompany legal maturity. 

 

You have given approval to extension measures designed to facilitate the conducting of the business of 

this House, and in general, to ensure the more effective representation of the people of Saskatchewan in 

their Legislative Assembly. 

 

You have approved legislation permitting most important refinements in the adoption laws of our 

province. 

 

Furthermore, you have agreed to increase the food and clothing allowance granted under the 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, and to initiate a program which will establish day care centres for 

children in certain of our larger communities. 

 

You have approved the expenditure of major sums for the expansion of our highway system, especially 

in the far North, and to provide assistance to municipalities for the expansion and maintenance of their 

road systems. 

 

You have approved grants of up to 50 cents per capita to help urban centres with snow removal. 

 

In full awareness of the present setback to the Saskatchewan construction industry, you have approved a 

dramatic injection of $20,000,000 for capital projects, the good consequences of which will multiply 

throughout our entire economy. 

 

You have agreed to sharply increase appropriations for the worthwhile programs of our young 

Department of Indian and Métis Affairs. 

 

And finally, recognizing the inordinately high costs of railway and freight services to the people of 

Saskatchewan, you have approved measures that may greatly ease the excessive burden which has 

heretofore been laid upon our people. 

 

I think you for the contribution you have made to meet the further requirements of the public service and 

assure you the sum of money voted will be used economically, prudently and in the public interest. 

 

In taking leave of you, I desire to thank all the Members of this Assembly for the manner in which you 

have devoted your energies to the activities of the session and wish you the full blessing of Providence 

as you return again to your respective homes. 



 

April 18, 1970 

 

1812 

The Hon. Mr. Heald, Provincial Secretary, then said: 

 

It is the will and pleasure of his Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 

prorogued until it pleases His Honour to summon the same for the dispatch of business, and the 

Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 


