




















































Hansard: February 18, 1970


24 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

3rd Day 
 

Wednesday, February 18, 1970 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I am happy to welcome the following groups of school children sitting in the galleries 

of the Legislature. From the Fenwood School District represented by the Member from Melville (Mr. 

Kowalchuk), 24 children under the direction of their principal, Mr. Krendrenk. From the Major school in 

the constituency of Kindersley-Kerrobert, represented by the Deputy Speaker, Mr. Howes, 13 students 

under the direction of their principal, Mr. Horner. From the Thomson school, Regina South East, 

represented by Mr. Baker, a group of students under the direction of Mr. M. Gayton, their principal. 

From the Churchill school, Nutana South, represented by Dr. Forsyth, 53 pupils under the direction of 

Mrs. Talbot, their teacher. From the Massey school from the constituency of Regina south, represented 

by the Minister of Public Health (Mr. Grant), 30 students under the direction of Mrs. Piragoff. From the 

Nokomis school, from the constituency of Last Mountain represented by Mr. MacLennan, 24 students 

under the direction of Mr. Pirie, their vice-principal. From the Weyburn Vocational Centre in the 

constituency of Weyburn represented by Mr. Pepper, 50 students from the upgrading program under the 

direction of Mr. E. Woodrow, Mr. A. Smith and Mrs. D. Evans. I am sure all Members of the 

Legislative Assembly would wish to extend to each and every one of these students a most cordial 

welcome and join with me in expressing the sincere wish that they will enjoy themselves and that they 

will find the proceedings here interesting and in wishing them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. H. H. P. Baker (Regina South East): — A slight point of order, Mr. Speaker, you mentioned Mr. 

Gayton, the principal of Thomson is Miss Gayton, the lady sitting up in the east gallery there, a very 

charming person. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — My apologies to the lady for confusing the gender. I hope that she will accept them. 

 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
 

Return No. 135 
 

Mr. W. E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. Last Friday 

when the Attorney General tabled the Returns ordered at the last session, he chose to single out the cost 

of labor and 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

25 

printing of Return No. 135. He then proceeded to chastise the Opposition and imputed or suggested 

irresponsibility on my part since I initially requested the information. Mr. Speaker, the minutes and 

verbatim report of proceedings of the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and Printing for 

1969, dated Wednesday, March 12th, pages 503 to 550, show clearly that I asked the Committee to only 

examine certain documents. I did not ask for copies of these documents. Mr. Speaker, the senior 

Treasury official advised the Committee that the Department of Highways and Treasury had no 

objection to providing the documents for examination by the Committee. Mr. Speaker, this is recorded 

on page 535. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Smishek: — I also draw to your attention page 546 of the Committee‘s verbatim report. The 

Deputy Minister of Highways, when asked what would be involved in making documents available for 

examination, answered and I quote: ―We can get it from our files.‖ Had this been done virtually no cost 

would have been incurred in having these documents examined. Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the 

Government Members denied me my request. Under the rules the Public Accounts Committee is 

allowed to call for papers, documents and examine witnesses under oath. When the Committee‘s report 

was considered in the Legislature on April 1, I drew this matter to the attention of all Members. My 

statement appears on pages 1867 to 1869 in last year‘s Debates and Proceedings. While I was making 

this statement the Premier invited me to place an Order for Return and assured me that the Government 

would provide the information. Mr. Speaker, this I did and on April 3 the whole Assembly voted to have 

this information produced. What I asked for, Mr. Speaker, was not privileged material. I regret the 

expenditure of money in providing this information. It was totally unnecessary but it was the Premier, 

the Government, and the Government Members on the Public Accounts Committee who forced the 

issue. If anyone acted irresponsibly it is they, not the Opposition and myself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I recall very well about a year ago explaining to the 

Hon. Member that this question if it were answered would cost the taxpayer hundreds and hundreds of 

dollars. Now he has wasted $1,740 of the taxpayer‘s money in finding an answer to this question so I 

hope you use it. Now I say that the Opposition must use some discretion in asking questions of this kind. 

Certainly this Session the Government is going to use some discretion in how many of the taxpayer‘s 

dollars we waste in asking nonsensical questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. Boldt (Minister of Highways): — Mr. Speaker, in reference to the Member of the Opposition 

regarding this question, he imputed at that time that there was some kind of sinister things going on in 

the Department and the Treasury Board, and that some Socialist contractor had told him that we weren‘t 

paying bills. Now for this question, there is nothing in it that we want to hide and I hope that you will 

now have confidence in the Civil Service and the Treasury Board 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

26 

and in the Minister of Highways . . . 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Will you please . . . 

 

Mr. Boldt: — Will you please keep your mouth shut. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Just answer the question. 

 

Mr. Boldt: — This question now has been answered and I hope that we have conveyed confidence in 

you people that the Minister of Highways and the Treasury Board and the Premier are running an honest 

affair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I think the lesson to be learned from this 

is one for the Government to learn. If it cooperates and makes information available in the Committee 

when the information is asked for and where it can be easily given, then we won‘t have these kinds of 

things in the House and we won‘t have these kinds of costs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order! May I draw your attention to the fact that the Member raised a Question of 

Privilege which must be taken into consideration immediately. Perhaps a definition of a Question of 

Privilege would be in order. Erskine May‘s Parliamentary Practice states: 

 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House collectively as a 

constitutional part of the High Court of Parliament and by Members of each House individually, 

without which they could not discharge their functions, and which exceed those possessed by 

other bodies of individuals. 

 

When a Question of Privilege is raised it is the responsibility of the Chair to decide whether the Member 

has raised a prima facie case of privilege. If he decides that he has done so then the Chair must entertain 

a motion that the matter be referred to the Committee on Privileges and Elections. When the Minister 

tabled the Return referred to and after he had done so, he made a statement to which it was possible for a 

Member on the Opposition side, according to custom, to reply. The Member has stated at some length 

what he considers to be his grievance. I think it would have been better had he done so at the time that 

the Minister tabled the answers to the Return. Because that was not done I can‘t agree that the Member 

has a Question of Privilege because quite obviously the Member continued to discharge his duties in the 

House and to function in the normal way. 

 

FEDERAL-PROVINCIAL CONFERENCE 
 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day, I wonder if I might 

briefly report on the Federal-Provincial Conference 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

27 

which we just returned from last evening. 

 

As Hon. Members know the Premiers‘ Conference was called primarily to discuss inflation. A report 

was received from the Young Commission indicating that some progress had been made in bringing 

inflation under control. We were asked as Provinces to take certain specific steps in cooperation. I may 

say that virtually all Governments promised to help. Frankly I fail to see how fiscal and monetary 

weapons alone can control this terrible problem. I regret to say that no proposals were made in 

connection with wage controls, though we were told that, if they were needed, they would be considered 

not too many months from now. 

 

I was particularly pleased that Western agricultural problems were placed on the agenda, as you know, 

Sir, at the request of the Saskatchewan Government. We had a two-hour debate on these problems the 

second morning. Saskatchewan presented a brief — and I want my hon. Friends opposite to note this — 

in which we proposed nine concrete proposals. I shall not go into those nine points this afternoon, 

although Members can have a copy later today or tomorrow if they should be interested. We didn‘t go to 

that Convention suggesting that there were any easy answers or pat solutions to the wheat crisis. We did 

put forward our proposals in the hope that they could at least alleviate it, if they were adopted. For 

example our Government asked for a massive injection of cash into our agricultural economy by three 

major methods: first, cash payments on farm-stored grain; secondly, the two-price system for wheat; and 

thirdly, substantial acreage payments for land taken out of wheat production and diverted to forage. I 

may say that we estimate that if the Government should adopt those three proposals several hundred 

millions of dollars would come out to the Prairies. We are optimistic that the Federal Government will 

adopt at least a portion of this program before seeding time. Both the Minister of Agriculture, the 

Federal Minister, and the Minister in charge of the Wheat Board were most optimistic about wheat sales 

in the next four-month period. They told the Conference that we would export between 370 and 400 

million bushels in the current year, which is about 100 million above past years. And in addition they 

said there would be a very substantial amount of grain consumed domestically. Now, if that is so, Mr. 

Speaker, perhaps we can have that election after all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If the Ministers are correct in their assumption then the farm economy will have a 

sharp upturn this spring. What pleased us most about the Conference was the fact that for the first time 

in many years, instead of talking about the Constitution, bilingualism, and biculturalism, we were 

talking about bread and butter problems. 

 

It was most interesting to note that both the Premiers of Ontario and British Columbia gave us strong 

support during the wheat talks. We brought back the papers of the NDP Government of Manitoba. I‘d 

like to spread them around this Legislature, too. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Real creampuffs! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Because if ever I saw a bust 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

28 

at a Conference it was the NDP paper on agriculture. They had two suggestions and both of them were 

impractical. The Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) will have something to say about those later. 

If they have located any solutions, they certainly kept them secret at that Conference. 

 

We also made some other tangible suggestions to help our economy. First of all I want to say a word 

about designated areas. We asked that the balance of Saskatchewan be designated for industrial 

incentive grants. And do you know, I am going to tell this House today that I think at least a portion of 

that request will be accepted by Ottawa very shortly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We were concerned about Public Works because when the Federal programs were 

released last week, out of $258 million we had virtually nothing in Saskatchewan — 1.3 per cent. So we 

asked the Prime Minister and the Federal Government for a crash program of not less than $20 million. 

Again I must say that our reception was amazingly warm. Before very long I hope to get up in this 

Legislature and announce some fairly major programs in Public Works for the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Our Swine Barn Construction Program in the ARDA area, as most Hon. Members know, has been most 

helpful in upping our hog production. Under the program Regina and Ottawa share a 25 per cent cost of 

building new barns in the ARDA area. That had been discontinued as of March 31st. We asked that the 

legislation be reinstated and I have every reason to believe that Ottawa is going to accept our suggestion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — So all I can say is, Mr. Speaker, that all in all it was one of the best conferences we 

have attended. We regret that the Leader of the Opposition did not see fit to come down and lend us his 

support, because he would have thought that Saskatchewan had a fine brief. Every part of it he could 

have supported. And as I say, I wish he could have seen how ineffective his NDP colleagues from 

Winnipeg were. I hope then that the results of this Conference will be tangible for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if I may direct a question to the Premier, I assume from what he said that 

the Provincial Government of Saskatchewan did not ask for any supplementary payment on grains to 

provide some $200 million of immediate cash injection, not some time later in the year or next year into 

the Prairie farm economy. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I explained the several hundred million dollars we asked for. We had another six 

planks in our program. As I indicated, I would be pleased to send the Leader of the Opposition a copy of 

our brief if he wants it. I haven‘t got one here this afternoon but I would be glad to have one printed. 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

29 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Surely the Premier can answer Yes or No. I 

understand, then, that the Government did not ask for any immediate, not sometime later on, but 

immediate payment based on wheat that has already been produced and unsold and of which the farmers 

have paid the cost of production. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Well, when you read our brief you will know exactly what we proposed. As a matter 

of fact we have a very tangible program. Nine planks compared to two by the NDP in Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may direct a question to the Premier? Do I understand 

from your iteration of the nine points that there was no mention in your brief of interest rates, and do I 

understand, therefore, that you did not ask the Federal Government for lower interest rates on Farm 

Credit Corporation loans? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We asked the Federal Government to bring in a tangible program that would help the 

farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ADDRESS-IN-REPLY 
 

Mr. R. Heggie: (Hanley) moved, seconded by Mr. G. G. Leith (Elrose): 

 

That an humble Address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

TO HIS HONOUR THE HONOURABLE STEPHEN WOROBETZ Lieutenant Governor of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 

 

We, Her Majesty‘s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly, of the Province of 

Saskatchewan, in Session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious Speech which 

Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present Session. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the Throne, may I 

express my thanks to the Government for the honor it has accorded me today, and to the constituency of 

Hanley which I so proudly represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this House is honoured again to have you in the Chair. The House functions well in its 

debate of public business under your learned but firm control. 

 

Last Thursday this House was honoured by the presence of the newly appointed Lieutenant Governor, 

the Honourable Stephen Worobetz. The message he brought to this Chamber has been most appreciated. 

Members on both sides of the House are completely confident he will carry out his important duties, in 

the tradition of this high office, but with that touch of humanity that has become so characteristic 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

30 

of Lieutenant Governors of Saskatchewan. I am sure I speak for all Members when I say with 

confidence that the people of Saskatchewan look forward to his term of office with enthusiasm. 

 

In welcoming the new Lieutenant Governor, I would be entirely remiss if I did not pay tribute to the 

retiring Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable Robert Leith Hanbidge. For seven years he served this 

province with dignity and humility. He will ever be remembered as the Lieutenant Governor who to a 

large extent made his high office a part of Saskatchewan life for all the people. I well remember the 

warm words of welcome he gave me privately, when I first entered this august chamber only two years 

ago. I am sure other Members can attest to a similar welcome. This House wishes him continued good 

health to enjoy his retirement. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to the executive branch of government, that part of our democratic 

governmental machinery which administers the day-to-day work of governing the province. Our 

province is going through critical, economic times, and the citizens of Saskatchewan can be thankful 

that there is a firm hand at the helm of the ship of state. In spite of economic handicaps caused in part by 

the depressed wheat and potash sales, Saskatchewan finances are in a strong position. This Province has 

enjoyed five consecutive balanced budgets since the present Administration took office. It has done this 

with little or not dislocation of any sector of the economy. The credit position of the Province is very 

strong. If the general recessive conditions should continue, the Government is in a strong position to 

cope with emergency situations by the use of deficit budgeting. On the other hand, if there is an 

economic upturn, the Government is in a position to take full advantage of new money and new 

investment, without having to spend three years of preparation to restore confidence before investment 

will flow in. 

 

This House owes a debt of gratitude to the Premier, the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and the 

Cabinet for their business-like conduct of the Province‘s affairs. In short, the Government has refused to 

panic in the face of a lot of pressure to do so. 

 

Perhaps the most serious situation which faces this province in the long term, is not wheat sales, not 

potash sales, not high interest rates, but the proposed White Paper on taxation. The White Paper, of 

course, is not all bad. As a matter of fact it contains much that is good, but where it is bad, if is very bad 

for Saskatchewan. We ought to be happy that it is only a White Paper and not yet the law of Canada. We 

can only hope that the consistent opposition to many of Mr. Benson‘s proposals will evoke modification. 

Raising the income tax exemption for wage earners is good. It ought to have been raised several years 

ago, but surely this can be done without increasing the burden to others. 

 

If the Just Society means grinding down the affluent, the investors, the risk-takers, the innovators, the 

hard workers, the frugal, then it is not just. If the Just Society means raising the standard of living of the 

working poor, providing a decent standard of welfare for the old, the needy, the sick and handicapped, 

but at the same time letting those who produce, produce more, then I would say that it is a successful 

Just Society. The mortal blow we can give this province and this 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

31 

country is to tax the incentive to produce. 

 

Our per capita productivity in Canada now is none too good in comparison to that of the United States. 

Fortunately we rank high in standard of living, but this can easily be whittled away by imprudent use of 

the taxing machinery. What we need in this country is tax incentives, not tax on incentives. Increased 

productivity will generate more money to bolster the welfare programs. But those who produce must be 

encouraged to produce more. Therefore, any tax which is confiscatory in nature whether on income, 

investment, or inheritance is doing a disservice to Canada and to Saskatchewan in particular. 

 

This is a young province. We lack investment and risk capital. We have been up to recently an 

agricultural province. If agriculture is prosperous, the whole provincial economy is prosperous. If 

agriculture is depressed as it is at present, the whole provincial economy becomes depressed. But 

agriculture in Saskatchewan has largely meant a straight wheat economy. That is why the Premier of this 

Province has gone up and down and back and forth carrying his message of farm diversification. ―Get 

into cattle and hogs,‖ he has said in his speeches to rural audiences time and time again. And he was 

saying this as far back as prosperous 1965, long before the present wheat crisis arrived. He urged 

businessmen to get into secondary industries large and small. He has carried the message both firm and 

clear to Eastern Canada, to the United States, to the United Kingdom, to Japan and now latest of all, to 

Western Europe. The message has always been the same. ―Saskatchewan needs a diversified economy. 

You have the money, we have the natural resources. Resources under the ground are of no use to 

anyone. Your money is safe in Saskatchewan under a free enterprise government. I invite you to invest.‖ 

And this program, Mr. Speaker, has not been without results. Saskatchewan now has at least a partially 

diversified economy in the manner of oil, potash, lumber, sodium sulphate, minerals of all kinds. How 

much worse off our people would be today due to the depressed wheat sales, if it wasn‘t for our 

diversified economy. Where would the jobs for our people be? Although unemployment is up right 

across Canada, and in spite of the serious agricultural situation, unemployment in Saskatchewan remains 

at about 5.5 per cent below the national average of 6.1 per cent. 

 

What we need is more risk capital, be it American, European or Japanese, to open up our natural 

resources. We have only scratched the surface so far. We need this capital at a time when the White 

Paper proposals could stifle investment in our resources. A severe capital gains tax, a 50 per cent tax on 

corporate profits, high taxes on middle income groups, loss of incentives to the oil and mining 

industries, confiscatory estate taxes in certain instances may do much to create the welfare state but will 

do nothing to broaden the industrial base on which those extra taxes are founded. 

 

One only needs to take the example of the United Kingdom. Here was a powerful and rich country 

which only 50 years ago was the acknowledged leader in manufacturing, heavy industry, merchant 

marine and world trade generally. Granted, two World Wars sapped this nation‘s strength, but this 

cannot be the real issue. Britain was a military victor in both wars, yet finds herself generally worse off 

than the nations defeated, Germany twice, France once, Italy once and Japan once. Everyone admires 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

32 

the economic recovery of West Germany. Much tribute is paid to the skill, energy, drive and 

determination of the German people. But the British people had all these same qualities in the 19th 

century and well into the 20th century. What caused the change? 1. Confiscatory taxes on income, 

estates and corporation profits. 2. Failure to modernize the industrial plants. 3. Constant warfare between 

management and labor, with labor practically dictating the policy. 4. Putting the welfare state before 

productivity. You want to kill a nation, a state or a province? Just follow the foregoing set of principles. 

It will do it every time. That is just what might happen to Saskatchewan if the White Paper proposals are 

not altered. 

 

The message came through loud and clear to Ottawa at previous Dominion-Provincial Conferences. It 

came through loud and clear again at the Conference just concluded. Again Premier Thatcher has carried 

the burden. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — Perhaps there is no other issue so vital to the Province of Saskatchewan as the serious 

agricultural situation due to lagging wheat sales. I want to deal with it now in some detail. 

 

Nature and geography endowed the Western Plains with soil and climate extremely suitable to the 

production of hard red spring wheat. Saskatchewan contains two-thirds of this wheat-producing land. 

Therefore, when wheat sales are depressed, Saskatchewan suffers more than do the sister provinces of 

Alberta and Manitoba. 

 

Soil conservation and technology working together have largely decreased the probability of complete 

crop failure. Weather conditions and other phenomena may combine to reduce yields in some years. We 

still have years of lighter crops but hardly ever years of no crop at all. Consequently we have been piling 

up surpluses of grain almost every year in the last ten. In the middle sixties there were short crops in 

Russia, China and other places so that the Wheat Board was able to sell off our surplus wheat. But the 

other wheat-producing countries of the world have been getting smarter as well. No wonder, for we 

exported power machinery, fertilizer, top grade seed and money and sent them the technological 

know-how by way of agricultural experts from our universities. 

 

Consequently, certain European and Asian countries have come from importers of cereal grains to 

self-sufficiency or near self-sufficiency. Asian countries have learned to double the production of rice by 

the use of modern science and technology. The wheat-producing countries like Argentina, Australia, 

Soviet Union, not to mention the United States, have adopted the latest that science and technology can 

offer to increase production. Australia which was once an erratic producer of wheat, now produces 

almost annually a 500-million bushel crop which equals an average crop for Canada, though on record 

years we out-produce Australia by another 200 million bushels. And since Australia sits right on the 

doorstep of Asia, it can outsell us in the Japanese market every time. 

 

France, which once used to import cereals for foodstuffs, has since World War II and by virtue of the 

common market 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

33 

protection, become an exporter of wheat and barley. Further, new varieties of feed wheat have been 

developed in Mexico, and these dwarf strains are now grown in semi-tropical as well as in temperate 

climates. Although this wheat is of low-grade variety, it is a heavy yielder and many of the African and 

Asian countries whose emerging peoples are just learning to like wheat flour find this low-quality wheat 

and flour quite suitable. 

 

Another factor that has influenced world wheat consumption is the advances in the science of nutrition. 

Wheat flour with a high protein content is now most in demand. Protein content varies from year to year 

but is highest in years of maximum sunshine and minimum rainfall. Therefore the Prairie area which 

produces the highest protein content in its wheat is the original dry plains area of Manitoba, 

Saskatchewan and Alberta. To be even more explicit, the Palliser triangle of Southwestern 

Saskatchewan and Alberta is the superhigh protein area in wheat production. Protein content falls off 

from a high of 15 per cent to a low of 10 per cent as the wheat belt is pushed further north. 

 

Therefore wheat of high protein content has a preferred place in world markets. It is gradually replacing 

the old standard method of grading grain. It becomes important when one considers that Canada‘s share 

of the export market in wheat averages about 350 million bushels per year. Here is a table of wheat 

exports for the last ten years. 1960 — 240 million bushels; 1961 — 317 million; 1962 — 326 million; 

1963 — 304 million; 1964 — 539 million; 1965 — 368 million; 1966 — 546 million; 1967 — 483 

million; and for 1969 I haven‘t the exact figures but it is approximately in and around the 300-million 

bushel figure. 

 

Except in four years our exports were 350 million bushels or less. We seem to be able to find markets 

for this amount. In the face of the world factors which I have outlined, the prospects of selling more in 

an average year is not very realistic. On the average we are piling up unsold surpluses of 150 million 

bushels on an average year and 250 million bushels on a bumper year. Canada today has an 800-million 

bushel carry-over from 1968. Add to this to the 1969 near-record crop of 600 million bushels and one 

can see that we have on our hands 1.4 billion bushels of wheat to sell. Not a very cheering prospect. In 

other words, it appears we must gear our production to the export markets obtainable. 

 

How are we going to do this, Mr. Speaker? How are we to cut wheat production without dislocating 

thousands of farms which produce nothing but wheat of the highest quality? How can we ask a farmer 

with three sections of land and a full line of modern machinery to immediately diversify to cattle and 

hogs? The truth is we can‘t. Farmers in the Rosetown and Regina wheat belts cannot suddenly scrap an 

investment of $200,000 plus or minus to go into cattle. Here are the reasons why: 

 

1. The heavy land which is so favourable to wheat and cereal grains would be wasted in growing fodder. 

2. There is generally a lack of water in these areas for maintaining livestock on a large scale. 3. The 

investment in machinery is too great to allow a turnover to livestock production. 4. These regions are the 

areas of the high protein grain and this is the grain the world markets require. 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

34 

What about the north central and northern areas? Can they diversify? Yes, to a much greater extent. 

These areas usually have: (1) Less favourable climate for straight wheat production of high protein 

content. (2) A somewhat shorter growing season and are subject to frosts in the spring and fall. (3) Much 

less dependable harvest weather. (4) A good deal of their soil is suitable for growing coarse grains and 

forage crops. (5) Many of the farmers in these regions are already in livestock and to increase would not 

be a heavy burden. (6) Many of these farmers already have buildings suitable for increased livestock 

production. (7) Generally they have a good water supply. 

 

The answer now seems obvious that the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada 

must pay more attention to a complete re-organization of the farm economy over the next 10 years. If 

the Governments will give direction, the farmers of Saskatchewan will adapt; they have adapted before 

and have a great faculty of absorbing the blow and rebounding stronger than ever. 

 

What then is required? The Federal and Provincial Governments ought to set up a joint Agricultural 

Land-Use Commission with a view to re-zoning the province into three general areas of agricultural 

production. 

 

1. The southern dry plains area would form Zone 1, the chief aim being to keep this area in production 

of hard red spring wheat of high protein content. This area would produce on the average enough wheat 

to meet Saskatchewan‘s share of the 350-million bushel annual export market. Doubtless some acres of 

less favourable fertility would be converted to oats and barley production for sale back to the 

cattle-producing areas. Production of flax and durum wheat could form part of this pattern. In other 

words these farmers would diversify horizontally into a variety of cereal crops but with the main 

emphasis on the first class hard wheat to fill our export quota. 

 

2. The central park belt would form Zone 2. This region runs from southeast to northwest across the 

centre of the province, and the farmers here are already heavily in livestock. The emphasis would be to 

increase livestock production in full scale vertical diversification. Where the land is suitable horizontal 

diversification into a variety of crops would be encouraged. Some acres would be devoted to oil seed 

crops of flax and rape for ready cash. All marginal land would be put back to grass and alfalfa for 

fodder. 

 

3. The northern bush area would form Zone 3. This region has always been able to grow heavy crops but 

experiences difficulty in harvesting almost every year. Damp grains is no new phenomenon in our 

northern areas. Farmers there have to deal with it to some degree almost every year. Coupled with early 

frost, these areas can face disaster three out of every five years. This area should diversify into feed 

grains, grass and legumes almost completely and leave the wheat production for farther south. Many of 

these farmers are already heavily in livestock so there is really no change — only a change of emphasis. 

 

The next step of the Agricultural Land-Use Commission ought to recommend is central clearing depots 

for feed grains and fodder. Excess oats and barley would move north from the southern region to feed 

the cattle and hogs in the central and 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

35 

northern areas. Clearing depots in Central and Northern Saskatchewan would move the grain to the 

particular areas that need it. 

 

Fodder from the northern region would move south to supply the central region. All this could be done 

at stabilized prices. Saskatchewan agriculture could be almost self-sufficient in the grain fodder 

livestock cycle. Saskatchewan would begin to look more like Alberta in its agricultural production. 

Outside markets for wheat and grain would become less important. The growing red meat market of 

North America could be fully exploited. Saskatchewan would be fortified against the one crop disaster 

which has plagued this province for so many years of its history. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the critics will say, ―Why isn‘t the Government doing something about it?‖ Well the 

Government of Saskatchewan is doing something about it. Here is the record: 1. The Minister of 

Agriculture in general and the Premier in particular have been preaching diversification for the last five 

years. 2. The Government lending agency SEDCO has been lending massive sums of money to farmers 

to get into or increase cattle and hog operations. 3. As the situation has become more critical in the last 

12 months, the Government has made loans to farmers available at reduced interest rates to help farmers 

increase their breeding stock of cattle and sheep. The Livestock Loans Guarantee Act mentioned last 

Thursday in the Speech from the Throne is back-up legislation for this popular policy. Already statistics 

show that over $7 million have been loaned to farmers for this purpose and over 2,000 farmers have 

taken advantage of it. 4. Special incentives have been given farmers by the Saskatchewan Department of 

Agriculture to convert land to grass and fodder production. 

 

It appears that the Federal Government is beginning to formulate policies to encourage farmers to take 

land out of wheat production. Whether this is to be a land bank or a land reserve we do not know at this 

time but experience shows this is an expensive and wasteful economic measure. In the United States it 

caused farmers to allot their poorest acres to the land bank and use the money to buy fertilizer to 

produce heavier crops on the balance of their acreage. Far better to convert the use of land to some other 

form of production than to simply take it out of production. A soil bank can only be a short-term 

measure at best. Under the land-use system, millions of acres will be in coarse grain and grass 

production, so that if there occurs a world shortage of wheat, due to failures in other countries, on very 

short notice Saskatchewan farmers can break up and plant to wheat if necessary, on acres and acres of 

almost virgin type soil. Saskatchewan farmers stand ready to gain no matter whether world wheat 

production goes up or down. Our Western farm economy would be so solidly based it could take the 

economic strain from year to year. 

 

The long-term solution to the Western wheat crisis is complex and will require much leadership and 

planning. However, it is not likely to solve itself. If the Western wheat farmer merely plans to try to ride 

out the crisis in the hope that crop failures elsewhere in the world will quickly use up the surpluses, my 

judgment is that he will be disappointed. There is no doubt that nature and weather may eventually 

restore the balance, but surpluses will simply build up again in periods of world-wide good crops and 

Western farmers will have this recurring crisis every five years. That is not what Western agriculture 

needs or wants. Western agriculture requires a balanced economy 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

36 

between wheat, oil seeds, feeds, grains and livestock. A viable agricultural economy may have ripples 

and troughs in the cyclical pattern but not hills and hollows as has been the all too familiar pattern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn my remarks to the urban sector of the economy. No one knows better 

than the merchant and business man that when the farmer is prosperous everyone is likewise prosperous. 

Organized labor ought to know that this axiom largely applies to their welfare as well. Merchants and 

businessmen have been feeling the pinch lately; sales are down some percentage points; some sectors 

like the construction industry, the farm machinery dealers, the automotive dealers feel it more than 

others. Jobs are harder to get. 

 

It follows that if the inflationary trends which aggravate our acute farm situation are to stabilize it has to 

start with wages. Unions are doing themselves no good nor doing the economy any good to keep 

pressing for increased wages and fringe benefits. It is the aggregate of the workers who have the massive 

purchasing power. If their wages stabilize the competition to buy goods decreases and prices 

immediately stabilize and eventually decrease. 

 

No one wants to see unemployment and depressed conditions for long, but as a brake on the economy, it 

usually works. That is why the Government of Saskatchewan feels it is important to hold the line on 

wages in hospitals, in the government service and in the schools. The President of the United States has 

seen fit to use these methods to deal with a similar situation in his country. The Federal Government in 

its wisdom is doing much the same thing. Our Federal Government goes as far as to say that if prices 

and wages don‘t stabilize voluntarily wage and price controls would have to be instituted. Many of you 

remember the Wartime Prices and Trade Board era of World War II. There is no denying these stringent 

measures worked in wartime because the patriotic motive was as strong or stronger than the profit 

motive. Many countries have tried these controls in peace time. They generally have led to chaos with 

continuous shortages, rationing and a burgeoning black market. However, there is a strong demand in 

Canada for some kind of control if inflation continues to cheapen our money. 

 

However, the Government of Saskatchewan recognizes that it should not always be the same people 

who make the sacrifices in the ―Battle of Inflation.‖ That is why the Premier has recently announced that 

if unemployment continues to rise in urban areas his Government will prime the pump with a massive 

injection of money into a governmental capital works program to bolster the sagging construction 

industry. Various Provincial public buildings and public works will be built throughout the province; the 

cities and towns will be the gainers here. 

 

The continuation of the accelerated highway program will mean $60 million will be spent on roads and 

bridges in the next fiscal year. $5 million alone will be spent on highways constituting the Yellowhead 

Route. The Premier has said that some deficit budgeting might have to occur from spending these 

massive sums to get the construction industry rolling again. Who in the Opposition can say these 

measures are not programs for people? 

 

Although agriculture, wheat markets, inflation and taxation 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

37 

are the main problems facing the Government and the people of Saskatchewan, the Speech from the 

Throne nevertheless outlines many other important areas of Saskatchewan affairs which require 

governmental action. 

 

Let me consider some of these important areas. Municipal assistance: everyone knows that local 

government faces ever-increasing expenditures to keep pace with the needs and aspirations of its 

citizens. To buttress the tax base which local government can draw upon for its needs, the Government 

is proposing an Industrial Incentives Act to encourage growth in the towns, villages and rural 

communities. The benefits from a successful incentives program will be three-fold. 1. Industrial 

enterprises will broaden the tax base. 2. They will help to keep the population from drifting away to the 

larger centres or out of the province. 3. The new jobs created will help to curb rural unemployment. 

 

Doubtless such incentives would be by way of cash grants to industries much in the same way as the 

Federal Government operates its assistance to the Federal Designated Areas. Again this is 

prime-the-pump legislation brought in at a time when the economy needs some priming. 

 

Most municipal authorities will welcome the news of increased financial assistance for police protection. 

I am very cognizant of this need as various towns and municipal councils in my constituency find that 

the new industrialization from potash and other industries brings with it problems of policing. This will 

be welcome legislation indeed and goes hand in hand with the industrial incentives program just 

outlined. 

 

The speech from the Throne indicates that homeowner grants will be increased. These grants introduced 

in 1966 have been most popular with every segment of the tax-paying public. In addition to bringing 

some tax relief to property owners the main side effects of homeowner grants is that they encourage 

local taxes to be fully paid up. I have made extensive enquiries of municipal councils in my constituency 

and I am advised without exception that despite low wheat quotas, municipal taxes are being paid up at a 

rate equal to or better than previous years. This is solid evidence that there will be no repeat of 

conditions during the ‗30s when hundreds of quarter sections of land went by way of tax sales. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another piece of proposed legislation on which I wish to comment, viz. The 

Coming of Age Act, 1970. Many Members on both sides of the House have given much private thought 

to this thorny issue. We have seen great social changes in the years since the War. Science and 

technology have brought untold benefits to humanity, but they have also created new problems not faced 

by our forefathers. Television and transportation have played the vital roles and a whole new generation 

has grown up where television and jet travel are the accepted way of life. The amount of knowledge in 

the world is increasing in a geometric progression. This knowledge is reaching the new generation at a 

faster pace and in greater volume. In simple terms, youngsters are growing up more quickly. The 

emphasis is on training, not on trial and error experience. Therefore this Government, recognizing that 

some adjustment has to be made, is recommending the legal age limit for both privileges and 

responsibilities be lowered from 21 to 19. Some may ask why 19 and not 18. There is no magic in either 

figure but it is well 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

38 

known that many youngsters are still in high school at 18, while at 19 they break out into the work-a-day 

world where responsibility comes quickly. The new legal age encompasses the responsibilities of 

owning personal property, real estate, executorship, marriage and the right to sue and be sued as well as 

the legal right to consume alcoholic beverages. The Government feels this decision to make the age of 

majority 19 will merit wide support through Saskatchewan and in Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the position taken by Her Majesty‘s Loyal Opposition made 

up of 25 NDP Members sitting opposite. We can only judge them by their public utterances both here in 

Saskatchewan and elsewhere in Canada. There is no doubt that the Members of the NDP Opposition 

have come to this Session of the Legislature with high hopes that at last their time has come. Rejected by 

the electorate in good times, they yearn for a stretch of bad times so they can sell their repressive and 

retrogressive programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — The new young shock troops have been moved up to the front bench to form a sort of 

shadow cabinet. Organizers are being appointed throughout the province at a superfast rate. They are 

busy rationalizing the previously abhorrent practice of taking campaign funds from industry and 

business. The pragmatist, Ed Schreyer, seems to be setting the pace in that regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the progress of Canada‘s Socialist party towards power in this country has been 

remarkably slow. The story is always the same. If only the people really understood their program they 

would be voted in immediately. After 35 years in the Federal field they have about the same number of 

members they had at the end of World War II. 

 

True, the emphasis has shifted from agrarian problems to labor union aspirations. The geographical axis 

has shifted from the Prairies to Toronto. The labor unions now in control are not really interested in 

upsetting the free enterprise system. They have too much to gain from the system as it is. Is this really 

progressive even from a Socialist point of view? In the provinces the success story has been little better. 

The sweetheart arrangement of the farmer-labor marriage came apart in Saskatchewan in April of 1964. 

The NDP found itself out of office and crying in the wilderness. They gained a narrow victory in 

Manitoba in 1969 but I daresay this is largely due to the personality of their young leader. In British 

Columbia last year, they lunged for power but received a stinging defeat from which the party has not 

yet recovered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — The effect of that defeat was quite noticeable here in Saskatchewan. In the political 

history of Saskatchewan that British Columbia election was our Battle of the Marne. It stopped the 

advance of the NDP. Since then they have been contained. 

 

Let us examine this party which so badly wants to become the Government. Has it the program and 

philosophy for such 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

39 

responsibility? I doubt it and I daresay the majority of the electors of Saskatchewan doubt it also. 

 

At the Winnipeg Convention last October, it aired its weaknesses before the public. It is apparent that 

the Eastern hierarchy is split, with the militants ranged on one side led by the radical academic, 

Professor Melville Watkins, and the orthodox wing of the party ranged on the other side led by such 

conservatives as David Lewis, John Harney, Charles Taylor and Tommy Douglas and backed up 

provincially by Manitoba‘s Ed. Schreyer. What do the radicals want? They espouse three main causes: 

1. Drive out American capital from Canada whether by confiscation, nationalization or even by a 

buy-back policy. It is a policy that smacks of some emerging South American country or some newly 

created African republic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — 2. Full implementation of the Carter Report on Taxation regardless of its consequences 

on the Canadian economy. 3. Introduction of true socialism by putting the whole means of production 

and distribution in the Government‘s hands. In effect they are advocating more bureaucracy and more 

inefficiency. You would think as intelligent men they would see the lesson of Czechoslovakia before 

them. Here was a brave and energetic people breaking the bounds of socialism and actually making 

headway to new high living standards and individual liberty. In one day of terror the repressive socialist 

system was forced back on to the Czech people by the military power of the Soviet Union. And yet 

Watkins and his group are advocating more of this for Canada. 

 

I think most Canadians have a good deal of admiration for David Lewis and Tommy Douglas in 

resisting the power-play by Watkins and his group. Yet at Winnipeg the Leader of the New Democratic 

Party in Saskatchewan stood up and voted with the Watkins group. Surely this spells out pretty clearly 

where the Leader of the Opposition stands on the economic questions of the day in Saskatchewan. 

 

1. Does the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) want to drive out American capital at a time when this 

province vitally needs American capital or any other capital for that matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Heggie: — One would have to reach this conclusion from his performance in Winnipeg. 2. Does 

the Leader of the Opposition want to yoke the full recommendations of the Carter Report on to the necks 

of Saskatchewan people? One would have to reach this conclusion from his performance in Winnipeg. 

3. Is he advocating the full implementation of socialist doctrine in Saskatchewan again? One would have 

to reach this conclusion from his record in Winnipeg. 

 

Frankly I am surprised that the Leader of the Opposition, the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd) took the 

stand he did. Watching him operate efficiently and eloquently in this House as his Party‘s Leader, I 

thought he was through with that kind of nonsense. The NDP reach for power in Saskatchewan at the 

next election despite the economic crisis seems like it will 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

40 

fall short of the mark. Professor Melville Watkins and the Hon. Woodrow Lloyd will be able to take full 

credit. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me say that I find the Speech from the Throne a very progressive and 

far-reaching document as it is applied to the needs of this province. What are its merits? 1. It is based on 

sound financial policies designed to stimulate growth and expansion. 2. It will produce more tax revenue 

in the long run. 3. Its policies are designed to speed up the economy. 4. It will arrest and reduce 

unemployment before unemployment reaches a dangerous level. 5. It is a program for people at a time 

when people become more important than dollars. 

 

I challenge the Opposition to find fault with it in any major way. They will say it does not go far 

enough, but they always say that. They always say that when they are out of office. Their record in 

office isn‘t that good. Two years ago they said the whole system of Health Services would fall apart if 

utilization fees were introduced. How wrong can they be? Not only did utilization fees help preserve the 

Health Plans but they have been well accepted by the public at large. As an election issue they are a 

dead duck. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wheat sales is where the Opposition will beat the drum of discontent. Oddly enough it is a 

Federal issue and not one where they can honestly fault the Provincial Government. What remedies have 

the Opposition got? None whatsoever. They are completely barren of any new thoughts. They merely 

echo what Roy Atkinson says in his public utterances. A cash injection of $200 million into the Western 

economy. No doubt every farmer in Western Canada would accept a cash bonus. But this isn‘t even a 

short run solution. This would quickly be used up and the average farmer would still be faced with the 

same old problem of surpluses. No, Mr. Speaker, the program for agriculture as outlined in the Speech 

from the Throne, the encouragement of programs of diversification, based on the extensions of a 

workable land use program, the development of a viable livestock industry and the tailoring of wheat 

production to realizable wheat markets is the only way to the future prosperity of agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been a memorable experience to give this Address-in-Reply to the Speech from the 

Throne in this the Third Session of the Sixteenth Legislature. 

 

Mr. G. G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to second the Address-in-Reply to the Speech from 

the Throne today, I am deeply conscious of the honor that this occasion confers on me personally, and 

also of the honor conferred on the constituency which I represent. 

 

In my opinion, Elrose Constituency has some of the best grain land and best grazing land in any part of 

the Province of Saskatchewan. We grow high quality and high protein grain as the previous speaker has 

mentioned. We grow good oil seeds and we raise and fatten some of the best livestock in Western 

Canada. 

 

In the last couple of years there has been significant oil development in the area. We now have 56 

producers and there is a pretty good indication that there is a large pool of oil that is going to continue to 

be developed both to the advantage of the local people and the citizens of Saskatchewan as a whole. 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

41 

Mr. Speaker, the physical aspects of that constituency are not its only attractions. I want to say just a few 

words about the people that live out there. I guess that they are representative, and like the rest of the 

people in the rural areas of Saskatchewan, they are ambitious, industrious, they are optimistic. They 

have brought the traditions of many different cultures to the task of providing food for not only the 

people of Canada but the people of the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — Most of our country was settled between 1905 and 1915. During the period from 1905 – 

1920, school districts were formed, the rural municipalities were organized, the buildings for schools 

and the rural municipalities were erected and the whole framework of local government was established. 

Indeed that framework has been handed down to us almost unchanged since that time. 

 

Before I go further, Mr. Speaker, I want to compliment the previous speaker, the Member from Hanley 

(Mr. Heggie). I want to congratulate him on his analysis of the Speech from the Throne and on his 

perception of the problems of today. His speech is a tribute to his ability as a Member of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — I wish to associate myself also with the Member from Hanley in his remarks about the 

new Lieutenant Governor, His Honour Dr. Worobetz. I am sure that he will grace the position in which 

he serves as the Queen‘s representative. The gentleman who has just retired from the vice-regal position 

represented as a member of the Federal House part of the area which I have the honor to serve in this 

Assembly. He didn‘t belong to the same political party that I do, but we have a couple of things in 

common. One of them is part of our name; the second and much more important the many mutual 

friends that we hold in common. I want on this occasion to express thanks from the people of Elrose to 

him for his service, his long service to the people of Saskatchewan, both as an elected representative and 

as an appointee of the Crown. 

 

I would like also to echo the previous speaker‘s congratulations to the Premier of the Province and to the 

Cabinet Ministers. The Speech from the Throne reflects the integrity and the hard work of this small 

group of men, not just in the last little while, but extending over the period since they first took office. 

To a man, they have been working steadily to make Saskatchewan a better place in which to live. They 

have brought to their position practicality and efficiency as well as an earnest desire to be fair and honest 

with each and every citizen of this province. 

 

The Speech from the Throne indicates to me, Mr. Speaker, as I think it ought to indicate to every 

fair-minded Member of this Legislature, that the Government is concerned about the people of the 

province, that it is concerned to fight inflation and to help our economy in every possible way. It is 

concerned about our health care and about the education of our youth. It is also concerned about the 

non-physical, the non-material aspects of provincial life that will make Saskatchewan an even 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

42 

better place in which to live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to discuss several items mentioned in the Speech from the Throne, but I want 

particularly to dwell on the references to education. I said earlier that municipal government and 

education had not really changed, but of course this statement needs elaboration. Because of its dynamic 

nature and because of the dynamic nature of the world in which we live, education has changed 

immensely, and is changing even as we sit in this Assembly. It is in this context of change that we ought 

to be examining the new proposals in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

First, what is not new and what will probably never really change is the root idea that parents should be 

mainly responsible for their children‘s education, that they should be mainly responsible for the 

organization and the maintenance of the schools. However, successive governments for many years have 

used Provincial tax revenues to equalize opportunities for children in every part of the province. School 

grants have varied from district to district, and Provincial grants have made possible relative uniformity 

and relative excellence in school programs all across the province. I am pleased to see that grants from 

this source are going to be increased again this year. The Provincial Government will assume a still 

larger proportion of the overall costs of education. 

 

In each and every year since we took office, Mr. Speaker, we have substantially increased the Provincial 

school grants. For instance in 1963-1964, grants amounted to $37.5 million. In 1968-1969 they had risen 

to $66 million. Nobody will deny that education costs to local taxpayers have risen extremely quickly as 

well. In 1963-1964 total education costs in the province were $59.3 million. In 1968-1969 total 

education costs in the province were $132 million. The main ingredients of these escalating costs are 

inflation, and the increase in the number of students and especially the increase in the number of 

enrolments in secondary and post secondary schools. These increases have started chain reaction 

increases in all costs, not the least of which have been teachers‘ salaries. In my opinion it is essential 

that the escalation in education costs be controlled, and controlled now. 

 

Someone has estimated that, if present trends continue, that by 1974-75 total education costs in this 

province will amount to $470 million. This is $105 million more than the total Provincial Budget for 

1969. It is time now to isolate the different cost factors in education, and it is time now to assign the 

priorities so that we can make intelligent choices about programs that can be added, and about programs 

that perhaps ought to be scrapped. 

 

Much has been heard lately about budget review. Every school board is conducting a budget review in 

cooperation with the Department of Education. The idea of budget review is not in itself new. Boards 

have been sending their budgets into the Department of Education for review for some years. However, 

this exercise had limited if any value. Ordinarily, budgets had been set, teachers hired, programs laid out 

and a new mill rate struck before these budgets were sent to the Department. The budget review 

presently being conducted is intended to be quite different. The preliminary review is being done now to 

give school boards a chance to go back and look again at their 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

43 

next year‘s budget before finalizing it, and in future years I am sure that the boards will conduct these 

reviews much earlier in the year. 

 

The board of the Eston-Elrose unit was in to the Department of Education two or three weeks ago. Their 

reaction to the budget review is cautiously favourable. They told me that they had always been careful to 

trim any wasteful expenditures from their budgets. They also said that the very exercise of looking at 

their spending estimates again and discussing them with the Department had made them more than ever 

conscious of costs, and their second review revealed to them several minor savings that could be 

effected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, budget reviews will be of value to the Department of Education as well as to the local 

school boards. It will give a good deal of information that the Department has never had before. It will 

give the Department a greater capacity for analysing the information since it‘s being set up on a 

computer program. As well as the budget itself, other data on staffing, enrolments, etc., are being asked 

for in conjunction with these reviews. It should enable school boards and the Department to ultimately 

budget on a program basis. It should enable the Department to better fulfil its role of leadership and 

direction. 

 

In general these reviews should open further avenues of cooperative action between the Department and 

the school board officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, surely this is the kind of cooperation that is needed to get the most value for our education 

dollar. If we look at costs, it is interesting to note how quickly the number of teachers in Saskatchewan 

has risen compared to the number of students that they are teaching. The present pupil-teacher ratio is 

about 19.2:1. If it were possible to raise this ratio by 2 or to bring it to about 21:1, then it has been 

calculated the taxpayers of the province might save about $6 million. I am sure that parents all over the 

province are now asking themselves whether this increase in this ratio is going to harm their children. 

Some individuals and groups have expressed concern. On the other hand other educational groups and 

many parents have welcomed the idea. Now just as an example, isn‘t it quite possible that a lecture class 

in history for instance could have more students in it than classes in a laboratory in biology which by its 

very nature requires a very high level of teacher participation? Certainly it is not uncommon for lecture 

classes at the universities to have as many as 200 or perhaps 300 students. Nobody is going to claim that 

this is beneficial or desirable. However, I will say and I do say that the people of Saskatchewan can‘t 

afford to let their pupil-teacher ratio remain at its present low rate. We must give some leadership to 

increasing that ratio. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — Mr. Speaker, 1969 saw the expenditure in Saskatchewan for education of almost $113 

million. I think it goes without saying that I believe that most of that money was spent wisely and 

carefully but if 99 per cent of it were spent carefully and wisely, then doesn‘t this mean that perhaps one 

per cent or as much as $1 million might have been saved by better planning, 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

44 

by a little more care and some review. 

 

This sure is the reason that school boards are now asked to bring their budgets in and sit down with the 

officials of the Department and really have a look at them. I want to emphasize that this look that is 

being taken at budgets is for the purpose of having the trustees themselves decide in the most part what 

are the essential and necessary aspects of their programs; what should be retained; what must be 

discarded; what new fields of education activity should be explored; what older and perhaps 

old-fashioned concepts and approaches and practices in education ought to be streamlined. Certainly we 

are aware that education is of tremendous importance to the people of our province. We are aware that it 

is our duty as legislators to provide the best leadership toward the best education that we can possible 

afford. But having said this, Mr. Speaker, it is time for us all to realize that there is a limit in spending 

beyond which we cannot go. There is a kind of lavish educational environment that we can‘t yet afford, 

and especially at this time in our economic history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we are talking about money, I want to say that I am pleased that again our University 

is going to get record grants from the Provincial Government for the continued expansion on both 

campuses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — The Government intends to provide more money for the expansion of the number of 

schools using French as the language of instruction. We will be asked for more money to increase the 

present ceiling for the pensions of retired and retiring teachers. Grade XII textbooks will be provided 

free starting September, 1970. 

 

I want to mention another area in which the Department is breaking new ground. This is the proposal to 

place in the government-aided category the pre-school teaching of the hard-of-hearing and deaf children 

in five Saskatchewan centres. The Saskatchewan Red Cross formerly supported this program, but is 

unable to continue to do so. I want to commend the Minister now for this move, Mr. Speaker, and I 

commend him also for the provision of grants for the transportation of handicapped children in urban 

areas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — I know that the people of Saskatchewan are going to approve of these latest measures to 

aid our handicapped children. I don‘t think I need to remind anybody in this House that there is constant 

need for support from this Legislature particularly and from all the people of the province for the care 

and education of all our children who are handicapped in any way. These are a couple of more steps in 

the right direction that this Government has taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Member from Hanley (Mr. Heggie) has had something to say about The Coming of 

Age Act. I want to add a few words about it. This is a proposal to lower the legal age of majority from 

21 to 19. Last year I think some Members will remember that I spoke to this Legislature and urged the 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

45 

consideration of the idea. I told the Hon. Members then that people who are between the ages of 18 and 

21 are discriminated against in many ways. They are old enough to marry and make decisions about 

bringing other human beings into a troubled world. They are old enough to rent houses, but are not old 

enough to be legally responsible for signed leases. They are old enough to serve our country if necessary 

in time of war, but they are not old enough to legally drink a glass of beer in public. They are old enough 

to vote for Members of this Assembly — and they will soon be able to vote for Members of the Federal 

House — but they are not old enough to buy or own or inherit or lease property. 

 

This situation has gone on long enough and I‘m extremely pleased to see the proposal for The Coming 

of Age Act in the Speech from the Throne this year. On the passage of this Act, the age of majority will 

be 19, a reduction of two years. Some people will complain to us that it ought to have been 18. I know 

that some people are going to complain that we are wrong to lower the age at all, that 19 is too young. 

Well, all I can say is that I ask the young people to accept this Bill as an honest attempt to meet their 

demands and their wishes. I ask the people who have reservations about it to remember that 

governments are usually two or three or five or ten years behind the social mores of the citizens that they 

serve. 

 

Young people have come to us and said, ―Look, we want to have the age of majority lowered from 21 to 

18. We are responsible citizens. Give us responsibility and we will deserve it.‖ As lawmakers, I don‘t 

suppose we have accepted the validity of this argument until now. But now we have come to the point in 

time when almost everyone in this province believes that responsibility begets responsibility, that if we 

ask our people to obey the laws, and if the laws are reasonable and just, and they appear to be reasonable 

and just, then they will be obeyed, and society‘s purposes will be served. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot has been said about the difficulties of being a backbencher in our system of 

government and particularly perhaps of government backbencher. I think I am inclined to agree with 

some of the comments about it, but I want to say today how heartening it is to see the fruition of an idea, 

to see that government is taking seriously what has been said in the debates in the House and to see that 

the Government is trying to close the gap between the work of the House and the thinking of the public 

that we represent. 

 

I don‘t suppose that any debate that occurs in this Legislature this year will be complete unless everyone 

has spoken about our economic problems. We are painfully aware of the economic difficulties that are 

facing us and we are painfully aware of the huge piles of wheat and other grains that clutter up our farm 

buildings and our yards. We are painfully aware of the cash shortage which is harming not only the 

farmers, but the small businessmen in our communities and indeed is having an effect on every other 

part of the economy in Canada. It is extremely naïve to think that this crisis will not affect the rest of 

Canada. Our export sales of grain are ordinarily our second largest earner of foreign exchange. The farm 

machinery, the farm trucks, the automobiles, the clothing that we use on the Prairies are a significant 

part of the total production economy of the nation. It may be true that the auto workers in Eastern 

Canada are now producing for the whole North American 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

46 

market. But very soon now, if it is not already, the large machinery and auto manufacturers will realize 

that Western farmers and Western Canadians are literally out of the market for their products. Every 

community in the Prairie Provinces is loaded with new farm machines. Farmers have stopped buying 

them because they just can‘t pay for them any longer. They are determined to make do with what they 

have. They are determined to repair what they have if necessary and to get along as cheaply as possible 

until the present crisis is over. 

 

Generally, Mr. Speaker, farmers, and Western farmers particularly are great spenders. If they have a 

dollar they‘ll spend 98 cents. But if they do see the threat of recession or depression, the few that have 

some money saved are not going to spend any more. People who have saved money are going to protect 

their investment. Many young farmers are buying land and have taken on big obligations. They are not 

able to spend; the result is a drying up of the juices which make the economy viable. 

 

I have a neighbor who has been in the province 54 years. She came here from the Eastern Townships of 

Quebec. She was telling me the other day that she has seen three depressions in Saskatchewan since she 

came here, but that this is the first time that she has seen a depression of plenty, the first time that she 

has seen problems of poverty when there are lots of grains around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a paradoxical situation. Ordinarily we are used to lean periods when there is no 

grain because of natural disasters like drought or hail or frost. Certainly it is unique in our history at least 

to have a recession generated by the bounty of nature rather than by general parsimony. People all over 

Saskatchewan and in the West generally are asking themselves and their neighbors: why? How is it 

possible that we are sitting here on the Prairies, up to our necks in grain, while there are still children 

starving in other parts of the world? How is it possible, when the United States is able to put a man on 

the moon, to muster the technology and manpower and the material to put a man on the moon, how is it 

possible that a relatively simple problem like the distribution of grain to different parts of the world 

seems to incredibly difficult? How is it possible that we could allow ourselves in the age of planning and 

computers to get into the situation where we have so much surplus grain? Who is to blame? This is the 

question we hear more and more often every day. Who is to blame? Each of us, including the farmers, is 

anxious to blame somebody else. We are quick to recall that government spokesmen told us three years 

ago to grow all the grain that we could, because it would be sold. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Liberals! 

 

Mr. Leith: — I suppose the blame here is particularly and partially correct. Errors in forecasting were 

made, and they were made by many political people as well as by the technical people who are supposed 

to be expert in this field. We accept the fact that mistakes were made. What we don‘t seem willing to 

accept, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we as farmers are just as much to blame for the surplus as is the 

Government, just as much as the Wheat Board and just as much as the 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

47 

exporting agencies. We have been floating along in a rosy world without really realizing how bad the 

grain situation was getting. Very few producers bothered to make any investigation of the long range 

prospects for hard spring wheat. We went along, happily accepting the fact that the Wheat Board was 

selling our grain and that there was no problem. Every year we sold quite a bit of grain. Every year we 

got quite a large final payment. We had come to count on this and we were using it as a financial tool, as 

a deferred payment of income to pay the tax on income generated by the original sale of wheat. 

 

Farmers across Saskatchewan, partly because of the policies of local government and provincial 

government and partly because of the stupidity of the regulations of the Canadian Wheat Board, were 

breaking up land which never ought to have felt the plow. They were knocking down trees which should 

have been left standing. They were seeding new ground, new marginal farm land, to wheat or to 

something else which could be used as a basis for the sale of wheat on the permit book. 

 

The operations of the Canadian Wheat Board were never seriously questioned. We took for granted that 

the Canadian Wheat Board was doing the very best job that could have been done in the selling of our 

wheat and in the regulation of the internal movement of grain. If anyone did criticize the Canadian 

Wheat Board, these detractors were categorized in the minds of most people as being right wing 

extremists, who wanted the return of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange for the handling and manipulation of 

all grain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was the general attitude in the summer time of our grain sales, when the living was 

easy. It‘s different now. The Canadian Wheat Board has come under fire from almost every sector of the 

Western farm economy. Some of these attacks have been senseless and useless and based on false 

information. Other criticism has been valid and valuable and ought to have been made long ago. How 

many farmers have actually seen the Canadian Wheat Board Act and its amendments and its 

regulations? Until a year ago, how many farmers knew that it was against the law to haul grain across a 

provincial boundary? How many farmers had ever heard of Cargill, or Continental, or Bunges? I think 

almost everybody knows now that they are international grain brokers, that most of our export grain 

sales are made through these or similar multi-national corporations. We didn‘t know, and we didn‘t care, 

because things were going pretty well. Things were going pretty well for the Canadian Wheat Board too. 

It was generally accepted that our wheat was the best in all the world and all that was really necessary 

for them was to tell people that, and to remind them about it once in a while, and to arrange to sign on 

the dotted line and t transfer some wheat to Cargill or Bungee for resale overseas. Everything seemed to 

come out alright. 

 

I know that this is an over-simplification of what was happening, but it is my sure opinion that the 

Canadian Wheat Board had become hide-bound, had become riddled with official inertia and had 

become, if not absolutely divorced from, at least pretty well insulated from the people it is supposed to 

serve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

48 

say that this attitude has undergone a marked change since the appointment of Otto Lang as 

Minister-in-Charge. In my opinion still more change is necessary. For instance, I don‘t believe that the 

commissioners should serve indefinitely on that Board. There ought to be a stated period of service, of 

perhaps three years, at the end of which each might be re-appointed, but only after pretty serious 

evaluation of that commissioner‘s service in the past. Mr. Speaker, what sounds like a criticism of the 

Wheat Board is really a criticism of myself and all the rest of the farmers that were complacent enough 

to let things slide without really knowing what was going on in that body. 

 

I have heard a proposal from an eminent source that the Wheat Board ought to become 

producer-controlled instead of government-controlled and I endorse this idea heartily. Each of us and 

especially every farmer knows that his business can only prosper if he is interested in it enough to look 

after it and watch it and see what‘s going on. There is a Scottish saying that fits the situation pretty well. 

―It is the eye of the master that fattens the cattle.‖ As farmers we have closed our eyes to the operation 

of the Canadian Wheat Board. We have delegated responsibility through our politicians to officials who 

are not farmers. Some of them have never been farmers and some of them understand the working of the 

international grain markets, but I doubt very much if any of them understand the difficulty of getting 

along on a five-bushel quota. The Canadian Wheat Board is governed under an Act of the Federal 

House. Blame that is directed to the Board must first be directed toward the politicians of our country, 

but I believe that, if the Canadian Wheat Board were taken entirely out of the political arena and away 

from the hands of the Government, then the producers would be better served. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am realistic enough to know that this isn‘t going to happen overnight nor should it 

happen overnight. The Canadian Wheat Board is still going to function as a government agency for 

some time. So, I make now a very strong plea that one or two commissioners be appointed to the Board 

and that these be farmers who are able, farmers who understand farm problems and who understand the 

grain business. Progressively as these farmer representatives become more expert in the workings and 

the operations of the Canadian Wheat Board, more and more of the work of that Board ought to be 

transferred to these farm representatives. This is the only way we are going to get satisfaction from this 

Canadian Wheat Board. Again, it is the eye of the master that fattens the cattle. 

 

We are assured by Mr. Lang that changes will be made in the operations of the Wheat Board. In my 

opinion they are long overdue. I don‘t know what they are going to be but I have some 

recommendations. 1. Feed grain must be allowed to move freely without let or hindrance in the Wheat 

Board designated area. Nobody has been able to give me any reason why artificial barriers to trade 

should be erected on provincial boundaries. All of us in this House ask for free trade for all the rest of 

Canada and then we allow restrictions on inter-provincial trade. It‘s fantastic and ridiculous. 

 

2. The Canadian Wheat Board should immediately concentrate all its activities and energies on the 

promotion of markets and the sale of grains. It should immediately get out of the non-productive activity 

of the policing of the internal movement of grain. 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

49 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — 3. The quota changed so that production of grains and seeds other than hard spring wheat 

is encouraged. 

 

4. Protein grading must be implemented as soon as possible. 

 

5. Marginal land in the Prairies — at least the class V, VI, and VII land — ought to become ineligible 

for wheat quotas. If there are to be subsidies for Prairie farmers, then let them be used to help farmers 

diversify, and if this is not possible, then take these lands completely and finally out of grain production. 

 

6. The ability demonstrated by the Canadian Wheat Board in the last few years has so impressed me, 

Mr. Speaker, that I suggest its jurisdiction not be extended to rye or flax or other oil seeds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — I don‘t have any doubt that the care and feeding of the Wheat Board is going to come up 

for discussion by other speakers in this and other subsequent debates. If what I have said seems unduly 

harsh, Mr. Speaker, I refer you to criticism much more damning. 

 

The Prairie Wheat Pools and the United Grain Growers have been watching the operation of the Wheat 

Board for many years. They have been strong and vocal supporters. Why have they decided to form the 

company Xcan? This company‘s stated objective is to do work and to do the kind of work that the 

Canadian Wheat Board was supposed to be doing all the time. Nothing more needs to be said. I have 

confidence in the Hon. Otto Lang‘s ability and his desire to cut through the tangle of regulations and 

amendments that have obscured the real purpose of the Canadian Wheat Board. The Board was never 

designed, nor meant to be a social agency to equalize income from farm to farm. People who would give 

this government agency more power and more regulatory function to accomplish that end are doing a 

disservice to the farmers of this province. Welfare and subsidies are not the responsibility of the Board. 

Its only true purposes are to find and to promote and to develop markets for our grain and to sell as 

much of our grain at as high a price as possible in those markets. Mr. Speaker, we are going to know 

pretty soon what kind of rules we are going to have to live with. They just have to be better than the 

ones we have now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our economic problems in the West and perhaps particularly in Saskatchewan have 

aggravated another old sore of Canadian life. I refer to the rising sentiment toward Western separatism 

in Western Canada that I perceive developing in some of the people around me. Neighbors and friends 

of mine say to me occasionally and more and more often lately they say, ―You know, George, if it 

weren‘t for Eastern Canada, we would be pretty well off. If it weren‘t for the tariffs and if it weren‘t for 

the amount of money we send to Ottawa in taxes, and if it weren‘t for some of the representatives that 

we send to Ottawa, if we were alone, the three Prairie provinces could 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

50 

organize a government, which would be suitable to us. We could trade with the world without tariffs. 

We could buy radios, trucks, and cars and machine tools from Japan. We could sell them wheat and 

barley. We could buy textiles and machinery and everything we need from European countries and use 

Churchill as our seaport. We wouldn‘t have to worry about Quebec and Ontario and the Maritimes. We 

wouldn‘t mind having B.C. in with us, but if they don‘t want to come,‖ people say to me, ―well then 

let‘s form a separate nation here in the West of Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan.‖ Some even say to 

me ―And yes — let‘s invite Montana and North and South Dakota to come with us too. It would make a 

great trading unit.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, this may make some Honorable Members smile, but I tell you that it is a sincere and honest 

expression of opinion that many people in this country now hold. When my friends tell me that we in the 

West are discriminated against by the freight rate structure, what can I say but Yes? When they tell me 

that the tariff structure in the first one hundred years of Confederation has discriminated against Western 

Canada, what can I say but Yes? When they say to me that Eastern people don‘t seem to realize our 

problems out here, that they go on unheeding, that the income of people in Ontario is almost twice that 

of people in Saskatchewan and nobody seems to care, that they don‘t want to do anything about it, what 

can I say but Yes? If they say that the Port of Churchill is not used enough and that perhaps the people 

of Montreal and the people that are interested in the St. Lawrence Seaway and the people that own the 

large terminals on the West Coasts don‘t really want us to use the Port of Churchill, what can I say but, 

―Yes, I think so?‖ If they tell me that the Federal Government seems more interested in the promotion of 

bilingualism than it seems to be interested in the problems of regional economic disparity, especially in 

the West, what can I say but, ―Yes, it looks like it?‖ When they tell me that Saskatchewan ought to be 

trading more with Japan than with Ontario and Quebec because of the possibility of the tremendous new 

markets in the Orient for our feed grain and our beef and our wheat, what can I say but Yes? When they 

tell me that Westerners now feel isolated from the rest of the country, that when they are away they 

think they are away from their only real home, that when they come back they would like to kiss the 

ground they are standing on, what can I say but Yes? I say Yes to all these things knowing them to be at 

least partially if not completely true. 

 

It‘s interesting to remind ourselves that the idea of Western separation has sprung up at various times in 

the past and indeed the idea has never been completely dead. In 1912, economic difficulties sparked a 

wave of separatism. Again in 1922, sentiment for separation rose to the surface of Prairie life. In the fall 

of 1924 and 1925, there were several articles in the then new Western Producer, which mentioned the 

talk of separatism. Again in 1931, at a meeting of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool near Lloydminster, a 

resolution was passed urging the formation of a Western Canadian Nation. Now almost 40 years later, 

we‘re talking about it again. There maybe something in our character that makes it natural for us to think 

this way, but every time a dark cloud comes up on the horizon there is somebody willing and ready to 

send it away by suggesting that we separate from Ontario and Quebec and New Brunswick, Nova 

Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland. When times are good, nothing is heard from these 

secessionists. Whole decades have gone by when no more than a casual mention of such a 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

51 

possibility is ever made. But when times are tough, when the going gets a little harder, we do tend to 

realize that we are in what seems to be a disadvantaged position in Confederation. The talk of 

separatism, the talk of a united West, separate and alone except for friendly relations with the rest of 

Canada, appeals to a deep and responsible chord in our character. I think someone has made some 

calculations which show that Western Canada might be so many million dollars ahead if we were to 

leave. I guess there are probably other calculations which will show that a united West, separate and 

alone, would be in a worse position by several millions of dollars. These are answers to a hypothetical 

question, Mr. Speaker. I don‘t think it is really possible to calculate to any degree of accuracy what the 

economic position of our province would be if we were one of three provinces of a Western Canadian 

federal nation. I think you could come to any conclusion at which you wish to arrive in this kind of 

debate. Even if it were possible to calculate exactly how much better off, or how much worse off we 

would be, would this be the answer to our question? 

 

In times of economic crisis in Saskatchewan of course we would be extremely interested to know how 

we would get along in a different kind of political environment. In this respect, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

mention the conference that is going to be held at the University of Lethbridge in May to talk about the 

possibility of uniting the three Prairie provinces in one province. Instead of there being ten provinces, 

and the Territories, there would be B.C., the Prairie Province, Ontario, Quebec, and the Maritime 

Provinces. This will be an interesting study and I hope that every Member of this House will be in 

Lethbridge in May. I think I should emphasize for some of the Members opposite that the purpose of 

this meeting is to study the pros and cons of union of the three Prairie provinces into one province 

within the framework of one nation. It is not to study the possibility of whether or not we would be 

better off to secede from the rest of the nation. This is a very real difference, and I don‘t think people in 

Saskatchewan ought to be confused about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1912, 1924, 1925, 1931, 1969 and 1970, talk of separatism spread across the Prairies. It 

has been popular because the problems that sparked the idea in 1912 were not solved by 1922 and the 

difficulties of 1924 and 1925 had not been settled by 1931. The contradictions of our position in the 

federal state in the 1930s have not yet been settled. The leaders of our governments in Canada have just 

come back from yet another constitutional conference at which another attempt has been made to come 

to grips with some of our real frustrations. 

 

Progress has been made. We heard about it in the Legislature this afternoon but in the perspective of 

history of Canada, mutual understanding and cooperation between the regions have not increased nearly 

enough. We must insist that these problems be discussed, the problems of freight rates, the problems 

about alienation, the problems about economic disparity, the problems of fighting inflation in some parts 

of the country and thereby hurting or ruining other parts of the same country. These problems have to be 

discussed and they must be solved very quickly or the talk of separatism and alienation will become 

more than just talk. It will become a possibility and perhaps an attractive possibility at that. 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

52 

Mr. Speaker, if there is one thing this world doesn‘t need, it is another nation. If there is one thing this 

world does desperately need, it is a nation like the Canada that we are trying to build, a Canada that will 

be an example and a precept for other countries in the world and especially for the developing nations 

throughout the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — All the talk about our alienation and all the talk about our difficulties in Confederation 

pale before the reality and the brutality and the slavery and the hunger of much of the rest of the people 

of the world. 

 

Separatism and the talk of separatism are like a thief who comes in the night to take our national edifice 

away brick by brick. We are building this country and we have been building this country for a hundred 

years, not for power, not for glory, not to subjugate other countries, not to colonize other lands and use 

their raw materials to better our own existence, but to make upon the face of the earth a place where 

freedom and equality and tolerance are not just idealistic watchwords, but where they can become 

reality. 

 

The arguments about economic equality between the various regions of Canada must be pursued. They 

must be pursued with determination, but they must be pursued in grace and in good humor. Even if 

absolute equality with our brothers in Ontario or in B.C. is never attained, we are providing an 

environment in which those intangibles of tolerance and freedom can flourish and grow and they can be 

respected and loved by all our people. 

 

For over one hundred years, Mr. Speaker, we have been living with an idea that is almost impossible to 

comprehend in other parts of the world — the idea that two great cultures can get along side by side — 

that they can pursue national objectives equally well in one language or the other. If this were the only 

reason, it would be reason enough for the preservation of our nation. We are the example, the good 

example, not always perfect in this respect, but we are the example of a country that is trying not to 

glorify nationalism but to work toward internationalism, to try to solve our problems first and then to 

pass on our experience and our devotion and our dedication to the other parts of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even if this sounds smug and self-righteous, I would not apologize for the feeling that I 

have for this country. I would not suffer it to be divided. We will not allow the experiment and the 

dedication and the work that has gone into the building of this nation so far to be put aside by the 

exercise of narrow economic provincialism. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Leith: — Mr. Speaker, I appeal to each person in this province, who believes that separation from 

the rest of Canada is our salvation, to think again. I appeal to him to remember what this nation can be, I 

appeal to him to bend every effort to make it what it ought to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne indicates to me 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

53 

that the Government of Saskatchewan has accepted its responsibility to this end. It emphasizes the 

increasing opportunities for all our citizens. It recognizes the importance of creating a climate of 

tolerance and understanding. It shows it cares for the youth and the aged of our province. I am pleased to 

second the motion and I am pleased to say that it has my support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, we have now had the annual eulogy of the 

Government from the mover and the seconder of the Resolution and I am sure we have all listened with 

a good deal of pleasure to what has been said. Both of the Members have displayed a considerable 

amount of eloquent rhetoric; at least I am sure that they believed it for the most part but really not quite 

for all. I thought there was one omission they both made that rather surprised me, Mr. Speaker. Now we 

have a new Member of the Legislature this year . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . and I know that both of the MLAs who have spoken this afternoon know where 

Kelvington is because I saw them up there. I am somewhat surprised that they didn‘t join with all the 

rest of us in extending the very warm welcome to our new MLA in this Legislature and wish him well in 

his legislative career. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Let me say just a few words about the more than few words of the mover and the 

seconder. Certainly those on this side will join heartily with them in what they have said about the 

present Lieutenant Governor and the very genial and generous man who has just left that post. Our 

present Lieutenant Governor comes to his position with a distinguished reputation in his own profession. 

He comes as a representative of a group who have a special Canadian identity, I think, because they 

chose to come to this country to look for many of the things which the Member from Elrose (Mr. Leith) 

was speaking of just before he took his seat. We welcome Dr. Worobetz and will look forward to our 

association with him. Certainly all of us will remember for a long while the genial hand and presence of 

Mr. Hanbidge. He, as I said on a former occasion, was one who lived in a house by the side of the road 

and was a friend to man. We wish him well in his retirement, and we thank him for his many years of 

service in different ways in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I notice that both the mover and the seconder of the Resolution agreed on one other 

aspect — two other aspects. The Member from Hanley said there were bad times in the province, and 

the Member from Elrose said there was a depression in the province. And maybe the first step to getting 

something done about the problem is to have some of the private Members at least admit that there are 

some real tough, hard, cruel times in the Province of Saskatchewan now. Both of them had, as one 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

54 

would expect, words of praise and encouragement and huzzas for the Premier and the Cabinet. I think 

the Member for Hanley (Mr. Heggie) used the expressed ―We have a firm hand on the helm.‖ Well, 

nobody is going to disagree with that, although some people may call it a tight hand rather than a firm 

hand. But I think the question that‘s being asked around the province isn‘t how firm is the Premier‘s 

hand, the question that is being asked is where the blazes is he steering. And the answer is that he has 

seen the rocks and is headed straight for them with the Saskatchewan ship of state. 

 

I am a little surprised that the Member for Hanley spent more time on Britain, more time on 

Czechoslovakia, more time on Germany than he did actually on the constituency of Hanley and the 

problems that exist there. He found opportunity to comment about British Columbia, but had nothing to 

say about Kelvington. That seems to me to be a rather curious case of far-sightedness in that sense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — He said it was a memorable occasion. I suppose a man as he walks to the scaffolds finds 

that walk a memorable occasion and I‘m sorry the Member for Hanley (Mr. Heggie) isn‘t going to be 

around to make many more speeches of that kind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Just a little bit about the comments by the Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith) who has just 

taken his seat. He talked at considerable length about education. I shall not have much to say about that 

now because I want to deal with it at length tomorrow. But he forgot to mention when he was talking 

about the promises on which he was elected and his colleagues were elected with respect to paying the 

education bill. Because if there was one promise which was repeated over and over and over again, in 

more places in the province and in more ways in the province than any other, it was the promise that 

―we will find a way to reduce‖ the property taxes for education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And any commend on this was conspicuously absent from his comments as he talked 

about financing education. I hope he realizes too that many of the remarks which he made this afternoon 

constitute nothing more nor less than an apology for the attack which this Government has mounted on 

education this year and for the years past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Again, there‘s a firm hand on the helm and that firm hand is steering education onto the 

rocks and we have hit many of the rocks already. 

 

I was disappointed too to hear the Member from Elrose join, as it seemed to me without doing so 

directly, in the attack on orderly marketing that is going on in this province and outside of the province. 

And I think we must construe his remarks this 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

55 

afternoon to be just that. It is a long while since the voice of the Grain Exchange was raised in this 

Legislature — I thought I heard it or came dangerously near to hearing it this afternoon as I listened to 

the Member for Elrose (Mr. Leith). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now, Mr. Speaker, let me turn to what was not a part of this debate but the remarks 

which the Premier made earlier with respect to the Conference just concluded at Ottawa. It will be 

recalled that on January 20, New Democratic MLAs presented to the Government a brief. In this brief 

we set out a number of the proposals which we urged the Government to put before the Conference of 

the last two days. The main reference in our brief was this: 

 

We said, ―The problem in Saskatchewan is not an overheated economy; the problem here is hard times.‖ 

We urged that the Federal Government together with the Provincial Government has major 

responsibilities to develop some emergency programs — and that means now — which will inject cash 

into the Prairie farm economy; which will move wheat and other grains more quickly into export 

positions and into international markets; which will create employment in Saskatchewan particularly in 

the construction industry; which will begin to deal effectively with the real problems of inflation, prices, 

profits and incomes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have listened to as many of the news reports about the Conference as I could. I have read 

everything that has appeared in our local newspapers and I have listened carefully to the Premier‘s 

statement earlier this afternoon. I can find in all of that no evidence that this Conference came to any 

conclusions or agreements which would get on with the job of doing something about those particular 

problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to learn that the Provincial Government did in its proposals 

pick up a number of the proposals we put before the Government and before the public in January, some 

of them long before that. I am pleased that it agreed with our proposals that there should be payment 

made to farmers for farm-stored grain. I am pleased that it saw fit to urge more grain moving faster to 

the terminal elevators. I am pleased that it saw fit to reiterate the importance of the two-price system for 

wheat, although I don‘t know yet that it also said that it must be at a meaningful price level related to the 

cost of production. Of course, it is a serious omission not to add in some figures at that point. I am 

pleased that it saw fit to include our proposal that there should be incentive to farmers to take specified 

acreage out of wheat production and put it into grass or other fodder. While I am glad that it picked up 

those proposals of ours, I am sorry indeed that it disagreed with some others or saw fit not to include 

them with its proposals, because, Mr. Speaker, our first proposal on agriculture is one which has had the 

blessing of major farm organizations. And it is one which represents the answer to a number of the 

immediate problems of farmers and other people too, that was, that the Saskatchewan Government 

should urge the Government of Canada to provide not less than $200 million in supporting payments for 

grain across the three Prairie 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

56 

provinces. I can only assume that since the Provincial Government did not raise that, did not put that 

request forward, it indeed does not approve of that emergency operation which would put some cash 

into farmers‘ pockets now, not, as has been suggested in the proposals, some two or three or four or five 

or six months from now, because at that time a great many more of our farmers will have gone under the 

hammer and a great many more of our businesses will have closed their doors. 

 

And I am sorry too, Mr. Speaker, that the Government didn‘t see fit to support the idea that all grains, 

including feed grains, be placed under the Canadian Wheat Board. Indeed it specifically disagreed with 

this and in disagreeing with this it is, of course, once more out of tune with the analysis and the requests 

of major farm organizations in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder where the NDP were . . . they didn‘t 

advocate that in the last . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I‘m not talking about Winnipeg, I‘m talking about that Government over 

there and what it failed to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . Let him look at himself. Let him analyze his own deficiencies. Let him answer why 

this Government failed to endorse two major proposals of the major farm organizations in this Province. 

That‘s the question for him to answer . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . and no amount, no amount of turning his wide-flung breath toward Manitoba will 

weasel him out of that particular position. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — They have a different program than you had . . . 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — . . . Farmers‘ Union . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I am not talking just about the Farmers‘ Union. I am talking about the 

Wheat Pool and the Federation of Agriculture as well. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can‘t stand them either, eh, Davey? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry too that there wasn‘t more emphasis put on the necessity of 

establishing some meaningful farm production guides. Now the Member from Elrose, (Mr. Leith) when 

he was speaking, admitted that some three years ago Ottawa Liberals were saying, ―Grow all the wheat 

you can grow.‖ Many of us remember the addresses in Saskatoon and Regina of the late Hon. Mr. 

Winters. He had just returned from a trip in which he had concluded the sales agreement with Russia, 

and he assured the people of Saskatchewan that we would have more 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

57 

agreements with Russia. Not only, he said, would we have more agreements with Russia but we will 

have more agreements at higher prices with other countries as well. We‘ve had practically no advice 

about production out of the Federal Liberal Government at Ottawa since that time, until the last few 

days, and now the Hon. Mr. Lang is suggesting to farmers that they shouldn‘t grow wheat at all this 

year. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Do you agree with that? You don‘t argue with the 

Saskatchewan Liberals, do you? 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, it‘s a long way between growing all the wheat we can grow and growing no 

wheat at all, but this is the kind of mixed-up, confused, costly, harmful, misdirection which the Liberals 

at Ottawa and the Liberals at Regina give to the farmers of this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, let‘s look at the Ottawa Conference with respect to employment. The 

Premier has told us this afternoon that he is hopeful that sometime in the future — when, we don‘t know 

— he may be able perhaps to stand up in this House and maybe announce a program of construction that 

might do something about unemployment. And that‘s about as definite as he got. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

welcome the change of heart on the part of Government which suggests it now, at long last, realizes 

something has to be done about unemployment. We want to know why all the delay, because it was 

needed in September of last year, and it was needed in July of last year, and it was needed in May of last 

year. But at that time there was this hard hand on the helm, and the ship of state went straight for the 

rocks where it‘s now finally ended and it is shouting for help from Ottawa. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Rip Van Winkle. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, the other matter on which I think the Provincial Government failed to speak 

up in the Conference of the last two days is that of inflation. You know the people of the country were 

led to believe that inflation is the problem. We were led to believe that it was at this Conference that the 

problem was going to be dealt with. And instead of facing up to the fact, instead of talking about 

inflation and a cure for it, we had just one more pillow fight in that Conference. And it wasn‘t even a 

pillow fight against inflation. It was instead a pillow fight against a public relations shadow of the real 

problem of inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the same pressures which created inflation last year, we are told, are loose in the Canadian 

economy today, and there is no suggestion really that anything be done about those proposals in the year 

ahead of us. It is agreed that undue price increases were part of the reasons for inflation. Yet all that has 

come out of the Conference is that prices will likely be maintained at a level no higher than they were 

last year. In other words, the pressure of prices with regard to inflation will remain as it was last year. 

Certainly anybody who looks at the cost components in our society must agree that one of the big cost 

components is that of profit. And profits 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

58 

are to be at last year‘s level so far as any Government action is concerned. And many of the profits in 

1969, Mr. Speaker, we know were excessive, cruelly excessive. 

 

I point out for example that the chartered banks‘ profits were up 26 per cent in 1969 over 1968, and I am 

reading from the material in our brief now. We pointed out in that brief that finance, insurance and real 

estate profits were up 47 per cent over 1968. We pointed out that Massey-Ferguson profits were up 64 

per cent in the first nine months of 1969 and more recently the Barber Commission has validated that 

kind of comment. It‘s possible to point out that the food and beverage manufacturers‘ profits were up 

$27 million in six months and the steel profits were up $16 million in six months as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of this, nothing was said, so far as I can understand, about this level of profit which 

is one of the real components of inflation pressures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — As a matter of fact it seems that profits were not even part of the vocabulary at that 

Conference. The Premier is ready to go all out for wage controls on people like those who work in the 

hospitals of Saskatchewan, but the profits of corporations to him are sacrosanct and mustn‘t even be 

talked about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — These are real pressures which the Conference did not face up to and the Saskatchewan 

delegation failed to bring this kind of necessary consideration onto the floor of the Conference. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Where was the Manitoba . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, you just defend your own record. You see it so happens that you are the people 

who are supposed to be the spokesmen for the people of the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now quit trying to weasel out of it by talking about what somebody else did or didn‘t do. 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan delegation has said they are happy about the results of the Conference. 

Mr. Speaker, if they are happy, then that simply proves how completely they are out of touch with the 

cruel reality of hardship in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — If they are happy with what went on there, it simply proves that they are unwilling or 

incompetent to describe the real issues which are hurting the people of this Province; that they are 

unwilling or incompetent to propose any necessary solutions to that Conference. This, Mr. Speaker, I 

may say, is known to the people of the Province of Saskatchewan and it was demonstrated by the people 

that they did know it in the election 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

59 

in Kelvington last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say a word about that election and its importance. You will 

recall that our slogan in that election was . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do or die! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . ―Kelvington today, Saskatchewan tomorrow.‖ It wasn‘t just ―Do or die.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — If it was ―Do or die,‖ Mr. Treasurer, we did and you died. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The people of Saskatchewan have granted that that was the meaning of that election. The 

people of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — You know, Mr. Speaker, when you touch a nerve people respond to it and we‘ve all sorts 

of responses coming out over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — But, Mr. Speaker, the importance of the New Democratic win was emphasized by the 

extent of the Liberal effort in that campaign . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — . . . showdown . . . 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — . . . that‘s true, that‘s true but you are talking about the day afterwards not during the 

campaign that was when we . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, let‘s look at the extent of that effort. Well, first of all the Liberals had a 

very popular, a very presentable, a very experienced, a very hard-working, a well-liked candidate. We 

all knew him in this House . . . 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Now you say that! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I said that but his trouble was, Mr. Speaker, he couldn‘t overcome the handicap of 

representing the Saskatchewan Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

60 

Mr. Lloyd: — So in spite of all his own personable qualities and the edge he had by having been an 

MLA, he just couldn‘t carry on his back the burden of sins of omission or commission of the people who 

sit over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now it wasn‘t because his friends over there didn‘t try to help him. No, one could find 

Cabinet Ministers by the dozen, on every trail and behind every bush and on every Indian reserve and 

going cap in hand to every back door in the country. The people just didn‘t listen. They weren‘t willing 

to communicate with those gentlemen over there. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but they called back into 

service a number of their former organizers who are now on the public payroll. For example they called 

in the Chief Electoral Officer who haunted the Liberal committee rooms day and night during their 

campaign. And on election day, Mr. Speaker, there was even a senior official of the Highway Traffic 

Board directing traffic on one of the Indian reserves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — The result of all of this, Mr. Speaker, was that the people of Kelvington gave the present 

sitting member, whom I welcome, a majority of 500 votes in that election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Now I want to turn to some general comments on the Throne Speech itself. 

 

The Throne Speech admits that there are some difficulties and some hard times in Saskatchewan. It 

talks, for example, of hardship to all groups. It talks about major reductions in income for farm people. It 

says our citizens face serious economic problems. Having used these words one would have thought 

they would have gone on and tackled the problem in the spirit of those particular words. Instead, Mr. 

Speaker, they threw a handful of bandaids and aspirins on the table and decided to leave it at that. Now I 

will admit that some of these will be of help to some people in our province. That much is welcome. 

Nothing wrong with bandaids and aspirins, I guess, if what is needed happens to be bandaids and 

aspirins, but when something more is needed, like an operation, then to give bandaids and aspirins and 

to delay action is probably dangerous. Indeed, to relieve the pain by a bit of aspirin here and there is 

deceivingly, deceptively dangerous. And the fact that the Government has seen fit to prescribe nothing 

more than bandaids and aspirins certainly indicates that it has not diagnosed the difficulties well enough. 

Or if it has diagnosed them, it indicates its inability and its unwillingness to face the facts of the 

situation. And that is probably the most dangerous fact of all, that it is unwilling to face up to the 

situation. That, of course, argues eloquently for the need to replace this present Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

61 

Mr. Lloyd: — I found it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in the Speech from the Throne this year there was 

no reference to private enterprise or free enterprise as that mystical presence which, if we just allowed it 

to hover over us, would solve all of our problems. If we laid enough gifts at the feet of this great god 

then all things would be taken care of. I can only conclude that the god has failed. At least he is not 

bestowing his blessings on the Province anymore in the way that he was. As a matter of fact the god is 

showing some disfavor, and the fact of disfavor is shown because of the number of activities, and the 

number of people and the amount of money which has moved out of this province in the last year in 

particular. 

 

One has to say about the Speech from the Throne that the recommendations with regard to agriculture 

are unimpressive. The comments with respect to education are misleading. Employment or 

unemployment doesn‘t even appear. Read the Speech from the Throne from beginning to end and back 

again and you will not find the word ―employment‖ or ―unemployment‖ even mentioned. That indicates 

the sweep of thinking of the people over there. Not only is employment or unemployment not 

mentioned, health isn‘t mentioned, pollution isn‘t mentioned and population is missing altogether. 

 

Let me talk for just a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, about some of this missing population from the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, I go back to a quotation of the Premier when he was Leader of the Opposition when he was 

speaking to this Legislature in 1964, standing where I am standing now. He made this comment: he said, 

―The population figures are the acid test of growth.‖ Population figures are the acid test of growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Well, let‘s apply this acid test, which the Premier has prescribed, to the Liberal 

performance. We can get the information, all that we need of it, if we go to the White Paper of the 

Government issued in December of 1969. That White Paper shows that in the three years up to 1964 the 

population increase was 12,000. It shows that in the latest three years the population increase was only 

1,000. An increase of 12,000 in the three years before the Liberals were elected, and in the most recent 

three years of Liberal performance, 1,000. And if that‘s the acid test then it must mean that the CCF 

performance was 12 times as good as that of the Liberals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — But that‘s not the whole picture either, because to get the full acid treatment you have to 

note what might have been. You have to note the natural increase that should have been available to us, 

because there are more births than there are deaths. 

 

It is instructive to note the Liberals have been in office for about five years and three months up to the 

time we have population records. Five years and three months . . . 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Five years too long! 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

62 

Mr. Lloyd: — Five years and three months. If we consider our natural growth of births over deaths 

since that time, the population ought to have grown by 75,000 instead it has grown by only 14,000. In 

other words during that period of Liberal performance 62,000 people left the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — About 1,000 every month have closed up shop and gone some place else to make a 

living. 

 

As a matter of fact, that isn‘t all the picture either because during 1969, the most recent period, the rate 

of 1,000 per month leaving the Province has increased to 1,800 per month leaving the scene. Surely the 

question which the Government should answer is: are population figures still the acid test of growth? If 

so, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the Liberal Government is very obviously on ―acid.‖ And the fact that it 

is on acid may account for some of the illusions of grandeur and even some of the violence which is 

sometimes displayed to certain groups in Saskatchewan. 

 

You know it used to be said by someone, whom I won‘t be so unkind as to mention by name, speaking 

in Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada and the United States, that ―Saskatchewan exports wheat and 

people.‖ These are the two major exports. We export wheat and people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And so, Mr. Speaker, we elected a Liberal Government at Ottawa and we elected a 

Liberal Government at Regina and the result is we export less wheat and more people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — That‘s the effect of that combination. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Since the election of a Liberal Government at Ottawa and a Liberal Government in 

Regina, the export of wheat has slowed down to a trickle and the export of people has been stepped up 

to the momentum of a spring flood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this lost population has come to some very considerable extent, of course, from our rural 

areas. We just note some information which comes from the reports of the Department of Municipal 

Affairs. In the three years, 1964 to 1967, our loss of population, rural population, was almost 30,000 

people, about 10 per cent. I have here a list of some 55 rural municipalities chosen at random in different 

geographical areas throughout the province. It shows that the loss of population in some cases as high as 

over 40 per cent. And that of course takes us into discussion of the difficulties and the problems of 

agriculture, particularly those which farmers have been exposed to because of the twin combination of a 

Liberal Government at Regina and a Liberal Government at Ottawa. I will 



February 18, 1970 

 

 

63 

have quite a lot to say about that tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, I now ask leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:52 o‘clock p.m. 


