



















































Hansard: April 17, 1970


1798 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

44th Day 

 

Friday, April 17, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 11:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker:  I wish to introduce a group of students situated in the Speaker’s gallery: 22 students 

from Success school in the constituency of Swift current represented by their Member, Mr. Wood. I’m 

sure all Members of the Legislature will wish to express the sincere wish that they will find their stay 

here educational and enjoyable and wish all their drivers and teachers a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

MESSAGE FROM LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Mr. Speaker, I have a message from the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  The Lieutenant Governor has been informed of Further Supplementary Estimates of 

certain sums required for the service to the Province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1970, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. Signed S. Worobetz, Lieutenant Governor of the 

Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. C. P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. Mr. 

Thatcher that: 

 

His Honour’s message and the Further Supplementary Estimates he referred to the Committee of 

Supply. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

STATEMENT BY MR. WILLIS 
 

RESIGNATION AS MEMBER 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Before the Orders of the Day I wish to thank the Member for Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. 

Willis) for having given me prior notice of his desire to make a statement before the Orders of the Day. I 

call on the Member for Melfort-Tisdale. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. C.G. Willis (Melfort-Tisdale): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for this opportunity of making the 

announcement before the Orders of the Day. As many of the Members know my health has been of 

concern to me for more than a year. My condition has worsened in the past six months to the point 

where I feel that I must relinquish my duties as MLA. 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 

1799 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I wish at this time to announce my resignation as Member for 

Melfort-Tisdale effective at the end of the current Session. This step has caused me some concern as I 

have throughout the years from 1952 enjoyed my duties as an MLA and the fellowship which has been 

exhibited by all to me. I have consulted with my constituency executive who have agreed that my health 

comes first. When I first prepared this statement I said in it and I quote: ―It is my hope that the 

Government facilitates the election of my successor if they call a by-election before the end of 1970.‖ 

With the recent announcement of the amendments to the Legislative Assembly Act I realize that 

Melfort-Tisdale will disappear as a constituency with the dissolution of the present Legislature and that 

the Government would in all probability be reluctant to call a by-election to fill a temporary position. I 

regret that Melfort-Tisdale will be unrepresented for a period, but my regret is tempered by the 

knowledge that my neighbouring colleagues to the west and to the east of Melfort-Tisdale will be 

encouraged to extend their constituency boundaries to assume immediately the duties of the Members 

for Melfort-Kinistino and Tisdale-Kelsey. I have consulted with both of the MLAs of Kinistino and 

Kelsey and have their assurances that under the circumstances they would be glad to take on these new 

duties. This I can say is appreciated by me and would be further appreciated by my Melfort-Tisdale 

constituents. In resigning I am assured then that my constituents will be in good hands. 

 

In conclusion may I say that it has been an honour to have served as Member of the Legislature for 

Melfort-Tisdale for the period from 1952 to 1970, some 18 years. My thanks go to my constituents for 

the privilege that has been accorded me and I wish to express of thanks to my fellow Members on both 

sides of the House for the consideration and kindness during the present Session. Further, Mr. Speaker, I 

prepared a letter stating my resignation for health reasons addressed to you and saying that it has been an 

honour to have served my constituency continuously since 1952. I can assure you that it is with a great 

deal of regret that I take this step. I’ll give this to you, Mr. Speaker, for your records. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that Members on both sides of the House 

will have learned of this decision with some regret. I think it has been rather well known in the past few 

weeks that the Hon. Member for health reasons felt that he was obliged to take this step. I would like to 

say that the Hon. Member has served this House and the people of Melfort-Tisdale long and faithfully. I 

have differed with him very frequently in this House as he knows, but I have never doubted his sincerity 

in trying to serve the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

May I, on behalf of the Government Members, wish him the very best in his retirement at the Coast. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, the Member for Melfort-Tisdale indicated 

to me a couple of months ago that it was his intention to take this action. While I learn of it with regret, I 

particularly learn of it with regret because of the health reasons which have 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 
1800 

moved him to make the decision. I may say that I was present at the meeting of his constituency 

executive when he discussed with them officially his intention. One of the gratifying parts about it was 

the very warm response from the members of that executive and the reaffirmation, (although it wasn’t 

necessary), of the very high regard in which he is held by those whom he has been most closely 

associated in that part of the province. I’ve known the Member for Melfort-Tisdale for a number of 

years. Before he came into the House he was a member of the school unit board at Melfort when I was 

Minister of Education and I had the opportunity to know him then. I’ve been associated with him in the 

Legislature when he was a private Member. Later on we were both Members of the Cabinet, later on he 

was in the Cabinet when I was Premier and more recently in our years in Opposition. He has shown an 

extraordinary, I think, dedication to those things in which he believes, and it is because of this of course 

that he has had such great respect and affection for many people in his constituency. I share with the 

Premier the appreciation for his very great service to this Assembly and to this Province and to his 

constituency. Certainly we will all wish that his relief from some of the heavy duties of a Member of the 

Legislature will be beneficial so far as his health is concerned and that he will have the opportunity to 

enjoy many fruitful and well deserved yeas of retirement. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. Willis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for those kind words of the Premier, of the Members and the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I wish to acknowledge receipt of the communication from the Member for 

Melfort-Tisdale (Mr. Willis). In acknowledging the receipt may I also express the appreciation of myself 

personally for the very warm association for the years in which we have both been Members of this 

Legislature. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I would like to introduce to the Members of this Legislature the following 

students: in the Speaker’s gallery there are a number of students from St. Chad’s Girls’ school from the 

constituency of Regina south East represented by Mr. Baker. On behalf of the Members of the 

Legislative Assembly I would like to welcome the students here. We hope their stay is enjoyable and 

educational and we wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

MOTION 
 

MRS. SCOTT’S RETIREMENT — SECRETARY LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might by leave of the Assembly 

move a motion at this time and before I move the motion I would like to say a few words. 

 

As many Hon. Members will know, at the end of this Session of the Legislature we will be losing the 

services through retirement of Mrs. Edna Scott who has worked in the Legislative Counsel Office for all 

Members of this Assembly since 1954. 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 

1801 

Mrs. Scott is seated in the Speaker’s gallery this afternoon, to the left of the clock, and I wonder if she 

would stand up for a minute so everybody can see her. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. Heald: — Mrs. Scott first came to the Government on the 17th of November 1941, where she was 

employed in the Local Government Board and she remained with the Local Government Board until 

November of 1854. Since that time she has been employed as a secretary to the Legislative Counsel. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, everybody will realize, I’m sure, that we have many dedicated public servants who 

do retire from time to time and we can’t honour them all in this fashion, but I felt and I think all Hon. 

Members will agree that this is a particular occasion because Mrs. Scott has been a servant of this 

Assembly, not of the Government alone, but of this Assembly. She has been a servant of all Hon. 

Members who have been in this place since 1954. I know that I speak for all of them when I express to 

her on behalf of the Government our best wishes for a happy retirement. She has been a dedicated and 

tireless worker. I know that Members will realize that when the Legislative Assembly is in session, the 

people who work in the Legislative Counsel’s Office, the Legislative Counsel, the assistant and the 

stenographic staff don’t have any hours at all. They are at the beck and call of all Hon. Members on a 

24-hour a day basis. I want Mrs. Scott to know that we all appreciate this very sincerely and therefore I 

would move, seconded by Mr. Lloyd by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That the Members of this Assembly wish to record their deep appreciation for the long and loyal 

service rendered by Mrs. Edna Scott to the Government of Saskatchewan and to the Legislature as 

clerk stenographer in the Office of the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, just to identify myself and those of us on 

this side of the House with the comments that the Attorney General has made and with the Resolution 

which is before us. As the Attorney General has said it is very easy to forget the people who work in the 

other rooms and whom we don’t see very often. Yet if we pause to think about it we will realize just 

how big a contribution they do make in making it possible for us to get through all of the various and 

sometimes length work that is here. We want to join in the appreciation that has been stayed to Mrs. 

Scott and the good wishes to her. 

 

I had the pleasure of living in the same community with Mrs. Scott’s mother for a number of years – that 

doesn’t make me old enough to be her father, may I say – and I do know something of the background 

of one more of these pioneer families who have given a lot to the country and Mrs. Scott has carried on 

that tradition in the public service. We do indeed thank her, we do indeed wish her well. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. Speaker:  May I join with others in expressing the very best wishes to this charming lady on the 

occasion of her retirement. 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 
1802 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer) moved second reading of Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend 

The Election Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 87, an Act to amend The Election Act is necessary, although I’m sure 

the Members often question whether it was necessary or not, but having passed the Redistribution Bill it 

is necessary because certain Northern seats, that is, Shellbrook or certain seats that extend into the far 

North of the Province, Shellbrook, Athabasca, and Prince Albert East-Cumberland are dealt with under 

The election Act to allow the returning officer to set up polls in a certain manner in the northern 

unorganised territory of the province. Since the name of Prince Albert East-Cumberland has been 

changed to Prince Albert East it necessitates a change in The Election Act, inserting the new name of 

Prince Albert East rather than Prince Albert East-Cumberland. That’s the only change made in The 

Election Act, there are no other changes. It has no other implication merely than naming Prince Albert 

East rather than Prince Albert East-Cumberland. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned Debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney 

General) that Bill No. 1 — An Act to amend The Farm Security Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West); –—Mr. Speaker, when I was speaking on this Bill before, I had 

begun to discuss Section 7 of The Farm Security Act and I was pointing out that the exemption was 

being allowed in advance. I had said that the farmer anxious to obtain the private mortgage and looking 

forward to many prosperous years readily accepted the idea of an exclusion. Now his protection has 

gone and he has no money to meet his obligations. Therefore I question the principle of allowing an 

exclusion in advance. It seems to me that the exclusion should be decided when and if mortgage 

foreclosure action is taken. I would like the Minister to indicate when and how many of these advance 

exemptions were allowed and in what category. Perhaps he would give us the information when we deal 

with the Bill in Committee. In summary, Mr. Speaker, the principle of the Bill is a good principle, but 

the wording of the legislation and the amendment are outdated and impractical because of the few 

contracts in this category in force at the present time. 

 

Second, I recommend to the Minister that the principle regarding crop failure apply when there is a 

market failure; three, that in consultation with farm organizations the limitation protection to the home 

quarter be reviewed; four, and finally, that the practice of excluding the home quarter in advance, 

although it is permitted by the present legislation, be discontinued because present circumstances prove 

the folly of such an advanced exclusion. It is my contention that the protection 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 

1803 

written into the legislation of holding the home quarter secure is defeated, unless the Board deals with 

the decision only when the homestead is threatened by cancellation or foreclosure. Each day more and 

more all of us are concerned with the security of our farmers. Since this Bill was introduced the LIFT 

program with payment to the farmer for summer fallow has changed the picture and emphasized the 

need for protection of the farmer. For instance, I ask the question: is the $6 payment for summer fallow 

which costs $3.50, a crop failure? I say it should be spelled out and I invite comments from rural 

representatives. This Bill could have said that it was. The definition of crop failure in the Act reads as 

follows: 

 

Crop failure means failure of grain crops grown in any year on mortgaged land or on land sold under 

agreement for sale due to causes beyond the control of the mortgagor or purchaser to the extent that 

the sum realizable from the said crops is less than a sum equal to $6 per acre sown to grain in that 

year on the land. 

 

Now that the figure is the same with or without a crop, $6, what is the farmer’s position? Is he protector 

or not? I say it is should be in this Act. The amendments are satisfactory and not controversial but even 

if we have to stay a little longer at this Session, Mr. Speaker, I urge the Minister to burn the midnight oil 

if necessary and bring in a new definition of crop failure. There is a desperate need for it. The LIFT 

program payments for summer fallow put us under the gun. 

 

I should like to point out — and if I may digress for a moment — the need for redrafting all of our farm 

legislation was emphasized by this Member and the Member for Kelsey in 1968 in another debate, on 

page 1,079 on March 15, 1968. At that time we urged the updating of the legislation. That is two years 

ago or more than two years ago. The Hon. Member for Kelsey said and I quote, Hansard page 1,080: 

 

We find that there are much much more volumes of money being borrowed and in much greater 

quantities, and the entire economics of agriculture is no longer the way it was when this first 

Securities Act was brought into this Legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time and at that time, I urged study by a legislative committee. It may be too late for 

this immediate problem for the situation is serious and urgent. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Minister shares my concern. His amendment suggests just 

that, but unless the trend changes there is a desperate need for extensive change in the original Act. In 

the interests of our rural population I urge immediate further updating and rewriting perhaps The Farm 

Security Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I will not be opposing the second reading of this Bill but as it 

has been explained by the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) it is a housekeeping Bill with respect to 

existing legislation. However, I should like to take this opportunity to make some general comments on 

the area of farm security as it relates to the present crisis in Saskatchewan. 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 
1804 

In effect I am asking the House to question the relevancy of the present statute and other related statutes 

in the area of farm security. Firstly, directing my attention to the Bill that is to be amended, I should like 

to observe that it appears to be hopelessly out of date and needs a thorough revision. A few examples to 

the legislation will make the point. The Act states that where the value of grain grown per acre in a year 

is less than the value of $10, then the purchasers of what have you are able to present a tax certificate to 

the vendor and what have you and the effect will be to stall the obligation of payment pursuant to the 

agreement of sale or mortgage. The theory behind the legislation seems to be that a farmer may have a 

drought year or a poor crop, and if he is unable to meet his obligations under the agreements and 

mortgages, the Act will give him security by alleviating his duty to pay. This is worthwhile legislation. 

However, it does not take into consideration situations which we have in the Province of Saskatchewan 

today. Today often the farmers are blessed with grain grown that is away in excess of $10 an acre. 

However, they are unable to move the grain because of the glut on the market. At the same time, many 

of the farmers still are obliged by contract to make payments pursuant to agreements and mortgages. It 

does not stand to reason that the farmer in this type of predicament should be forced to meet his 

payments while the same farmer who is hailed out or otherwise financially insolvent is given relief. 

What we are saying is that the Act does not seem to consider the modern day problem of Saskatchewan. 

Farmers are full of grain, but yet it would not surprise me if they are in many cases unable to make their 

payments and the like. 

 

Another example is Section 6(1)(b) which defines what is meant by a crop failure. A crop failure is a 

crop that is unable to realize the sum of $6 per acre own. The definition is careful to note that this does 

not occur due to causes beyond the control of the farmer under mortgage or contract or sale. It would be 

an interesting argument to submit to a court that there is a crop failure in Saskatchewan and many rural 

areas because of the inability of a farmer to realize $6 per acre. It is clear to me that the Statute was 

designed to protect the farmer who simply did not have and not the farmer who has a crop failure in the 

midst of plenty. I do not feel that the modern day farmers would be able to get the protection of this Act 

under the present situation where the bins are full. Furthermore, I doubt if many farmers will today agree 

that the figures of $10 and $6 an acre are realistic figures with respect to the break-off point. The fact is 

that, because of the cost price squeeze, many farmers are broke at a figure substantially higher than 

those stated in the Act and consideration should be given to raising these figures. All of these comments 

are made in support of the argument that the Government must look immediately at an overall of the 

farm security legislation in Saskatchewan. This Act has to be updated and made more modern. It must 

reflect a variety of situations where the farmer is unable to meet obligation and faces further legal action. 

Also the legislation seems to be very unclear and very complicated. The language is not conducive to 

farmers being able to readily appreciate their rights. The references to the Provincial Mediation Board 

may be obsolete and no longer meaningful. Perhaps we have to look to some speedier and more 

effective remedies. I would also commend to the Attorney General that there be an overhaul of all 

legislation for protection of the farm and farmer, such legislation as land contract action and the like. 

Perhaps they may be consolidated in one Bill more simplified and more meaningful for 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 

1805 

farmers. I urge the Government to bring into the forthcoming Session of the House if not this Session, 

positive farm security legislation which incorporate the best features of all of these Acts. In my mind, 

there is a need for a general Provincial debt moratorium legislation to meet the present prices on the 

farms in Saskatchewan. There is a need for the Provincial Government to assure farmers that those 

matters within the power of the Provincial Government will be dealt with in such a way that the farmer 

does not have to worry in this crisis. Thus I call on the Provincial Attorney General to launch a full-scale 

review of this type of legislation within his Department and the presentation to this House of immediate 

and long-range protection for Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Heald: – Mr. Speaker, the hour is late and I don’t want to make a lengthy speech. I don’t disagree 

very much with what either of the Hon. gentlemen has said. I would only remind them of one thing. The 

Farm Security Act can’t do all of the things that they are advocating be done. I agree with what they 

said. As a matter of fact I made a speech here yesterday on the Resolution of the Hon. Member for 

Regina North West in which I advocated Federal enabling moratorium legislation which would enable a 

province like Saskatchewan to set up a Provincial Moratorium Board. That is what is needed. But we 

can’t do it in The Farm Security Act because we haven’t got the constitutional power to do it. The Farm 

Security Act was a very touchy thing when it was first introduced and it stood the test in the courts and it 

went to the courts, but you can’t go very much further in The Farm Security Act and still be within the 

constitutional competence of the provinces. You have got to have Federal legislation, you have got to 

have interest legislation which is Federal, you have got to have basic bankruptcy legislation which is 

Federal. The only way you can do it is to have a Federal Act setting up Provincial Moratorium Boards. 

you can’t do it in this Act. We can’t really do very much more than what we are doing by these 

amendments, except an attempt to update to some extent. I agree with the Member from Regina North 

West that instead of having crop failure, we should have market failure, but again I think that is 

moratorium legislation and it can’t be done by a Provincial Legislature. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly recessed from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. 

 

SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND PRINTING 
 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of the Report of the Special Committee 

on Standing Orders and Procedures of the Assembly, the Hon. Mr. Guy moved a Resolution which 

pertained to the recommendation regarding the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts and 

Printing and which I ruled to be in order on the grounds that this specific matter had not been decided by 

the Assembly in the present Session. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst appealed my ruling. 

 

Ruling of chairman confirmed on the following recorded division. 



 

April 17, 1970 

 

 
1806 

YEAS — 31 

 

Thatcher MacDougall Radloff 

Howes Coderre Weatherald 

McFarlane Larochelle Mitchell 

Boldt MacDonald Gardner 

Cameron Estey Coupland 

Steuart Hooker McPherson 

Heald Gallagher Charlebois 

McIsaac Heggie Forsyth 

Guy Breker McIvor 

Barrie Leith Schmeiser 

Loken   

 

NAYS — 22 

 

Lloyd Meakes Baker 

Bowerman Berezowsky Pepper 

Messer Smishek Matsalla 

Wood Thibault Wooff 

Blakeney Snyder Kwasnica 

Davies Michayluk Kowalchuk 

Romanow Brockelbank Byers 

Dewhurst   

 

MOTION 
 

SATURDAY SITTING 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister 

of Education, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding Standing Order 2, on Saturday, April 18, 1970, the Assembly shall meet at 

10:00 o’clock a.m. until 10:00 o’clock p.m. and there shall be two-hour recesses at 12:30 o’clock 

p.m. and 5:30 p.m., the Order of business on Saturday to be the same as on Friday. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


