



















































Hansard: March 05, 1970


512 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

13th Day 

 

Thursday, March 5, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 

 

DURUM WHEAT PAYMENT 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, just before I came into the House today I had a 

telephone call from the Hon. Otto Lang‘s office. I thought Hon. Members might be interested in what he 

indicated. Later this day it will be announced apparently that $7 million will be made available for a 

final durum payment. I don‘t know whether it was made . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . as a result of the Hon. Member for Elrose‘s (Mr. Leith) motion on our order 

paper. We were also informed that the over-all deficit in the final participation account this year, will be 

$48 million. The figure includes both wheat and barley. The loss apparently will be absorbed by the 

Federal Government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The Minister‘s office also pointed out that this Sunday, from Winnipeg, every farmer 

on the Prairies will be sent a letter of explanation, as to how the acreage payment legislation will be 

proceeded with. I hope this letter may clear up some of the many questions that are being raised all over 

the Province. I give the House that only as information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I apologize to the House for having got my procedures out of turn. I should have 

introduced the students from the galleries before we proceeded with the Orders of the Day. However, I‘ll 

do it now. 

 

We have situated in the galleries the following groups of students: 44 students from the St. Gerard 

school in Saskatoon from the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair represented by its Member, Mr. 

Brockelbank, under the direction of their teachers, Mr. Brezollo and Miss Budz; 32 students from the 

E.B. Feeham high school from the constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair again represented by its Member, 

Mr. Brockelbank, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Baumgardner; 30 students from the Palliser 

Heights school in Moose Jaw from the constituency of Moose Jaw North, represented by its Member, 

Mr. Snyder, under the direction of their teacher, Mrs. Wood; 27 students from Montmartre high school 

from the constituency of Qu‘Appelle-Wolseley represented 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

513 

by the Hon. Minister of Agriculture, Mr. McFarlane, under the direction of their teacher, Miss 

Lachambre; 62 students from the Mass school in the constituency of Regina South, represented by the 

Hon. Minister of Health, Mr. Grant, under the direction of their teacher, Miss Brown; 24 students from 

the Leroy high school from the constituency of Humboldt, represented by its Member, Mr. Breker, 

under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Schugman; 38 students from the Victoria high school from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Nutana Centre, represented by the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs, Mr. 

Estey, under the direction of their teachers, Mrs. Shamski and Mr. Stiller. 

 

I am sure that all Members of the Legislative Assembly would wish me to extend to each and every one 

of these students and to their teachers an extremely warm and cordial welcome from the Legislature of 

the Province of Saskatchewan and to express the very sincere wish that their stay here will be 

informative and enjoyable and wish each and every one of them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

COMPLIMENTARY PARKING PERMITS FOR MEMBERS 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You will notice the red 

complimentary metered parking permit on your desks. I might say that this is a courtesy extended by our 

city council, to each Member here, to be used during the Session. I would suggest it be placed 

somewhere in the windshield or on your sun visor, so that it can be pulled and be visible to the 

commissionaires or police. I would suggest you keep them. We will also honor them just in case my 

friend the Premier calls another Session in the fall, so they could be used for the whole of 1970. We 

hope that you will make use of them. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. McIvor (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Liberal Members here in the House I 

would like to thank Mayor Baker and the council. I was the culprit that first approached him on this 

subject. He said he would see what he could do and that‘s less than two weeks ago, so his prompt action 

is well appreciated by us Members. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. F.A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the Member for Arm River that he is 

rather a Johnny come late. This request was raised with the city several years ago. He did not then have 

a sympathetic council. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — . . . any Government Member to . . . 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — As Members we come here to bring business to the city, not take it away, and I 

appreciate what the city has been able to do so far. Our best wishes go to them, but we hope it will be 

extended in the future. 



March 5, 1970 

 

514 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION 

 

ANNUAL REPORTS OF HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL CARE PLANS 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder 

whether I can ask the Minister of Health when we might expect the annual reports for the Saskatchewan 

Hospital Services Plan and the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance to be tabled in the House. 

 

Hon. B.G. Grant (Minister of Health): — Well before the deadline . . . 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

BUDGET DEBATE 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Steuart (Provincial 

Treasurer) that Mr. Speaker do now leave the Chair and the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. 

Blakeney. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, before I resumed my seat I had complimented our new 

Lieutenant Governor and given the good wishes to the retiring Lieutenant Governor, I had somewhat to 

say about the apparent irrelevancy of the Liberal party according to the Ontario Liberal convention and I 

had discussed a little bit about education. 

 

I must get on with my notes and I want to say first that in reading the Budget one of the things that I 

noted — and I might say noted with pleasure — was the increase in the vote for the Indian and Métis 

Affairs. A year ago when the Department of Indian and Métis Affairs was formed, I said that I would 

vote for its establishment, but I would withhold real judgment on the wisdom of doing so until later. I 

am still in that position. Although in principle I think I am still against it, I want to see how it will work. 

I‘ll admit it is only the first year, and I didn‘t hear too much about it but I am prepared to reserve 

judgment yet. 

 

As I said before, I know and I don‘t like to be repetitious, but the Department should, I believe, and must 

try to establish industries either on or near reserves. The Indian people I talk to again and again express 

the wish to be able to remain on the reserves and still have good meaningful jobs. To me this makes 

sense. Most of them now have much better houses on the reserves than a few years ago. It seems logical 

that these houses should be used. This Government claims to be interested in promoting industry. I 

suggest it should be ready to subsidize some industry. I suggest it should be ready to subsidize some 

industry to come to a place like Punnichy or Lestock where there are five reserves in the area. I believe 

there is a potential work force there of five or six hundred people. Another obvious place would be Fort 

Qu‘Appelle or Balcarres which is near the File Hills and Fort Qu‘Appelle agencies. 

 

These Indian people do not want welfare. They want good 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

515 

meaningful jobs, jobs that will bring them a decent standard of living, jobs that will make them first 

class citizens. This to me is much more logical than to move them into the cities, find houses for them, 

jobs for them, and then leave them alone to find out the pitfalls of a new urban environment. 

 

I want to remind the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) that the band council of the Standing Buffalo 

Reserve has a letter dated September 15, 1967, promising that the Highway 364, which runs on the north 

side of Echo Lake to the Sioux Bridge, would be oiled in the immediate future. This letter was signed by 

the then Minister of Education, Mr. Trapp. I would like to ask the Government what it means by 

‗immediate future‘. Surely it doesn‘t mean two years. 

 

The Indians are very interested in getting this done. This is the road that they travel to their town of Fort 

Qu‘Appelle. In the summer time during the tourist season dust conditions become terrible on this road. 

There have been several accidents and many, many near accidents. On behalf of these Indians I ask the 

Government to act this spring. I think it is a real emergency. 

 

I have mentioned the fact that I believe industry should be brought to the reserve. The Standing Buffalo 

Reserve has several miles of good beach on Echo Lake. There is an overcrowding of beaches in the 

Qu‘Appelle area. The Department would have a perfect project to help the Indian band finance the 

setting up of a resort area, not a resort to be rented to the white man but one that the band could own and 

run themselves. In talking to some of these Indians they expressed great interest in this kind of a project. 

 

Over three years ago the Department of Highways consulted the band council of that same reserve, the 

Standing Buffalo, about bringing the highway from Lipton through the reserve to the Sioux Bridge and 

then from there joining Highway No. 364 into No. 10 Highway. As I understand it the reserve agreed to 

it and they hoped it would be done. This would save several miles for the general public travelling on 

No. 35 Highway to or from Regina. Also it would allow them to avoid several miles of speed zone 

following the north side of Echo Lake and through the town of Fort Qu‘Appelle. I suggest the Minister 

of Highways (Mr. Boldt) should look at this very carefully. 

 

I think if this Department of Indian Affairs is going to be a success it will have to have Indian people 

running the Department in close consultation with the Indian people on the local level, and above all, let 

these people make their own decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of all the reasons why I will not vote for this Budget, the first is its callous disregard for the 

great urgent problems facing agriculture. The Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) boasted about the over 

$1 million increase in the Estimates to the Department of Agriculture. When one looks at where that 

increase is to be spent, it is nearly all on either irrigation or projects for the Indian and Métis people. I 

have no quarrel with these expenditures, although I wonder about expenditures on more irrigation, when 

prices of farm products are as depressed as they are. 

 

Certainly there is nothing in this Budget for the hard-pressed grain farmer, nothing to put money into his 

pocket. 



March 5, 1970 

 

516 

To make it worse we also have a Liberal Government in Ottawa. The wheat acreage reduction program 

brought in last week is certainly not going to put cash into his pockets. Last weekend when I was home I 

talked to dozens of farmers. The universal remark was, ―I can‘t summerfallow for $6.00 an acre.‖ As I 

see it the wheat acreage reduction will be of no assistance to the small or medium farmer. 

 

I was dumbfounded at the Provincial Treasurer‘s (Mr. Steuart) words in his address, ―Agriculture in our 

province has fallen upon difficult times.‖ Imagine, he has just found it out. Those times started in 1964 

when a Liberal Government was elected in this Province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — At the same time to have a Liberal Government in Ottawa is just too much. Liberal 

times are hard times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — You know, the last sentence of the Provincial Treasurer‘s (Mr. Steuart) speech before 

he moved his motion of supply really was a confession of the failure of his Government over the last 

five years and I would like to quote him: 

 

Nothing within our power will be left undone to get Saskatchewan back on the track of prosperity and 

economic well-being for all our people. 

 

That statement is an admission that this Government somewhere along the way has derailed the 

economy of this province. 

 

I want to spend some time discussing the diversification program instituted by this Government last fall. 

I am not surprised that some 3,000 farmers have borrowed $10 million. Most of them are in such dire 

circumstances that they considered anything was worth gambling on. He had little hope of getting out of 

debt anyway. I do suggest though that this program only burdens the farmer with more debt and no 

guarantee of success. Until there is a guaranteed floor price for meat, buying into livestock is a 

hazardous venture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Certainly and the prophecies are already out that pork will decline with the population 

explosion of pigs that there is in Saskatchewan. When pork goes down, for the life of me I don‘t see how 

beef can stay up. 

 

The only group of farmers who really have benefited from this program are those who had females for 

sale. The artificial pressure on the market shot up the price of female stock, forcing those who bought to 

pay exorbitant prices, and with interest rates as they are, even with subsidization the cows will be dead 

before they are paid for. 

 

As I said in a previous debate, this Government does not hesitate to put a floor price on potash, but it 

refuses to try to stabilize agriculture with floor prices for farm products. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

517 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — In 1964 the Premier was always saying that the only exports that the CCF had in 

Saskatchewan were wheat and people. Let me tell him now that the export of people has risen and the 

export of wheat has declined. Let us read the headline of The Leader-Post of February 26th, 1970, 

―Population of Saskatchewan declines by 13,000 in 1969.‖ And then wheat exports are down. Just 

another sign of the bad state of the economy that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) hopes to get on 

the track again. 

 

I am glad that at long last this Government has listened to the Opposition in regard to giving more 

assistance to education. I certainly hope that the prophecy that school units will either be able to hold the 

tax line or reduce mill rates is right. The trouble is this should have been done years ago. In the last five 

years property taxes have risen year after year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have used these figures I will now quote before in this House but they are relevant still 

and I am going to quote them again. I use an example of the rural Municipality of Garry No. 245. From 

1961 until 1964 the municipal rate was 35 mills. In the area where the municipality of Melville North 

School Unit is situated the mill rate was 32 mills in the rural and 37 mills in the urban. Yorkton School 

Unit was 31 mills in the rural and 35 in the urban. By 1968 the municipal rate had risen from 35 mills to 

42 mills, an increase of 7 mills. Melville North School Unit had risen from 32 mills in the rural to 45 

mills, an increase of 13 mills added to the 7 mills of the municipality, an increase of 20 mills. Melville 

North Unit had risen 32 mills in the rural to 45 mills, an increase of 13 mills and 37 mills in the urban to 

47 mills, an increase of 10 mills. Yorkton Unit had risen from 31 mills in the rural to 45 mills, an 

increase of 14 mills and from 34 mills in the urban to 49 mills, an increase of 15 mills. This is what the 

taxpayers had to pay more, 22 mills on their property. With increases in property taxes like this it is no 

wonder that I say it is about time something was done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — In fact it is too late already. Some farmers have been pushed off the farm by the tax 

policies of this Government. It is like locking the barn after the horse is stolen. 

 

Agriculture is sick in this province. Unless something is done immediately there will be a mass exodus 

from the farms in the next year or so. Many of our smaller farmers are on the ropes. I only hope I am 

wrong but I am sure in my mind that this Government and the one in Ottawa just don‘t care less. If these 

farmers are pushed off the land and into urban slums, it will cost our society more, both economically 

and socially. All over the American continent the same thing has happened and is happening. Farmers 

pushed off the land have moved to the great urban centres, becoming lost in the downtown slums, 

caught in the web of living off social aid, and living in rat-infested ghettos. Here in Canada nothing is 

being done about it. 

 

The Federal Government says it will be injecting about $100 million into the agricultural economy. We 

are not sure how 



March 5, 1970 

 

518 

many acres will be taken out of the production of wheat. I doubt whether it will be that successful but 

even if it is, this is really not money being put into the farmers‘ pockets to pay his debts or to buy new 

machinery or to give a lift to the economy. All this money will be used for is to pay for 

summerfallowing. As I said before $6 an acre will not cover the cost of a good summerfallow in our 

area. 

 

What is needed to lift agriculture out of this morass is a huge injection of cash, not $6 an acre but 

enough money to make farming a vibrant, viable industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Farmers ever since 1950 have been shortchanged. Their income for years has been less 

than their legitimate expenses. They have subsidized the rest of Canada with low-priced food. They have 

subsidized the rest of Canada with low-priced food. In fact the Governments in Canada over the years 

have deliberately followed the plan of not allowing food to rise in comparison to other commodities. I 

would not criticize this plan if the farmer had been subsidized to compensate for such decisions. As it is, 

the Canadian farmer has subsidized the rest of the Canadian people and at the same time has had to 

compete on the international market against the treasuries of the other exporting nations like United 

States, France, Argentina, etc. Those Governments have subsidized their farmers and sold the grain at 

world prices. 

 

This Government and the Government at Ottawa are not hesitant to supply $200,000 so that the Member 

for City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) can play at building a mountain. With the hundreds of miles 

of Saskatchewan river banks across Saskatchewan, and also the long stretch to the Qu‘Appelle River, no 

one can tell me that there weren‘t suitable ski-runs available. But, no, the Member for City Park-

University had to have his toy mountain and it will stand as a monument of Liberal waste. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — In the Budget there is $1 million for doctors‘ salaries increase. That will be an average 

increase of about $1,200 a doctor but no monies for the farmer. It is not only the farmer who is suffering 

this economic squeeze. Every businessman in the towns and villages across this province is suffering 

too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Many have closed their doors, either bankrupt or closed out. For this terrible situation 

to go on means the death knell of the villages and towns of this province. I have talked to dozens of 

businessmen in the last three months and they tell me how their accounts are $50,000, $75,000 or even 

$100,000 out. The great majority of outstanding accounts are to good people but the farmer has just not 

sold wheat. What is there in this Budget for them? Nothing. Some of these people have their whole life‘s 

work tied up in their businesses. This Government goes on building mountains, building four-lane 

highways, raising doctors‘ salaries, but these people go by the board. If I were to vote for this Budget it 

wouldn‘t be safe for me to go home. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

519 

I look at this Budget and see what there is in it for our young people especially our rural youth. Well, 

they will have to pay tax on their hot-dogs and hamburgers. This Budget will go down known as ―The 

hot-dog budget.‖ They will have to bury the taste of it though in lots of mustard. There is no promise of 

any long-term guarantee that the youth can stay in Saskatchewan, settle down and become citizens of the 

province. The people of this province have helped finance their education, now some other province will 

reap the benefit. If this Government had not got this province off the rails, we might get some young 

people back from other provinces, but who will come now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — I look at this Budget to see what there is in it for our older citizens. Here again, 

nothing, except tax on any bowl of soup they may be able to afford to buy. Here are our old people, the 

pioneers who opened this wonderful province of ours, left to eke out their last days on a pittance. And 

the member for City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) gets money for his mountain. 

 

Of course, I know, the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) will say that they can get assistance if they 

are in need. I will tell the Minister that these people have pride. They won‘t beg and go through all the 

answering of the questions that the Department demands. Many of them will go hungry first and some of 

them will die first. All will vote against the Government at the first opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Meakes: — Mr. Speaker, there are many other things that I would like to discuss in this Budget. I 

see my time is now finished. I want to assure this House that I will be supporting the amendment and 

opposing the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): — Mr. Speaker, I first extend my sincere congratulations to the latest 

addition to our Legislature, the Member from Kelvington, Neil Byers . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — . . . a member that I am sure will contribute and has already displayed a great deal of 

knowledge and dignity to our Legislature and one who will be respected by all Members of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — As the Hon. Member from Prince Albert West, our Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) 

introduced his Budget on Monday last, I am sure that all Saskatchewan was waiting to see just what it 

contained that might help to alleviate the serious economic conditions that we find ourselves in today. 

This Budget pointed out that by using the money the Provincial Government now receives in Federal 

payments that it is able to provide 



March 5, 1970 

 

520 

some benefits to a broad range of people of various age groups and professions. However, the message 

that I feel came through loud and clear to the people of Saskatchewan was ―More taxes.‖ 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — And more additional taxes imposed on our people of Saskatchewan following a year in 

which our farm income had already dropped some $130 million. And if sense of values and priorities are 

not given proper and greater consideration by the Government in distributing this Budget than it has in 

the past, the exodus from farm and rural life will be unparalleled since the Thirties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as agriculture is recognized as our basic industry it should be of 

prime importance in any Saskatchewan Budget. This year there is some 3.83 per cent of the total Budget 

set aside for agriculture. Does that seem realistic to you, to be sufficient for an industry of such prime 

importance, for an industry on which the whole economy of Saskatchewan depends? Many of our 

farmers are fighting for survival like they have never fought before. They are in a situation which is 

different, a situation in which they have carried out their part of the agreement. They have worked hard, 

used their best judgment in both crop and livestock management. They have been favored with 

wonderful cooperation from the weatherman and have produced an abundant harvest . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — . . . a harvest, Mr. Speaker, which they have long dreamed about only to see it now 

turned into a nightmare partly because of inefficient governments both here in Saskatchewan and in 

Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — We have poverty in the midst of plenty, a very chaotic and serious condition when they 

tell us that over half of the people in the world go to bed hungry each night. What we need, Mr. Speaker, 

is governments in office that are efficient and interested in the long-term welfare of all people and not 

just concerned about the short-term profits of a few. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — We have heard a lot of talk about diversification in agriculture. This Budget speech 

mentions it. To those farmers who have some background training or experience in this area this could 

be a sensible move and might prove successful for them. But for those farmers who have had no 

experience and are grasping for a solution to utilize some of their grain now that a loan is being made 

available to them, I question the success that they will make of it, especially if there is no protection 

provided for them by the Liberal Government sitting opposite. Steps should be taken and taken now to 

assure these farmers a 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

521 

continued realistic price for their livestock, a price that will not fall below the assurance of a reasonable 

profit for their venture. Feeder cattle today are being bought by farmers at livestock exchanges at a price 

range from 35 to 45 cents per pound. Packing house industry buyers are noticeably absent. But when 

these cattle are fed and resold by the farmer, who do you think will be there buying at that time? 

 

I would like to see more effort being emphasized on the important place our Wheat Board plays on the 

marketing of our grain, more money set aside in our Budget for provisions for orderly marketing. It is 

very easy for our Governments to try and switch the responsibility that they should be taking and place it 

on our farmers, our farm organizations and our Wheat Board; stirring up dissension and mistrust among 

them, knowing that the Wheat Board could eventually be abolished and open markets and the Grain 

Exchange under such management as James Richardson will once again reign supreme. 

 

Let me ask you, Mr. Speaker, just who is the Wheat Board. How are they appointed? Who sets out their 

Policy? And who has the power to dismiss them? In all cases the answer is the Federal Government at 

Ottawa. If the Federal Government would take the shackles off the Wheat Board, set up proper 

regulations, and let them implement the policies that should be provided for them, then and then only 

can Western agriculture receive equal opportunity and take its proper place in securing a fair share in 

this competitive world-wide marketing of grain. May I emphasize again, Mr. Speaker, this responsibility 

lies squarely on the shoulders of the Federal Government, and this Provincial Liberal Government 

should be one of the first to see that it is reminded of its responsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pepper: — On Tuesday morning, March 3, The Leader Post had headlines to this effect: 

―Saskatchewan budget brings increase in taxes.‖ I read it over again and said to myself surely not, not 

from a Government that was elected to office two consecutive times with a firm promise of a tax 

reduction and the great assistance it would provide for people in Saskatchewan. Remember, 

Saskatchewan was going to have a new look one like they had never had before. Well, Mr. Speaker, as I 

have heard before quoted in this House: ―This tax increase could be the straw that breaks the camel‘s 

back.‖ 

 

First let me say I am very pleased and will give it full points for the elimination of the 2-cent tax on farm 

fuel, a tax that should never have been imposed on our farmers in this province to begin with. But it 

ruined much of its effect by the imposition or shifting of it over on to the 2-cent increase in car gas and 

commercial and industrial purple gasoline, also 1 cent on diesel fuel, and the exemption of $2 on meals 

for the purpose of educational and health tax, dropping this to 14 cents. Then there is the 1 per cent 

increase in personal income. Add them all together and you will have another tax increase, Mr. Speaker, 

of some $9 million. Add this to the tax increases we have already had imposed on us since 1964, which I 

believe amount to some $109 per person in Saskatchewan, and it becomes a very sizable sum. And this 

doesn‘t include deterrent fees for those requiring hospital and medicare, a fee which in many cases is a 

burden to many of our elderly citizens, or geriatric 



March 5, 1970 

 

522 

patients, our old age pensioners, many of whom cannot afford this extra cost. Mr. Speaker, I ask you: 

could we have not done with a few less miles of double-laned highways and provided these people with 

a few million dollars of human comfort? Mr. Speaker, I ask you: where is this Government‘s sense of 

values and priorities? 

 

I have touched on some of the tax increases that were introduced in this Budget, and previous Liberal 

Budget. Couple these with the increasing loss of employment and employment opportunities that face us 

in Saskatchewan today, and a decline of population of some 13,000 people in the year of 1969, a potash 

industry that has suffered severe cutback, an oil industry with very little expansion and production 

declining. Mr. Speaker, this is known as the ―New Saskatchewan.‖ I call it, Mr. Speaker, a different 

Saskatchewan. I am told that Newfoundland, headed by another Liberal Government is in serious 

trouble and many people are moving to other parts of Canada for employment. May I suggest, Mr. 

Speaker, the wrong people are moving and the only sensible move is to move the Liberal Governments 

out of office. We have nothing to lose and we have everything to gain. 

 

There are some areas in the Budget that I feel will be endorsed by all Members, in the area of education, 

the issuing of free text books for grade 12 students, and the funds that are set aside for the renovation to 

the School for the Deaf in Saskatoon. But might I remind you, Mr. Speaker, we will be giving a very 

hard look and a close examination to the student-teacher ratio and how it will effect the quality of 

education in our province. I am receiving correspondence and I know the Minister of Education (Mr. 

McIsaac) is also receiving some, which I say further necessitates a close examination of this student-

teacher ratio. In the opinion of many of my ratepayers the quality of their children‘s education will be 

severely reduced if the student-teacher ratio is increased. This is a serious area to cut costs. 

 

The Budget has suggested a $10 increase in the homeowner grant, bringing the total now to $60, a move 

in the right direction for homeowners but it gives little assistance to renters of homes. Today there are 

many of these and less homeowners every day are becoming very evident. Well, from past experience 

when the $50 homeowner grant was introduced in 1967, I believe it amounted to some $8 million to be 

returned to the homeowner in the form of a grant, a cheque you remember with the signature of our 

Premier on it. This was just prior to an election. Then you remember the following year in 1968, the 

Government stuck its hand into the other pocket of the people of Saskatchewan and drew out some $35 

million in the form of new taxes. But the Premier forgot to put his signature to that one. If, Mr. Speaker, 

this is to be the custom and continuing policy of the Liberal Government this $10 increase could become 

a very expensive grant for the homeowners of our province. 

 

There is an additional $4 million to be spent in the Department of Health and a considerable amount is 

set aside for our Base Hospital in Regina along with other hospital grants. But it did not inform us that 

during 1969 some 11 hospitals ceased to provide hospital services because of not receiving operating 

payments from the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan. The services where these 11 hospitals have 

been located are discontinued, and today there are waiting lists for patients to be admitted as long as 

your arm. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

523 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer for a moment to the constituency which I have the honor to 

represent. Weyburn has been a progressive constituency, one where agriculture has been the 

predominant industry. Mixed farming is the chief source of income. We were fortunate to have located 

there one of our major oil fields of the province, and this was developed under the former CCF 

Government. But now since the sharp decline in farm income, and in order to keep our population from 

a further exodus particularly in farm and rural life, we need more industry. It might be of interest to tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, that within the 11 rural municipalities that are located in the Weyburn constituency, 

there has been a decline in population from 1963 to 1968 of some 893 people or almost 20 per cent. We 

need industry and budget assistance to help fill the vacuum that was created on the people of our area, 

due to the loss of employment and financial assistance, which our Saskatchewan Hospital provided for 

many of our people for so many years. 

 

I asked the question the other day as to the future plans the Government has for the further use of the 

Saskatchewan Hospital at Weyburn. The reply, if you remember, was similar to the one I received a year 

ago. The Premier also announced while he was at a meeting in Weyburn last fall that we would have a 

rye distillery located there and that it was 98 per cent certain, Weyburn now being in the designated area 

qualified for assistance from the Federal Government. The latest figures I heard was that it was now 

only 38 per cent certain. He also stated that he would have another announcement to make concerning 

Weyburn in perhaps six months‘ time. Would this be another promise, Mr. Speaker? Well, the Budget 

has been brought down and if I can interpret it correctly, most of the funds for public works and 

industrial expansion are designated for the northern part of the province. Promises are not good enough. 

They may carry you for a short time, but when months become years of promises, the people begin to 

doubt, and this is certainly happening in the constituency of Weyburn. They want action now, Mr. 

Speaker, from this Government. Promises do not help to meet the needs or balance the budget of any 

unemployed parents and their families and they cannot borrow money and operate by deficit financing. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to leave a final thought with the Hon. Minister of Highways (Mr. 

Boldt). He informed me while I was to see him along with a delegation last fall that Highway No. 18 

would not be considered for rebuilding for some time. I see that the Budget has increased its spending 

on highways. Would it be possible that he might have had a change of heart now and that we could 

qualify for a portion of this Budget being spent on this route from Oungre to Minton and then on to 

Coronach? I can assure him it would be money well spent and appreciated by many people across the 

southern part of both Weyburn and Bengough constituencies. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in summarizing this Budget I would say that it displays the lack of three qualities 

that I feel are necessary: leadership, research work and knowledge. Because of this the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are called on to pay the pound of cure when an ounce of prevention, in most cases, would 

have been sufficient. I find for these reasons I cannot support the motion but I will support the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1970 

 

524 

Mr. E.F. Gardner (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the Provincial Treasurer 

(Mr. Steuart) for his presentation of a favorable Budget. I would also like to compliment the Opposition 

critic for his able and impassioned reply yesterday. You know last night I met an NDP acquaintance of 

mine and he mentioned the great speech made by the Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney). I tried 

to find out from him what the financial critic had actually found to criticize in this fine Budget and this 

chap said that he really didn‘t know what in particular the Member for Regina Centre found wrong, but 

it sure was a great speech. Perhaps the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney) should be further congratulated, if 

you can find nothing to criticize and still convince your followers that you have made a great speech, 

then you have really accomplished something. 

 

You know I was pleased, Mr. Speaker, to hear in the Budget Speech that the Provincial Government 

grants to schools will increase next year by a record $11 million to $73 million. This, Mr. Speaker, is the 

largest single increase ever provided and it is greater than the expected rise in school operating costs. It 

therefore should be possible for many school boards to decrease their mill rates in the coming year. This 

is especially important right now in rural areas because farmers and small businessmen are no longer 

financially able to pay the ever-increasing costs of education. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, in the past have been paying far more than their fair share of the education 

costs. I believe that the time is long overdue for a major change in our method of financing education. 

Fifty years ago or so when schools were organized on a local basis, there were a greater number of 

farmers, very few professional or salaried people and school costs were low. A tax on land seemed a 

reasonable method of paying these small school costs. However, over the years, Mr. Speaker, the 

number of farmers has decreased, the number of professional and service people has increased and 

school costs have risen at an alarming rate. It seemed the easy way to raise more money was to simply 

increase the tax rate on land, rather than scrap the whole obsolete system. 

 

We have reached the ridiculous situation today, Mr. Speaker, where the farmer and the small 

businessman, with a decreasing income, are bearing most of these staggering educational costs and the 

highly paid professional man, civil servant, teacher or laborer is getting off relatively scot-free. Farm 

land, Mr. Speaker, is a production asset acquired by man to earn his living. Yet it is almost the only 

production asset on which taxes are required for education. To illustrate this, Mr. Speaker, I would just 

like to take a minute of your time and give you an example. Supposing a man dies and leaves $50,000 to 

each of his four sons. His son No. 1 goes to university and invests his money in an education to become 

a teacher or a lawyer. No. 2 invests his money in construction equipment and goes into the business of 

building roads. No. 3 invests his wisely in securities to provide him with an income. No. 4 invests his in 

farm land with which to make a living. Suppose they all earn the same amount of money, about $6,000 

and that as a result of investing their $50,000 as above. They all pay the same income tax, $1,500 or so 

and have about $4,500 left to provide for their families. However, for some strange reason, Mr. Speaker, 

we say that we are going to tax only one of these individuals another $1,000. We say that No. 4 because 

he chose to buy farm land to make his 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

525 

living he is going to have to pay an extra $1,000. No. 4 and only No. 4 will be charged this extra tax. 

 

I think you will agree, Mr. Speaker, that this outmoded system of taxation should be changed. Education 

is a people service and should be paid for with a people tax such as a sales tax or income tax which is 

fair to all. Even without land tax, Mr. Speaker, a farmer carries more than his share of the tax burden. In 

his operations he is a massive consumer of goods — fuel, fertilizer, machinery, repairs, twine and so on, 

and the price of all these goods includes many taxes. What I am suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

work for the eventual removal of all school taxes from farm land. Education is not a service to the land 

and should not be paid for by a land tax. 

 

I was pleased to see, Sir, that in the Budget the 2-cent tax on farm fuel was abolished. This was a tax on 

a production item used in farming and certainly couldn‘t be justified. Mr. Speaker, I have occasionally 

heard urban people complain because we are allowing farmers tax free gasoline in their trucks. Taken 

alone there may be some small justification for this criticism, but when you look at the farmers‘ overall 

tax situation as a package, I think you will agree that he is certainly entitled to this small concession. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all Saskatchewan people are interested in ensuring that our young people get 

the best possible education. The Government, however, is charged with the additional responsibility of 

ensuring that these fine facilities be provided at a reasonable cost to the taxpayer. People tend to get 

unduly concerned whenever any existing educational situation is in question. The recent discussion on 

pupil-teacher ratios is a good example. The Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) just mentioned these 

ratios and I hope that he will listen carefully. I don‘t profess to know what an ideal ratio would be. I 

believe I have been in as many classrooms as anyone here and the class size that I have been in has 

varied from as low as five to as many as 275. Quality of instruction may depend to some extent on the 

size of the class but this is only one of many factors involved. Pupil-teacher ratios vary widely in the 

province. Past grant structure has contributed to a pupil-teacher ratio of about 18 to 1 in the Eston-Elrose 

unit, while the unit that I live in, Arcola, has a pupil-teacher ratio of about 24 to 1. Now we certainly 

know which ratio is financially better for the taxpayer but we do not know which is better for the 

student. Statistics do not indicate that scholastic achievement is better where pupil-teacher ratios are 

low. In fact I believe the achievement record is better in my home unit in Arcola and also in the 

Broadview unit with almost the highest pupil-teacher ratio in the province than it is with some of these 

others with a low pupil-teacher ratio. And strangely enough, Mr. Speaker, a study of unit statistics will 

also show that scholastic achievement is not necessarily higher in units where teachers are paid more 

because of higher classifications. Each time the pupil-teacher ratio is increased by one in Saskatchewan 

a saving of $3 million is made. If two extra students were put in every classroom in the Province we 

would have about $6 million extra to use, perhaps to a greater advantage, somewhere else in our 

education system. In view of these facts, Mr. Speaker, surely the Department is justified in taking a 

close look at pupil-teacher ratios. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there are any here who think the situation was better under the CCF they had better take 

a pretty good 



March 5, 1970 

 

526 

look at the record also. I have here the grants paid to school units in my area and also the pupil-teacher 

ratios from 1964 to 1969 and I would like to give you a sample of this information. In the Moosomin 

unit for example in 1964, the last year of the NDP the grant from the Government to that unit was 

$424,000. It gradually increased to 1969 and was $593,000. The pupil-teacher ratio was 26.5 to 1 the 

last year under the NDP, it has gradually decreased until it is now 21.2 to 1. In the Arcola unit that I live 

in, in 1964 the grant from the Provincial Government to that unit was $443,000, in 1969 it has increased 

to over $700,000. And again looking at the pupil-teacher ratio, in 1964 the last year of the NDP it was 

27.7 to 1 and it has decreased now to about 24 to 1. So we see, Mr. Speaker, that under the NDP the 

grants were small and the teacher-pupil ratios were very high. 

 

I would like to suggest to the Members opposite that they ask their teachers and school boards if they 

would like to go back to the Government grant, to the average teacher‘s salary and to the pupil-teacher 

ratios that prevailed only six years ago under the CCF. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the Government for providing text books free to grade 12 

students. This, Mr. Speaker, completes our plan of providing text books in all grades from 9 to 12. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, for 20 years the NDP talked of providing free high school text books but never took 

any action. Only since we have been the Government have these text books been provided to high 

school students. 

 

I would also like to commend the Government for providing $700,000 in the Budget to renovate the 

School for the Deaf in Saskatoon. I am sure this is badly needed. For the first time, Mr. Speaker, funds 

will be provided to assist in transporting retarded children to school in urban centres and other 

worthwhile projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the blackest marks on the records of the former NDP Government was the way that 

they treated our University. In 1964, their last year of office, under $12 million was provided to the 

University. This year the Government is providing over $39 million. Mr. Speaker, I would hope that this 

vast sum is used by the University for the purposes that are intended. With this money facilities should 

be available for every student in the province who wishes to attend University. The percentage of the 18 

to 24 age group in Saskatchewan going to the University is about 12 per cent, much, much higher than 

the Canadian average and something we should all be very proud of. However, when financing is 

mentioned to University officials they immediately think of curtailing enrolment or getting rid of some 

of the students. They never seem to consider other obvious ways of controlling costs, such as increasing 

the size of classes, increasing the time that a particular professor spends in front of a class, decreasing 

their staff, decreasing programs where graduates are not immediately needed by our society, or making 

greater use of facilities provided for a greater portion of the year. Instead of considering some of these 

factors, Mr. Speaker, they seem determined to keep some of the students out of university and after all 

the students are the reason why the University exists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no other Government in this province has ever been so concerned with education. No other 

government is presently doing more for education. Figures to bear this out are readily 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

527 

available to all. I will support the Budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Mitchell (Bengough): — Mr. Speaker, as I join this Debate today, may I extend my sincerest 

congratulations to our Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) for the wisdom and foresight he and the 

Government have shown in bringing in this Budget. Our Government has always stated that in normal 

times we believed governments should balance their budgets. As Members well know, this Government 

has consistently done this until this year. Members also know that we on this side of the House have 

stated as part of our policy that, if and when hardships existed, and it became necessary to prime the 

pump, our Government would take the necessary steps to see that this was done. I am sure that no 

Member in this House today, Mr. Speaker, would suggest that it is not necessary at this time for the 

Government to take some initiative in stimulating our provincial economy. This Budget, Mr. Speaker, is 

designed to counteract at least to some extent this depressing situation. It is also designed to cure some 

of the ills which plague the provincial economy at this moment. 

 

This Budget is designed to assist our farmers in further diversifying so that they need not be so 

dependent on the vagaries of the international wheat market alone. What Member opposite would 

quarrel with this, Mr. Speaker? This Budget is designed to spur activity in the construction industry in 

order to provide jobs to the labor force of our province. Surely the NDP agree with this program. This 

Budget is designed, Mr. Speaker, to assist the local property owner through increased assistance to 

municipalities and more particularly, through largely increased grants for education — the largest in the 

history of the province. It is hoped that all school boards will use this 18 per cent over-all increase, to 

hold the local mill rate or even reduce it in some cases. Surely no Member of the Opposition would 

quarrel with this budgetary goal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Budget presented to this House this year, Mr. Speaker, represents a positive and responsible 

approach to the economic problems facing our Saskatchewan citizens. It indicates that the Government 

is concerned with problems of cash shortage, unemployment, huge inventories of wheat, etc. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, may I turn for a moment to the wheat crisis, as it has been called through the 

Prairies. Mr. Speaker, if I may take a moment, although many farmers are advocating that some changes 

should be made within the structure of the Canadian Wheat Board, may I emphasize that this does not 

suggest the abolition of the Wheat Board, but rather an improved Wheat Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Recently the Federal Government announced a program of far-reaching changes in 

Federal agricultural policy. There is no doubt in my mind that some drastic change was long overdue. 

Whether a program to encourage the taking of land out of wheat production is the best answer is difficult 

at this point to know. I am convinced, however, that along with changes in Federal agricultural policy 

must go a serious change in attitude, at least with the Canadian Wheat Board. Changes in these two 

Federal areas must take place if the Western Canadian 



March 5, 1970 

 

528 

farmer is to survive. We must see more emphasis placed on what is best for the Western farmer in view 

of the international market situation and less emphasis, much less, on bureaucratic detail and comfort. I 

believe we must see a much more aggressive attitude on the part of the Canadian Wheat Board in selling 

Prairie wheat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — We also, Mr. Speaker, must see a great deal more cooperation between the Canadian 

Wheat Board and other Federal departments involved in international trade. If this were done, I believe 

we would see a great deal more wheat moving off Saskatchewan farms. I am convinced that a very 

serious look must be taken at the qualities and types of wheat which are presently licensed in Canada. 

To date yield has been neglected in Canada in favor of quality and disease resistance. Canada today has 

the lowest yielding varieties of wheat in the world. I believe there is room for the licensing of higher 

yielding wheats in Canada, perhaps under contract growing. Contract growing would provide maximum 

leeway in terms of varieties, price and delivery with the aim of capturing massive new markets for wheat 

and feeds at competitive prices. I am aware, Mr. Speaker, of a recent proposal made to the Federal 

Government along these lines which received a very cool reception. Here again the interests of the 

Western farmer are cast aside in favor of the comfortable status quo so fondly cherished by the seasoned 

Ottawa bureaucrats. I am convinced that a serious look must be taken at the restrictions that exist within 

the Prairie region with regard to feed grains crossing provincial boundaries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, it makes sense to regard the Prairie region as one unit with the 

free exchange of feed grains within this area. I know of a number of Saskatchewan farmers who have 

been unable to take advantage of large demands for feed grain in other provinces as a result of these 

restrictions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for the past few years we‘ve heard the Opposition in this House lamenting in the 

Press and in this House over the apparent large decrease in population which Saskatchewan is allegedly 

suffering. May I draw your attention to some facts which I have. I discovered this in going over the 

records of the Vital Statistics Branch of the Department of Public Health. These figures are taken from 

the SHSP records and in 1969 covered 963,878 persons which is about 99.9 per cent of our population. 

But listen to this, particularly the Opposition, the average annual net loss from the end of 1953 to the 

end of 1963 under the Socialists, the average net loss in that 10-year period was 10,040 people per year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — And in fact, Mr. Speaker, SHSP records indicate that in 1957 the total net loss for that 

year was 19,200. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — These same records indicate 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

529 

from the end of 1963 to the end of 1969 that the average annual net loss under this Government was 

only 6,933 per year . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — . . . for the 6-year average. On top of that, Mr. Speaker, there has been no year in the 

past six with a population loss that has ever been close to that astronomical figure of 19,200 under the 

Socialists in 1957. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Even this year, Mr. Speaker, with the serious farm crisis and slow-down in 

construction the reported DBS figures are far from approaching this Socialist record in 1957 — dubious 

record I would say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell; — Mr. Speaker, early in December of 1969 I had the privilege of being a member of the 

Saskatchewan delegation to the Constitutional Conference in Ottawa. I can tell all Members of this 

House that the performance of our Premier on behalf of the Saskatchewan and Western farmer at that 

Conference was absolutely fantastic. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — There is more to come! No other Premier at that Conference spoke with the 

determination, the authority and the sincerity of our Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — I only wish the Leader of the Opposition had been there to see the dismal effort put 

forth by the NDP in Manitoba as compared to our Government‘s presentation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — All the Western Premiers recognized the leadership ability of our Premier and they 

handed the case for Western Canada over to him. The presentation which he made certainly justified 

their confidence in him. I wish Hon. Members and the citizens of Saskatchewan could see how this man 

works untiringly for us when he is on these conferences. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Talks on bilingualism and the constitution do not distract him from his basic motive of 

trying to solve the problems of the Saskatchewan people. I say again, Mr. Speaker, what an honor it was 

to be part of that delegation and particularly to see how well our Premier stands out when compared with 

the other heads of government across Canada. 



March 5, 1970 

 

530 

Mr. Speaker, before concluding I would like to make a few remarks relative to the constituency which I 

have the privilege of representing in this Legislature. The economy of the constituency of Bengough 

consists mainly of three basic segments of agriculture: namely, extensive grain-growing operations, 

mixed farming and large-scale ranching. The Provincial Government in its policies of tax abatement on 

grain storage facilities and also the subsidized interest loans to encourage and to promote cow-calf 

operations has provided a measure of relief to agriculture in these adverse times. Our constituents of 

Bengough appreciate the Provincial Government‘s highway programs of the past five years. With the 

oiling this year of the two remaining sections of Highway 13 and Highway 36 we will have completed 

the oiling of all Provincial highways within our constituency. We have on occasion heard in this 

Legislature — some of the city Members on the Opposition benches — criticizing the Government. We 

had a case today — the Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) — criticizing the Government for 

spending so much on highways. Let me assure you, Mr. Speaker, the rural people of Saskatchewan 

certainly disagree with such opinions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Mitchell: — Our constituency has benefited from another program instituted by our Liberal 

Government — the installation of telephones in the unserved areas. We have had telephone service 

brought into three separate districts in the past three years and will have the fourth added early this year 

with a project in the Big Beaver area. We are also looking forward to having natural gas brought into 

several more of our towns and villages within the next two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I in conclusion, say the Budget Speech is designed to do what the Provincial 

Government can to ease the hardships and problems which I have mentioned. I will support the motion 

and not the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, this Budget indicates that this 

Government is not hesitant in coming to grips with the economic problems besetting our province. It 

indicates again that we are continuing to carry out programs for the benefit of our people and to 

introduce new policies and programs for the further development and diversification of our major 

resources which, in turn, benefit all our citizens. The Budget Speech reinforces the awareness of the 

people of Saskatchewan, yes, and of others outside our boundaries that we are the only party and the 

only Government that has the courage to take constructive and positive actions with, or even against, 

other governments or organizations, be they provincial, national or international, whose policies or 

actions we feel may not be in the best interests of the residents of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The Budget Speech indicates that this Government will continue to forge ahead in 

developing our agricultural industry. It is the largest agricultural budget in the history of 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

531 

Saskatchewan and almost double that of the NDP for the last year that they were in office. It emphasizes 

the importance that we have placed and that we will continue to place on helping our farmers diversify 

rather than on too many trying to rely on a straight grain economy. We are fully aware of the economic 

situation due to world surpluses in wheat. We are aware that wheat exports in the past crop year are 

down compared to what they were in the previous four or five years. We are aware that the cash income 

to our farmers is down on this account. But let me remind the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and 

his colleagues, when he tries to blame this on the Provincial Liberals, if this is the criterion that he wants 

to use, then his record as a Member and Leader of an NDP Government for 20 years was terrible and no 

wonder the people kicked him out. The estimated cash receipts in 1969 for all crops was $500 million. 

This is the lowest figure since we took office in 1964, but, in the last 10 years under the NDP, when they 

were in office it was only barely exceeded twice. This figure has been exceeded every year since we 

formed the Government. The average is better than $655 million per year since we formed the 

Government in 1964. Farm cash receipts for all crops have risen substantially since we have been the 

Government, to an all-time high of better than $728.5 million two years ago. If again, according to the 

NDP, this is bad, then again certainly their record was terrible. The same pattern applies to cash receipts 

from livestock and livestock products. From $153 million the last year under the NDP, it has increased 

substantially every year to a peak of $236 million in 1968. These facts surely prove that the farmers of 

Saskatchewan could never again afford to have an NDP Government. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, when the total farm cash receipts are published for 1969, they will be lower than the 

records established since we took office; but they will be far above those of the years our people 

suffered under the Socialists. Mr. Speaker, our worst is far better than their best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the most perplexing problem that is facing our Saskatchewan farmers 

today, and this is the marketing of cereal grains and oilseeds; and, of course, the main concern is a more 

aggressive wheat selling program. We hear so much talk of reducing our wheat acreage or of cutting our 

production. There is some justification for this, but we Saskatchewan farmers, we are not concerned 

about our ability to produce; we are concerned that our share of the world marketings of our wheat and 

coarse grains has been declining. We have only one agency for the marketing of oats, wheat and barley, 

and that is the Canadian Wheat Board. It is not my intention to condemn the Wheat Board principle of 

marketing, not to condemn its personnel; but I do intend to bring to the attention of its members, and 

those whose responsibility it is to determine its policies, that there must be some changes made 

immediately if Saskatchewan farmers are not only to maintain, but most important of all, increase their 

share of the world‘s markets. Mr. Speaker, either we market or we perish. It is just that important. The 

following procedures must be carried out: 1. It is imperative that every possibility of further markets and 

sales, both in Canada and throughout the world be explored and established. 2. If some policies or 

regulations have to be adjusted to achieve more results, now is the time to make the adjustments and the 

changes. 3. Markets must be researched throughout the world in order that sales efforts can be geared to 

the type of product that fits the habits and the 



March 5, 1970 

 

532 

needs of these countries. 4. We must maintain flexibility in our pricing systems so that sales are not lost 

because of fractional differences in prices with competitive countries. 5. Flexible credit terms to fit the 

needs of customers and of potential customers must be offered. 6. Employ individuals with salesmanship 

ability to continuously contact representatives of importing countries throughout the world. 7. The 

Saskatchewan Government must be allowed representation on the Canadian Wheat Board by virtue of 

the fact that complementary enabling legislation is provided for the marketing of oats and barley by the 

Wheat Board. 8. Provision must be made for more producer representation on the Canadian Wheat 

Board or on its advisory committee. 9. Provision must be made to guarantee customers a specific protein 

level of wheat. 10. There should be free movement of feed grains among the Prairie Provinces. These 

are just a few proposals that I submit should be taken into consideration immediately by the Canadian 

Wheat Board. Mr. Speaker, I would like to enlarge on some of these proposals briefly. 

 

A disturbing factor in today‘s wheat marketing situation is that Canada is still unable to offer wheat for a 

precise and guaranteed protein content. We are told that the Japanese market, and this market 

particularly, looks for guaranteed protein levels. They want it within a tenth of one per cent; they don‘t 

want it lower or they don‘t want it higher. The United States is prepared and is able to do this, while 

Canada is not. Secretary of Agriculture Hardin, speaking to the United States National Agricultural 

Congress very recently, noted the advantages that their country held over Canada just by this very fact. 

And surely, the time to rectify this situation is now and not a year or two years from now as has been 

suggested. 

 

I have mentioned the importance of Provincial Government representation on the Wheat Board. And this 

view is shared by the Government of Alberta as well. This should have been requested when The 

Saskatchewan Grain Marketing Control Act was passed some years ago. And surely, the Leader of the 

Opposition and his colleagues, who were the Government at that time, should have realized the 

importance of a direct voice by the Province. It again, Mr. Speaker, points up that he is always ready to 

criticize but never prepared to be positive or to be practical. 

 

It was not surprising to hear the Leader of the Opposition attempt to ridicule our recently completed 

barter sales. Again, he could only offer criticism. He could not offer one practical suggestion. He 

appears to be now joining those who would place every obstacle in the way of this Government which, 

in the interests of our cash short farmers, is trying by every possible means to see that grain is sold 

immediately. As the Premier pointed out on different occasions, two deals have been completed; and, 

with the cooperation of the Federal Government and the Wheat Board, we could complete additional 

sales. What is the story we hear from the Opposition? They say, ―Oh, well, you aren‘t selling anymore 

wheat‖; they say you can‘t prove that this wheat would not have moved anyway. They say that this will 

lead to retaliation by other competitive countries. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me tell the Leader of the Opposition that he had better wake up and realize what 

is going on in some of these other countries. Let me remind the Canadian Wheat Board what is 

happening. Let me tell some of those representatives of farm organizations who criticize barter deals 

what is happening and what has happened. It is most important to note 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

533 

the steps that the United States, also with large surpluses of agricultural products, are taking. Just a year 

ago, Secretary of Agriculture Hardin announced the formation of the export marketing service in the 

United States Department of Agriculture. This special agency has authority to formulate commodity 

credit programs. It has also been instructed to develop such additional policies and programs as it may 

find necessary. The United States like ourselves, has been concerned with a downward trend in 

agricultural exports. They have created this special agency to halt that trend. And here are some of the 

things that F.G. McKnight of the Export Marketing Service of the United States Department of 

Agriculture said to the National Agricultural Outlook Conference recently and I quote: 

 

Barter is one of the tools we can use to supplement the more general programs, by providing an 

incentive to increase exports. 

 

The current U.S. Department of Agriculture Barter Program is a way of using agricultural exports to 

generate funds with which procurement abroad can be made for other Federal agencies. 

 

He went on to say, and this is the statement that we continuously hear and I quote: 

 

How do we know barter exports are all additional to what the U.S. would sell otherwise? We don‘t, but 

we take a calculated risk that with restrictions it will give us at least some degree of additionality. 

 

He quoted an example of reversing a downward trend of corn exports to Spain through barter and 

forecast barter exports reaching $400 million for this year as compared to a previous high of $405 

million. So, Mr. Speaker, this seems to me at least an example of a country actively promoting its 

exports and actively selling its products. So much so, Mr. Speaker, that the United States‘ share of the 

world markets in coarse grains has risen sharply in recent years while Canada‘s share of 3 per cent 

almost bordered on extinction. Even a little country like Thailand exported more coarse grains than 

Canada. And again, Mr. Speaker, if those persons responsible for searching out markets and selling and 

moving grain would spend more time and effort in this regard and in changing some of the archaic 

regulations governing farmers‘ delivery permit books, they would be making a greater contribution to 

our farming industry as well as nullify many of the reasons for all the current talk of Western alienation. 

 

Our Government is concerned with the movement of wheat to the terminals, especially the slow 

movement. This is reflected in low quotas of one-bushel or no quota at all at 176 of our shipping points. 

The seriousness of the situation can be pointed up when we realize we are now in the eighth month of 

the crop year and many points do not even have a one-bushel quota — 176 to be exact. We realize that a 

larger volume of wheat, coarse grains, flax and rapeseed must be moved if farmers are to be able to 

deliver the required amounts to meet present commitments in this crop year. 

 

And again we remind the responsible authorities and the Wheat Board that available space at the 

terminals must be utilized immediately and there are four main reasons for this: 



March 5, 1970 

 

534 

1. This will put much-needed cash in our farmers‘ hands at once. 2. It will prevent a glut in 

transportation at the end of the crop year as has happened in previous years due to shortage of boxcars, 

weather and labor strikes. 3. Potential customers will have more confidence of rapid delivery if grain is 

in shipping position and will attract more orders, especially from Japan. 4. Farmers have the time to 

deliver now and can take advantage of favorable road conditions before spring break-up or losing time 

during the spring seeding period. This, Mr. Speaker, will necessitate the complete cooperation of the 

grain companies, the railways, the shipping industry, the Wheat Board, and of labor. 

 

I am not going to deal with the subject of strikes at this moment. These have been the biggest bugbear 

that our farmers have had to contend with over the years. They have continuously interfered with the 

marketing of his grain, such as, the serious marketing situation they caused at the beginning of the last 

crop year when approximately 2½ months of opportunity to deliver was lost to our farmers. They have 

continuously resulted in the increases of input costs to the farming industry. They have resulted in 

countries not placing orders for Canadian grain. There is a motion on the Order Paper, Mr. Speaker, and 

this topic will be dealt with at a later date during this Session. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition has said that his party has made a striking contribution in agriculture. 

Certainly, their political affiliates, the union bosses, have managed to keep the grain industry in a state 

of turmoil. If the NDP can‘t get involved in a strike that will affect Canadian farmers, they send their 

Saskatchewan section to California to picket against farmers in that state. The striking contributions of 

the Leader of the Opposition and his party have had a disastrous effect on the cash income of our 

farmers, not only this year, Mr. Speaker, but in years past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those of us who are concerned with the welfare and the future of our agricultural industry 

must feel genuine concern regarding the White Paper on tax reform proposals. Apparently it has been 

endorsed by the NDP as were the Carter Commission proposals that would have cost our farmers 

millions of dollars more in taxes. So in the time available to me, I can only refer to two aspects of it. 

First is the regard to depreciation. At present, our farmers are using the straight line depreciation method 

on their farm machinery. This allows the farmer an advantage in that when the trade-in value exceeds 

the depreciated value he is not taxed on this gain. This is in the nature of a capital gain and under the 

new proposals would be taxable. We calculate that this proposal, even with the higher personal income 

deductions proposed, will cost the average-sized farm more in tax per year, and of course, a larger farm 

will pay considerably more. We know our farmers are in no position to accept these higher taxes. 

 

Secondly, we are concerned with the implications of a capital gains tax on agriculture. Who is going to 

value the land? Who can say what it is worth? A farmer invests in land; he invests money in the form of 

machine hours, fertilizer, etc., and above all he invests his labor and management in improving his land. 

No one pays him for this. He expects to be rewarded partly through the sale of produce form it and 

partly through its improved value. That has been his security, his pension, and now it will be taxed. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

535 

We are particularly concerned that, when a farmer sells to his son and retires, a capital gains tax may be 

assess just when the farm can least afford to pay it, at a time when it must support two families instead 

of one. 

 

Often this type of sale is made at lower than market price balanced to give the father a reasonable 

retirement and the son a reasonable opportunity. But, now, it appears that some expert from the Federal 

Department of Finance will put a value on the land so that a capital gain may be assessed. These are but 

two of the aspects of the White Paper that concern us, Mr. Speaker, and on which we will in due course, 

be making recommendations to the Federal Government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has become very evident that we are not hearing much from Opposition speakers about 

the agriculture program they adopted at their Provincial and National Conference last summer. At that 

time, according to press reports the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) was quoted as being very 

happy with it. Why are they not telling the people they intend to nationalize the farms? Why are they not 

telling the people that one of their labor delegates said, ―It was not realistic to say that land is a resource 

for all the people and then oppose state ownership.‖ Why are they not telling the people that another 

Moose Jaw unionist said that we have no qualms about nationalizing the CPR and that type of thing? 

How do you make a difference between that and land, timber and mining? Why aren‘t they telling the 

people that they went on record as opposing the homeowner grants? Why are they not telling the people 

their program calls for the nationalization of farm supply and service centres? Why are they not 

mentioning the Watkins Report and the Wafflers among them who signed it? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I imagine the reason is, as Premier Schreyer has said, ―You don‘t mention these 

things if you want to get elected. You form the Government first and then do them.‖ And that‘s the 

Socialist philosophy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suspect that the agricultural policy of the Saskatchewan NDP is so impractical that even 

Schreyer daren‘t try to adopt it in Manitoba. The same is true of the brief they presented to our 

Government prior to the recent Dominion –Provincial Conference. Surely the Leader of the Opposition 

must have made a copy of it available to the Schreyer Government before the conference. Surely the 

Manitoba Government must have studied it carefully and said, ―Now, Woodrow, if you were in our 

position, how could you be so unrealistic on so many things.‖ And they probably said, ―Woodrow, with 

a brief like that you had better dream up some excuse to stay home.‖ Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 

the Opposition chickened out. 

 

Manitoba‘s NDP Government presented its submission designed to solve the agricultural situation in 

Western Canada. In my frank opinion it was a complete dud. There were only three recommendations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is increasingly evident that the Manitoba NDP Government in power wants no part of 

the agricultural proposals of the Saskatchewan NDP in opposition. Mr. Speaker, the presentations by our 

Premier at the conference accomplished more for the people of Western Canada than those of any other 

delegation. I am sure his efforts on behalf of Western Canadians are appreciated by all people regardless 

of political affiliation. 



March 5, 1970 

 

536 

I know they had a tremendous impact on all the representatives of the Federal and Provincial 

Governments present. 

 

But most important of all, they received the support of provinces that had not previously realized the 

necessity of immediate action on many fronts to alleviate Western problems. The presentation by the 

Saskatchewan Government once again demonstrated the value of a positive and constructive approach 

versus carping criticism. The Leader of the Opposition stated that he decided not to accompany the 

Saskatchewan delegation so he could stay home and be in a position to criticize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Budget Speech indicates further measures will be introduced to help in the 

diversification of agriculture in our province and to increase the economic base of our farm units. This 

has been a tremendous task, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we took office we had to halt the tremendous exodus of people off the farms and the decrease in 

farm units during 20 years of Socialism. And for the information of my hon. friend from Touchwood 

(Mr. Meakes) I would like to remind him that in fact under a Socialist regime, over 2,000 farm units a 

year had disappeared in Saskatchewan. In the years that they were in power over 50,000 farm units 

disappeared. Multiply this, Mr. Speaker, by an average family of four and you can realize the terrible 

exodus from our rural communities during that period of time. They talk about a few families leaving 

the province this year. Well, Mr. Speaker, it is only a trickle compared to the years of Socialist 

regimentation. Not only did we lose farmers, but the whole of the agricultural industry was neglected. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, the NDP in their last year of office only allocated $8.5 million for the 

Agriculture budget. We have almost doubled that figure for this year. We have seen substantial increases 

in the Agriculture budget each year under our Government to help the farmers of our province. Added to 

this, our farmers have benefited through a larger and better highway system; a larger and better grid road 

system; a farm access road program; larger grants to municipalities for maintenance and snow removal 

on municipal roads; urban assistance for street improvement in their shopping centres; and the bringing 

of natural gas to their local communities that the NDP Government and the financial critic when he was 

responsible said it was not economically feasible to do, and now, further to that, bringing natural gas to 

our farm homes. 

 

Practically every service provided for in this Budget helps our farmers either directly or indirectly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Certainly this Budget marks a tremendous improvement in level of services to our 

people compared to the old NDP and CCF programs, but most important of all, the lack of programs 

they had in those long 20 years. 

 

One of the first things our Government had to do upon taking office in 1964 was to bring about 

diversification of our agricultural industry. We had to devise programs and policies to enlarge the 

economic base of our farm units. We had to halt the decline in income from livestock and livestock 

products. Mr. Speaker, this has been accomplished. The income from this source 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

537 

has been higher every year that we have been in office compared to the last year under the NDP. We had 

to increase, yes, prices. You go back over your records and your prices are terrible for the 20 years that 

you were in, as low as $8 a hundred and finally got it up to $10. You thought you had something when 

you got up to $13 and $14. We had to increase our cattle numbers and this has been done. Our cattle 

numbers have been higher every year we have been in office compared to any of the 20 years under the 

Socialists. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Rubbish! 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Rubbish, he says! He can‘t even read a report. If you would check your annual 

report even in 1969 you will see that as of December and September the amounts are higher every year 

that we have been in office than any of the years that you were in office. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — What happened to the June count of . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The June count is not lower. And I also want to remind the financial critic that 

yesterday the only thing that he could criticize on the Agricultural budget was, I think he said turkeys 

were down. But he said that marketing of cattle was down. And if you were realistic at all, Mr. Financial 

Critic, you would realize that the reason that the marketing of cattle is down is because the females are 

all staying right on the farms where they should be to build up the number of cattle from year to year. 

 

Again, our cattle numbers, and you can check the Agriculture reports, have been higher every year that 

we have been in office compared to any of the 20 years under the Socialists. We had to arrest the 

disappearing sheep industry. This we are doing and our programs and policies have been acclaimed and 

acknowledged across the nation. We had to rescue the hog industry that was on the verge of extinction. 

In fact, there were not enough hogs entering our packing plants to warrant maintaining that portion of 

the industry in our province. We found that hog numbers had declined from a high of 1½ million the 

year before the Socialists took office to a low of 441,000 in the last year of their term. 

 

Again, Mr. Financial Critic, by virtue of our program, hog numbers have been higher every year since 

we formed the Government compared to the NDP‘s last year in office. Most important of all to our 

farmers is the fact that during the past year and again this year livestock prices are at an all-time high. 

Important, too, is the fact that we are raising, finishing and processing our meat products right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The value of livestock on our Saskatchewan farms has risen to all-time highs since we took office and 

predictions for the future indicate a substantial further rise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons the Socialists failed in the development of the agriculture industry in our 

province was because of their negative thinking. We have heard them make such statements as the one a 

year ago from the Member for Turtleford that, if we fatten our cattle in Saskatchewan, the increase 



March 5, 1970 

 

538 

in weight will cause a surplus of beef. Well, our farmers are doing just that. Numbers are increasing in 

our province and so is the price. 

 

Then we hear the ridiculous statement that because we offer a farmer a grant of 25 per cent of the cost of 

his swine building, it will drive the man with four or five sows out of the business. How ridiculous can 

they get! They say that this will allow big corporations to take over in our province. 

 

I want to remind my Socialist friends that the very thing that they are screaming against is taking place 

under an NDP Government in Manitoba. Apparently the NDP Government in the province doesn‘t agree 

with our Socialists, for a corporation of farmers and businessmen is setting up a million dollar hog 

production enterprise in that province with the help of the Department of Industry and Commerce, the 

big corporations with the help of Schreyer and his own Government. Again it points up the fact that all 

the Saskatchewan Socialists can do is criticize. I ask you now: do you sanction this move made by the 

Manitoba NDPers? 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — No, I don‘t. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — You are against corporations. You talk one way in opposition. Schreyer says, 

―Don‘t talk about these things. First we have to get elected and then when we are elected then we do 

these things.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I review very briefly the positive steps we have taken since this Government came to 

office. We haven‘t just sat down and complained to Ottawa. We have been doing positive things. We 

have heeded the warnings that economists have been making since the mid-fifties. We have recognized 

the vulnerability of our farmers and of our whole economy to the vagaries of the international wheat 

market. 

 

This Government took office in the spring of 1964. In less than three months we announced that we 

would live up to the terms of the 1948 Agreement and build the irrigation phase of the Gardiner Dam. 

The Socialists had been waffling about it for six years and had not done one thing during that time in 

regard to irrigation. It is with some pride that I can advise you, Mr. Speaker, that the irrigation system 

for 19,000 acres is fully complete now. This summer we will complete construction of the complete 

Outlook-Broderick block of 40,000 acres. Further, 8,650 acres are now readied for irrigation, either by 

gravity or sprinkler ready to go this spring. Of this, 1,480 acres are in a Crown Land Forage Project 

which will be used for a fodder reserve against a dry year. 

 

We also have a 500-acre project in Miry Creek developed for the same purpose of protecting our cattle 

industry against an emergency. These are all under roof not like the old haystacks that you put up years 

ago, and the feed all rotted, and nobody got the use of it. These are practical programs to conserve the 

feed so that they will be there in a year of emergency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now plan to proceed on the west side, the Conquest-Ardath area. The estimates provide 

funds necessary to finalize engineering plans and to commence construction of the west side pumping 

plant. In 1965 the emphasis of the Family 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

539 

Farm Improvement Branch was broadened to include much more emphasis on modernizing livestock 

enterprises and to assist our small communities install modern water and sewage systems. 

 

The first Mexabition, a new type of extension activity, where we draw together farmers interested in 

modernizing their production and farmstead with commercial people who can help them to do it, was 

held in 1965, and has been a tremendous success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard much from the Opposition about the decline in our rural life, about the 

problems of our small communities. Well, we have undertaken to do something about it. And once 

again, let‘s compare the records. Up to and including the fiscal year 1963-64 four hamlets and one 

village had installed community water systems with assistance from the Branch. Now, since we have 

had direction of the program, this puny accomplishment has increased to 97 small communities assisted 

with water systems and 46 with the installation of sewage systems. 

 

Also, in 1965 we commenced a policy of offering incentive grants to farmers for the construction of 

fodder storages and bunker silos as a measure to assist our farmers in carrying reserves. These are no 

longer a rare sight in Saskatchewan and we have paid out 535 grants to farmers in this program. In 1966 

we undertook two further programs. In our individual irrigation policy we offer a cash grant of $35 per 

acre, up to $3,500. In the same year we commenced a policy of paying grants for seeding submarginal 

lands to grass and have paid grants to 4,591 farmers for seeding down about 200,000 acres. We have 

done things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1967, we undertook a direct program to assist farmers in the ARDA area to build modern hog-raising 

facilities. We offered a grant of 25 per cent of the costs up to $4,000 per farm. To the end of last month 

we have paid grants totalling $742,640 to some 328 farmers. I challenge the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd) to name any program under his Government aimed at positive agricultural adjustment in our 

farming industry that even nearly approached this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is fond of commenting that all this Government does is to 

make grants to industry and forgets the farmer. Just look at the record. Since 1964-65 — 535 fodder 

storages — $67,000 in round figures; individual irrigation projects — $34,000; re-seeding marginal land 

— $514,000; land development grants in irrigation projects — $174,000; hog building grants — 

$742,000; farm water and sewage grants $1,935,000; total of some $3,468,000. To this I can also add 

the refund of sales tax on grain storage amounting to about $600,000 this past fiscal year and about 

$3,800,000 a year for tax-free purple gas, making a total of millions of dollars. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a listing of grants paid towards permanent improvements to individual farmers in 

the less than five years we have held office. Mr. Speaker, the Budget before you includes provision for 

further assistance to farmers towards diversification and towards assisting our livestock industry. You 

will note an item of $120,000 to provide for grants under The Livestock Loans Guarantee Act. And as 

the figures have already indicated over $10 million have been paid out to some 2,700 farmers. Assuming 

that interest rates stay at present level, an individual borrower can earn grants of about $430 under 



March 5, 1970 

 

540 

this plan. 

 

The Estimates provide for an increase of $193,000 to a Budget item of $375,000 for the seeding of 

marginal lands. Further, Mr. Speaker, Members will note a substantial increase in funds provided to the 

Veterinary Division. Because of the problems experienced in holding veterinarians in rural areas we 

propose to double the grants available to Veterinary Service Districts. 

 

The estimates of the Economics and Statistics Branch include over $20,000 to meet the costs of 

additional farm management courses and costs of extending the CANFARM program to Saskatchewan 

farmers. The estimate for hog building grants is increased by $60,000 to $410,000. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

we have devoted much effort and substantial funds to encourage and support an expanding livestock 

industry. We are very much aware, however, that substantial opportunities may be available to us in the 

diversification of crops. 

 

I am sure that with this in mind all Members of the Legislature heard with much pleasure the Provincial 

Treasurer‘s (Mr. Steuart) announcement regarding a Crop Breeding Institute at the University. 

Discoveries of such an institute would be available throughout the Prairie Provinces and, therefore, we 

feel it would be only equitable that the Federal Government share financing of the project. 

 

$400,000 would permit the establishment of a first-class institute and we are ready and willing to 

contribute $200,000 towards it, if it is matched by the Federal Government. 

 

I would like to refer briefly to our Community Pasture Program. Over 100,000 head of cattle and calves, 

of which 38,000 were breeding cows, were carried for 3,442 patrons last year. Increased estimates 

reflect an increasing expenditure for the maintenance of grass stands in those pastures. We will open two 

new pastures, one north of Tompkins, and the other on a section of the Lizard Lake pasture for sheep 

this coming year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our agricultural program. We believe it to be one of the best in Canada. It 

is a far cry from the treatment meted out to our agricultural industry in one-shot emergency measures 

under the NDP. This Government has set a pace and record of achievement in its program towards 

assistance to our people of Indian ancestry that is widely regarded as the best in Canada. I need not 

remind you of the many years that these people languished under the former NDP Government without a 

single positive helpful step to really improve their position and status. 

 

The Department of Agriculture is proud to play an important role through the management of our 

training farms and through our program of land improvement on Indian reserves. Indeed, these programs 

are recognized throughout Canada as a forward-looking imaginative step towards assisting these people 

to achieve their proper place in our society. 

 

In 1969 we appointed a special extension agent to assist Indian farmers and bands in this province. The 

program is supported by the Federal Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development. Last year 

under this program 37 Indian farmers were assisted in improving 3,800 acres of land. To date, 16 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

541 

community pastures are under construction on Indian reserves under their own supervision and 

management. 

 

Our estimates for the next fiscal year include a total of $340,000 for development on Indian reserves, an 

increase of $160,000 over the previous year. This Government has pioneered in the development of 

training farms for our people of Indian ancestry. The farms at Lebret and Green Lake are being 

expanded. At Cumberland House we have five local families in the process of being established in their 

own ranching business. The large budgeting increase will provide for further development of farms at 

Silver Lake, La Loche, Ile-a-la-Crosse and Mortlach started last year and to commence a new farm at 

Beauval. 

 

We are proud of this achievement and proud of the fact that last year we employed 89 adults on these 

farms and some eight teenagers. I listened to the financial critic trying to attack this Budget. Once again, 

I state that it indicates his complete lack of reality when he said that the Capital Budget was reduced. So 

I ask: would he spend more money to clear and break more land this year? Would he spend more money 

to drain more land and thus bring more land into production in a year like this? Apparently by what he 

said yesterday he would. I point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that these are the items that I would like to deal 

with but time does not permit. New legislation will be introduced that will substantially help our 

agricultural industry. Before I close I want to remind this House of the significant achievements and 

records established by our farmers under a Liberal Government since 1964, namely: the largest wheat 

crop in the history of Saskatchewan, 1966; the highest per acre yield of wheat in the history of our 

province, 1969; the highest per acre yield of barley in the history of Saskatchewan, 1966; the highest per 

acre yield of flax since 1905 in 1969; the highest per acre yield of rapeseed in 1968; the largest rapeseed 

crop in history, 1969; and now they are on the verge of a tremendous rapeseed industry for our province 

along with the many other records that I have mentioned earlier. So in appreciation, I want to thank the 

Premier (Mr. Thatcher) and the Hon. D.G. Steuart the Provincial Treasurers who provided the necessary 

budgets. I want to thank my colleagues for their support in initiating the policies and programs that made 

these records possible. I want to thank the staff of the Department of Agriculture in carrying out these 

programs and especially our farmers of Saskatchewan who have accomplished these fantastic 

achievements. I will support the motion, I will not support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, while listening to the Hon. Minister of Agriculture 

(Mr. McFarlane) I began to wonder if I was really in the right province. There were a number of things 

of course that he said that brought me back to the realization of the fact that we really are here in 

Saskatchewan. That was when he started his usual Liberal journey back into the past about 

nationalization of farm land and when he began to talk about socialism in Saskatchewan insofar as 

nationalization of farms is concerned. He began to claim sole responsibility for agricultural 

diversification in the province and he constantly wandered around in the years of 1944 to 1964 in order 

to justify his own Government‘s inactivity in 1970. I would like to say to the Hon. Minister of 

Agriculture that the hard cold facts remain, Mr. Speaker. 



March 5, 1970 

 

542 

Saskatchewan agriculture in 1970 is in extreme difficulty, more serious by far than it has been for the 

last one or two or three decades and it behooves the Minister of Agriculture and his Government in 1970 

to do something about the very serious position of agriculture. 

 

As this, Mr. Speaker, is my first occasion to enter debate in this Session I want to add to the 

congratulatory remarks of other Members in honoring the appointment of Dr. Stephen Worobetz to the 

honorable office of Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. We are aware in some limited measure of the 

respect and decorum which is required in this honorable office and are able to appreciate from our first 

observations the very able capacity and competence with which he has undertaken that duty. I could not 

extend these remarks without being reminded of the warm personality and the humanly responsive 

character of the retiring Lieutenant Governor, The Honourable Mr. R.L. Hanbidge. I simply re-echo the 

words already spoken by Hon. Members on behalf of His Honour‘s retirement and his years of service in 

this Legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I would suppose that while we are making our congratulations, Mr. Speaker, the 

other most worthy effort of commendation in this House is to congratulate the electors of Kelvington 

constituency for their decisive and to that rather controversial election of 1967. I congratulate our 

colleague, Mr. Byers, for a very excellent performance in delivering his first speech in this House. I 

suggest that his competence and contribution so early in the game is a compliment to all who supported 

him at the polls and he has, indeed, already become a welcome strength among his colleagues on this 

side of the House and a formidable opposition to the present Government who sit to your right, Sir. 

 

I would suppose that the Hon. Premier and Members of his Government may very reluctantly admit now 

that Kelvington by-election was not just a usual Saskatchewan by-election. I rather suppose that it was 

an election that conclusively placed public opinion on the controversy of 1967 in that Kelvington seat. I 

believe as well that it expressed public opinion on the flatulent arrogance of the Premier and his Liberal 

party that surrounded this whole matter from beginning to end. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I suggest the reaction of public opinion to the $40 million tax 

increase was an expression of public opinion on the deterrent fees for health programs. 

 

An Hon. Member: — $35 million. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — $35 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — $40 million. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — By the time it is done it will be over $40 million. Tax on farm fuels, the tax that 

was added on meals, the tax that was placed on long-distant telephone calls, taxes on household goods 

only to mention a few which came after that 1967 election. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

543 

I suggest, Mr. Speaker, when the rest of Saskatchewan people have the same opportunity to express an 

opinion on that Liberal deal of 1967, that they will take the lead which Kelvington has already 

established . . . 

 

Mr. D.G. McLennan (Last Mountain): — We‘ll see! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Fine, we will see. Saskatchewan Liberals will then disappear, I suggest, as a Liberal 

force and they will only become a nucleus for the Western separatist party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — On Monday last, Mr. Speaker, we listened to the Liberal program on how to go 

broke in one easy lesson. Perhaps the Treasurer‘s Budget would be better sung as a postlude to a passing 

Liberal Government and the broken and badly bent taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — We have often heard the Liberal Premier proclaim his abundance of Liberal 

wisdom. Time after time he has charged Saskatchewan people with the obvious. There is no magic, he 

says, no magic about the source of Government funds. If people want more services they must be 

prepared to pay for them. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would advise the Premier and this House that has been a 

fact to Saskatchewan people for a long time. But, indeed, since 1964 it has become increasingly obvious, 

in fact so abundantly obvious, that when Saskatchewan people again have a tax buck to spend they will 

not get a Liberal Government to spend it for them. Saskatchewan people have been more than generous 

with this Government. And I suggest they don‘t mind paying taxes for services. But this Government 

will regret the day when Saskatchewan people know that they have been had, when they know that they 

have been had by a 60 per cent property tax increase in five years with a constantly decreasing public 

service. And this I suggest is too much to expect. 

 

The tax facts that were so ably presented in rebuttal to the Budget Speech by my hon. colleague from 

Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) must, I suggest, become known by every citizen in this province. And 

when known and understood, Mr. Speaker, I say, it will spell the demise of this totally unacceptable 

approach by Government to its electorate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I don‘t pretend to understand the very complicated and complex 

matters of management or distribution of high finance; but I can ask the simple question that is on the 

mind and on the lips of every bricklayer, of every pensioner, of every unemployed construction worker, 

of every farmer, teacher, hospital worker, home owner, lessee, small businessman or you name them, 

and that question is: where in fact is the money going? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will have increased our Provincial expenditures from slightly less than $200 million in 

1964 to slightly over $400 million in 1970. That‘s $208 million more taxes in six short years. The 

Premier tells us there is no magic about 



March 5, 1970 

 

544 

where Government funds come from and that of course is obvious. Therefore, $400 million of taxes are 

now coming from fewer taxpayers‘ pockets in 1970 than did $200 million of taxes in 1964. 

 

We have of late heard some remarks from the Premier about the bread-and-butter issues. It is interesting 

to observe that when the Prime Minister of Canada calls Canadian Premiers together to discuss matters 

of Canada‘s constitution, our Premier performs rather well on national television in regard to faking a 

prairie storm on what he calls the bread-and-butter issues. But when the Prime Minister calls a 

conference of Canadian Premiers to discuss the real bread-and-butter issues our confused and noble 

Premier thinks of the B & B conference and makes a take-off on Western separatism. To me, Mr. 

Speaker, and to the people I represent this Government totally misrepresents the serious plight of this 

province‘s agricultural industry. It dismisses it, as did the Hon. Minister of Agriculture this afternoon, 

with idle chatter about loans to diversify and it gives no serious thought to the effects or the results of its 

loan program even three years down the line. I say that this kind of benevolence the farmers of 

Saskatchewan can well do without. It is the kind of theory that has been directing farmers for the last 

decade. They have said to farmers, ―Specialize.‖ They have said to farmers, ―Diversify.‖ They have said 

to farmers, ―Grow all the grain that you can grow.‖ And they are now saying to farmers, ―Don‘t grow 

any grain at all.‖ The agricultural industry of Saskatchewan and Canada is facing the greatest social and 

physical upheaval in its entire history. It is an industry that contributes over 42 per cent to our gross 

national wealth in Canada and more than 85 per cent to our gross provincial wealth in Saskatchewan. In 

the face of these staggering facts, Mr. Speaker, we actually have a Prime Minister who has 

unquestionably identified himself by his actions as really not caring about the problems of agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — He has gone on record to say, Sir, that he is not interested in selling wheat nor is he 

concerned about the Western farm problems. I want to quote briefly from The Western Producer, 

February 19, 1970, and the headline is this: PM‘s remark on tractors brings question in House.‖ And 

this, Sir, is the quotation: 

 

Prime Minister Trudeau faced a barrage of questions in the Commons last week about remarks he 

made to a student Liberal conference in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Trudeau is reported to have said that when he was out West he saw some farmers riding $20,000 

tractors and they probably owned land costing $100,000 to $200,000. He was asked why when 

Montreal asked for millions of dollars for Expo the money was provided, but when Western farmers 

needed $200 million it wasn‘t available. He replied that the money for Expo was because of an 

obligation by a previous Government. 

 

I might say that that same previous Government and that same Prime Minister who made that 

commitment also made a commitment to the Western farmer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

545 

Mr. Bowerman: — He made a commitment to guarantee to the Western farmers, $2 a bushel for their 

wheat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I go on with the quotation. 

 

The student questioner said, ‗But I don‘t understand why the farmers can‘t get the $200 million.‘ 

 

‗I don‘t think these people are poor,‘ the Prime Minister is reported to have said. 

 

I don‘t think they are poor the Prime Minister is telling the people. At the same time we have in this 

province, I suggest, a doddling, old-man‘s Government that is obsessed with its private monopolies and 

worn-out clichés. Its total imagination is still caught-up in the 80,000 jobs and reducing the tax on 

turkey saddles. Simply nothing more. While agricultural disaster is knocking at the door of every farmer 

and every rural community and every smaller urban centre in this province, we have a Liberal Premier 

and a Prime Minister of Canada locked in a mating dance that resembles the prairie chickens out on the 

farm which I operate — and I suppose they are out on the farm which some of you people are operating 

— 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — the whole objective of which is to deceive the innocent spectator. Mr. Speaker, 

surely for a province that has 85 per cent of her gross productive wealth invested in agriculture, the most 

commendable single project to which her financial and brain trust must apply itself would be the 

security and the stability of that industry. It is not good enough for a highly developed society to say 

that, when it has produced more wheat than an inefficient system can dispose of, it should label the 

producer inefficient and direct him into growing hogs or, when it is said that he has produced to many 

hogs, that it should tell him to grow hay or that, when he has produced too much hay it tells him to go 

borrow some more money and to try raising cattle. 

 

Saskatchewan Governments must begin now to scan the horizons of its agricultural potential. Solutions 

to the problems of today‘s agriculture are not in the patchwork, hodgepodge of government band-aid 

programs. Liberal governments have sloughed off their responsibilities too long to assert agricultural 

management programs at the secondary levels of production control, distribution, marketing and of farm 

inputs. Too long, I say, have the governments and the experts hid behind the diversities of agriculture to 

excuse their fraudulent inactivity and their marriage vows with the industrial community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — It has moved agriculture from crisis to crisis and it has continued to use the old line 

that farmers must become more efficient. There is absolute and unmistakable evidence about the 

management ability and efficiency of today‘s prairie farmer at the farm level. There is equally absolute 

and 



March 5, 1970 

 

546 

unmistakable evidence about the management ability and efficiency of today‘s Prairie farmer at the farm 

level. There is equally absolute and unmistakable evidence in the area of public responsibility from the 

farmer to the consumers of the world. There are gross inefficiencies in transportation, in storage, in 

marketing and in uncontrolled prices and profits for the service industry. It is in this area of public 

responsibility that approximately 80 per cent or better of the farmer‘s dollar is being spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the strength of Canadian agriculture, and particularly Western agriculture, has 

immeasurably depreciated since Trudeau-mania has become the governing force in our nation. Why? 

Because he has moved the public responsibility for agriculture further away from the farmer than any 

other Canadian government or any other Prime Minister in history. 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — That‘s not true. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Well, I‘d like to have the Hon. Member display the facts if he feels that it is not 

true. 

 

Mr. Leith: — Be glad to. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Very well, we will be glad to listen to the reports. Our Prime Minister undoubtedly 

has obtained a world record for the heights of his crass uncontrolled mania displayed in his statements 

respecting the public or his Government‘s responsibility to sell wheat and the unconcern he has for 

people who meet him on $20,000 tractors. In the words of my respected colleagues I suggest his 

ignorance has almost become remarkable. Add to this, Mr. Speaker, the castigation of farmer 

organizations by the Minister of Highways and you have a combination that the farmers of this province 

must soon unload or suffer irreparable damage. 

 

Our province and its farmers must not yield to the pressures placed upon agriculture today that are being 

exerted by the corporate industrial complex which is saying and they are saying it for their own gain that 

we must reduce our farmers 40 per cent or more by 1980. 

 

I would suggest we think of the absurdity of such a statement when you analyse what it is in fact saying. 

They are saying that one farmer, Farmer A, will or should buy one or two or three or four or five of his 

neighbors, and that somehow this will magically reduce world production of farm products. Mr. 

Speaker, if Farmer A is to buy out his neighbors he must unavoidably become more efficient on that 

same land acreage by making that farm land produce to its greatest maximum potential. If he does not 

do this, he will in fact fail. We are at this stage now in our development. I, Mr. Speaker, own the family 

farm and I also farm land equal to four or five of my father‘s neighbors in his days of farming, and some 

agricultural or economic expert is telling me to buy out four or five more of the same farmers by 1980. 

There must unavoidably come long-term plans to guide agriculture safely into the future. And I suggest, 

Sir, that farmers will acknowledge the fact that Liberal governments just don‘t plan. 

 

For some time in this House, Mr. Speaker, I have listened to various Members of the Government extol 

the virtues of their 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

547 

great Northern and Indian development program. In the same breath they have claimed that virtually 

nothing but stagnation of North Saskatchewan occurred during the years of the former Government‘s 

administration. I have sat as a member of the Premier‘s Indian and Métis Task Force and I have listened 

anxiously and expectantly for the great program developments which the Premier so frequently speaks 

about. We have seen a new department established and we have heard the Premier and his colleagues 

refer to the massive sums of money he is prepared to spend. We hear Government Members talk about 

how many percentage points of employment have been opened to Indian people and, however small or 

large that may be, we indeed give credit and urge the Government to continue its efforts in this regard. 

One thing I have purposely not engaged in since coming to this Legislature, Sir, is to discuss the 

developments of the past. We, on this side of the House, live and represent the present and on-going 

generations, something that the Liberal party in this province has not, as yet, accomplished. We 

recognize the fact that the problems of today will more than equal all the combined energies, experience 

and mental capacities of the on-going generations, and to this fact we must address ourselves. However, 

because there is confusion about Northern and Indian development in this province, and because of the 

many old and tired Members of the Liberal party who have not yet realized that they are, in fact, the 

Government today, but in fact they continue to rate their own progress by misrepresenting the past, I 

suggest it therefore becomes necessary to set the records straight. I do so only to demonstrate the 

pitifully shameful record of this Government with its $200 million more of capital with which to work 

and a sound base from which it was able to launch new and imaginative programs since 1964. In some 

respects, Mr. Speaker, I believe I can set that record straight from the position of my experience with 

Northern people, fishermen, trappers, prospectors, community development programs, that were 

established and with industries and development of Northern Saskatchewan from a forgotten wasteland 

in 1944 to an integral part of Saskatchewan in 1964. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — If they were in the House, I would challenge the Hon. Members for the 

constituencies of Athabasca and Meadow Lake — and the Member for Meadow Lake I see is in his seat 

— who represent principally all of the area of Northern Saskatchewan for them to present any factual 

evidence contrary to what I am about to say. I challenge, as well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, and the 

Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart), and either of the Ministers who deal in mines or resources and Indian 

and Métis Affairs, or any of the rest of that Government who sit to your right, Sir, with respect to the 

production of any single bit of evidence of their Government‘s programs, industry or community 

development, they might name it, including the pulp mill program in the city of Prince Albert, any of 

these programs I say that will match the programs of progress that occurred during the years that you 

and your Government so frequently refer to. And may I briefly refer to the programs of major impact on 

the progress of those years. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, let‘s not forget that as late as 1944 there were 

very few established settlements of people in Northern Saskatchewan, with the exception of those along 

the old fur trade routes of the Churchill and Fond-du-Lac Rivers. 

 

People living in the barren land areas of the extreme 



March 5, 1970 

 

548 

northeast of our province were still actively a nomadic people and a nomadic generation. Their life 

principally consisted of that of following the caribou herds as a source of existence. I would offer to the 

Members that if any of them wants to enlarge his understanding of that experience, I can refer him to 

Farley Mowat‘s book, ―People of the Deer.‖ But I want them to relate that situation in 1944, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Wollaston Lake settlement of 1964. Wollaston Lake settlement didn‘t exist in 1944. In 

1964 it was a community with a church, a school, a modern, well-equipped people owned co-op store, a 

post office, coastal commercial fisheries processing plants, a tourist and air transportation service, a 

regular mail delivery, a pool room and a theatre owned and operated by the Indian Chief Loui Benounie, 

an airstrip for large wheeled aircraft, a producer-owned fish marketing co-op and a fur marketing 

service. These were all for the benefit of the people of that community . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — . . . that were principally a nomadic people before those years. I could go on to list 

the other social benefits that came as a result of regular visits of public health nurses, Department of 

Natural Resources officials, Welfare officers, Co-op Development officers, and an air ambulance service 

that was ready and willing at the people‘s point of greatest need to come when the call went out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — But I can also tell the Members opposite that since 1964 that service has not been 

available to the people of Northern Saskatchewan. They must first put their money on the line before 

that aircraft will come to them. I can go on to list many other benefits as a result. This was a program I 

suggest for the development of Northern people and for the development of industry in Northern 

Saskatchewan. Similar developments followed at Reindeer Lake, Pine House, Pelican Narrows, 

Deschambault, Stanley and at Lac La Ronge itself. If the Member for Athabasca (Mr. Guy) was in his 

seat, I would like to remind him and his punitively inert Government that the only means of overland 

transportation into the now thriving community of Lac La Ronge as late as 1944, Mr. Speaker, was a 

200-mile canoe trip down the Montreal River to that community. By as early as 1946 and 1947 only two 

and one-half to three years after a change of government, cars and modern transportation were being 

seen by the indigent populations of that community in their village of Lac La Ronge. 

 

It is true, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of that day was involved in a housing program where 

houses were costing $1,000 or $1200 or less per house, but what must be said of that operation is that 

people were involved. People were involved in logging, in sawing the logs and in the construction of 

their own houses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — This not only reduced the cash cost of the house but 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

549 

it did provide employment and it provided personal interest in the result of that construction. One of the 

greatest follies of this Government is exactly what the Members so proudly described as ―their 

program‖, and that is moving people from tents and from log cabins into $17,000 Nelson homes. This, 

they do, without any involvement or very little involvement or any apparent appreciation and interest by 

many of those whom they claim to so generously assist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must briefly mention in closing the other developments in Saskatchewan history that 

occurred during that period, which will yet be known as the greatest social development experience 

among Indian peoples of North America. I refer now to the fur management program. The present 

Government would so much like to say that it developed that fur management program, Northern 

cooperative trading stores program, cooperative fisheries marketing, fur marketing services, Northern 

schools development program, prospectors‘ training schools, Northern radio communications network, 

road to resources, Saskatchewan airways, community development and cooperative training, natural 

resources conservation and management programs. 

 

I could go on to list more of them, Mr. Speaker, but let me finally add the greatest single industrial 

development in this province‘ history to date is the development of the Uranium City complex, an 

industrial development which virtually moved the old town of Goldfields off its foundation across the 

Athabasca ice to the new and ultra-modern community of Uranium City. No wonder the Member for 

Athabasca (Mr. Guy) fails so consistently to mention his constituency and his people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, there are programs and attitudes towards people which even massive 

sums of money cannot produce. I suggest that the actions of this Government are heard much above the 

saying of the Premier and his colleagues about its Northern Indian and Métis program. Sincerity and 

concern for development of people do not come through publicity-oriented programs to fulfil the 

partisan political objectives of its sponsor . . . 

 

We have heard the Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) say that the Government proposes to increase the welfare 

allowances under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan. This, Mr. Speaker, is a welcome announcement to 

many in our province. The situation which exists now simply cannot continue and simply must not 

continue. But I want to suggest to the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and the Hon. Minister of 

Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) that these announced increases will mean very little unless the Government 

changes its attitude and its policy for the administration of relief to the needy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I charge the Minister of Welfare (Mr. MacDonald) and the Government with 

current actions of suppression and harassment of welfare applicants that do have legitimate claims for 

welfare assistance. Mr. Speaker, I make my own claim that acute poverty and inevitable physical and 

social starvation do exist and exist with the knowledge of welfare authorities even in my own 

constituency. 



March 5, 1970 

 

550 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Indeed increased welfare allowances are a welcome announcement. But 

commensurate therewith must come a greater demonstration by the Government of a humanitarian 

concern to share the humiliations and desperations of the poor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to the conditions in my own constituency 

which occur as a direct result of Liberal . . . 

 

Mr. J.J. Charlebois (City Park-University): — How come you didn‘t tell Cy MacDonald about that . . 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I can. I can. Would you like me to tell you? 

 

Mr. Charlebois: — Yes, I would. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — You would? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where is he? 

 

An Hon. Member: — He‘s down taking a swim. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where is he now? Why isn‘t he here? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to the conditions in my own constituency 

which occur as a direct result, I suggest, of Liberal policy either national or provincial. For indeed it has 

been said that Liberal times are hard times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — These, Mr. Premier, I believe are the nitty-gritty or the real bread and butter issues 

of Saskatchewan today. Your Government will be taking from the taxpayers $200 million more in taxes 

in 1970 than it did six short years ago. Small businesses, small urban centres, farmers and residents in 

our constituency see absolutely no evidence of increased services in return for those increased taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — We see in our weekly newspaper that 13 families left the small community of Big 

River simply because of no hope and no assurance of future employment after the destruction of the Big 

River sawmill. 

 

The Premier still talks in terms of the local wind-bag when he says his Government expects to undertake 

a large industrial complex in that area in the near future. The population depletion and the social unrest 

of that community are the direct result of this Government‘s inactivity to respond in a positive 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

551 

way with some of the annual $200 million of taxes. 

 

I can assure you, Mr. Premier, that the people of Big River know that the uncertainty which surrounds 

their timber industries now will be settled forthwith only after your Government‘s demise from office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, the timber won‘t be given away to the large corporations as it is now 

in jeopardy of such action. 

 

While I am dealing with the Big River area I want to make reference to correspondence that is dated 

February 2, 1970. This is from a group of people in the Big River area who are attempting now to set up 

a Northern Development Association, because they have viewed others, such as newspapers, 

bottleworks and grain companies, getting grants from the Federal Government, from $10,000 to 

$42,000. They are now making an application for some grants in that respect. Some of their comments 

are interesting, Mr. Speaker. They are asking that the Provincial Government take some action with 

respect to farm costs on machinery and machinery parts. It is interesting that I should quote here from 

some of the costs that they describe: 

 

A 50/10 tractor tire has a price range from $500 to $728, a Massey-Ferguson 155 fanbelt $4.50 to a 

high of $11.20 depending on the needs. 

 

They go on to mention that farmers rather than fast machinery dealer salesmen should be licensed to 

supply and service farm machine companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also go on in this letter to suggest that they are indeed in need of telephones and 

telephone services. They are having to wait and many of them have never had telephone services. And 

some of them now could have telephone services if they had the money to pay, would be paying in the 

range from $390 to $900 for installation alone. This, I suggest, is a disgrace in itself. 

 

Each day, Mr. Speaker, there is new evidence of the erosion of rural life in Saskatchewan. Post offices in 

the rural areas beyond the railroad that have served so well in the farming communities are now under 

order of the Liberal Government in Ottawa to be closed. The small local community stores which have 

housed these post offices will inevitably be forced to close their doors. Rural people will be required to 

meet the added expense of driving the additional many miles for services. 

 

Proposed withdrawal of certain railroad services to all the small urban communities in my constituency 

will hasten the development of ghost town results and the eventual complete withdrawal of the farming 

communities. And I simply ask, Mr. Speaker: what has our Provincial Government done by way of 

identifiable actions to prevent this process from taking place? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot nor will I support a government nor its Budget Speech that plays so much on 

words and so little on facts. I will support the amendment and be very glad to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



March 5, 1970 

 

552 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, this is my first opportunity in this 

Session to participate in formal debate and before dealing with the Budget. Sir, I would like to 

congratulate you on the very capable and colorful manner in which you are again executing your duties 

this Session. And I wish also to congratulate our new Lieutenant Governor, Dr. Stephen Worobetz. It 

has been pointed out in the House that his appointment is an honor and a recognition to the medical 

profession and incidentally, Mr. Speaker, it is a secondary honor too to professional educators. I am sure 

most Members are aware that his brother Peter is a well-regarded member of the staff of the Department 

of Education. 

 

I want to acknowledge too, Mr. Speaker, the services to the province so ably rendered by the retiring 

Lieutenant Governor, Mr. R.L. Hanbidge. As an elected Member, Mr. Speaker, he represented most of 

the area of my constituency. He has always had a very special regard for the Kerrobert-Luseland area, 

and I can tell him and tell the House that the people all through that country likewise had a very special 

regard for him. I know that I am speaking for all of my constituents when I say ―Thanks, Dinny, for a 

job well done and we wish you the very best in retirement.‖ 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, to take part in this Debate. On Monday the Provincial 

Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) brought down a Budget that warrants the support of all Members of this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — And judging by the half-hearted, sort of half-baked criticism so far advanced by the 

NDP opposite, I am sure they will be voting for it. Can they vote against an increase in homeowner 

grants? Can they vote against increased aid to municipalities for police protection? Increased aid to 

libraries? Increased aid to the school boards of the province? 

 

An Hon. Member: — They don‘t dare! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — This is a budget that gives the largest dollar increase to education ever given in the 

history of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — And yet I am sure Members opposite will complain, Mr. Speaker. You know I am 

convinced, in the short time I have been in this House, that they enjoy whining and wailing more so than 

anything else. You know it is interesting to note that, as this country moves into the seventies and as 

other political parties look at the problems of the seventies and solutions of the seventies, our Socialist 

friends opposite still look backwards to the Thirties. They love that old depression complex, continually 

harking back to the Thirties. They do their utmost both inside the House and outside of it to perpetuate 

that old depression psychology that spawned them in the first place. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

553 

Mr. Speaker, we have had some references in this Debate to the changes in the seating plan of Members 

opposite. I want to welcome at this time too, before I forget, the new Member for Kelvington (Mr. 

Byers) and I note with interest too, Mr. Speaker, that he has been added to the force of education critics 

in the Opposition, and I welcome that very sincerely. Now I hope it isn‘t indicative of their priority in 

education the fact that all of these critics occupy the last row. Perhaps the numbers, Mr. Speaker, do 

indicate their philosophy in education in another way, although they have added another member to the 

force of critics thus lowering the teacher-pupil ratio, and without any perceptible improvement in 

quality, at least that we have seen yet, in the course of this Session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — In short, quantity before quality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the field of education there has been a great deal of discussion in the past few months 

about budget reviews, teacher-pupil ratios, and other related questions. Some of these discussions have 

been very lively. Some of them very alarmist and some of them in many cases generating a good deal 

more heat than light. And again we have had examples of this kind of discussion both inside the 

Chamber and outside of it. The Member for Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) joined the club today with his 

remarks. 

 

But before dealing with this to any great extent, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to a couple of comments 

made yesterday by the financial critic (Mr. Blakeney). You know he did an excellent job I thought. I 

attended a Little Theatre performance last night in the city here and, while those performers were 

excellent, I don‘t think they came up to the job he did here yesterday in that speech that he made, and 

the fact that there was very, very little of actual criticism contained in it when one examined it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Good acting! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Good acting is correct. One of the criticisms he made with respect to the homeowner 

grant — he was very careful not to oppose it, not to oppose the increase — so that he centred his 

opposition around the fact that our Indian and Métis people in the province would perhaps not be able to 

receive it, because obviously he couldn‘t find anything else to say in opposition. Under the policies of 

the former Government, or the lack of them, in providing housing for our Indian and Métis people, Mr. 

Speaker, they would have never got the homeowner grant, because native people in this province are 

receiving major assistance from this Government which was even agreed to by the Member for 

Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman). He talked again yesterday about giving them the homeowner grant and in 

typical fashion didn‘t seem at first concerned with providing these people with homes. I can assure him 

that more and more of those people every year in this province will become eligible for the homeowner 

grant. 

 

The budget in the Department of Education this year provides a sum of $936,000 for special training and 

upgrading of our native people in this province, which I can point out, Mr. Speaker, is over double the 

Provincial support of this program in the current year. 



March 5, 1970 

 

554 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I want to mention particularly a completely new, Provincially-sponsored program for 

people of Indian ancestry, which has been instituted this current year. The programs are put on by the 

Department of Education and the referrals are made by the Indian and Métis Department and the 

Saskatchewan Métis Society and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians. This program was initiated at 

the request of both of these organizations in an effort to help bridge the educational gap that exists 

particularly in many of these rural areas where many of these people reside. 

 

This year this program is being offered at approximately 35 different centres throughout the province. In 

addition to this the Department cooperates with the Department of Welfare, with Federal authorities, 

Manpower, ARDA and other agencies, to provide education opportunities for the native people of this 

province. We expect, Mr. Speaker, that the monies contained in this Budget should provide for an 

increase in the number of trainees for people of Indian ancestry alone from about 1100 this year to 

approximately 2,000 next year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, we were able to cooperate this year with Federal authorities, in the 

Department of Manpower particularly, and the Provincial Department of Agriculture as well to provide 

15 different courses throughout the province, accommodating about 360 farmers in farm management 

training. Nine of these courses are 11 weeks in length and three of them are six weeks in length. These 

are new courses in addition to other one-week courses in farm mechanics, farm machinery maintenance. 

That‘s something over 400 additional farmers are taking advantage of. The interest and the attendance at 

these courses have been excellent and certainly indicate the wisdom of this move. 

 

The Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) yesterday also mentioned the lack of vocational training 

opportunities particularly here in Regina. I want to point out to him again that this Budget provides for 

an increase in enrolments from approximately 6,600 this year to just over 8,000 for next year. The major 

part of that increase, Mr. Speaker, of course being in the two Provincial institutes at Saskatoon and at 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — He spoke about the need for additional vocational upgrading for adult workers 

particularly and adult trainees. For many years, as I am sure Hon. Members are well aware on both sides 

of the House, the emphasis in adult upgrading has been to bring trainees up to the vocational grade 10 

level in order that they could then enter further courses primarily in trades training. I might say, Mr. 

Speaker, that the entire approach developed here to curriculum and the courses being offered in this 

province are second to none in the country. 

 

There have been increasing interest and demand in offering grade 11 and grade 12 courses to adult 

students in order that 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

555 

they might meet entrance requirements in the two-year technology programs or just in order that they 

might get a grade 12 certificate. We are offering courses at Prince Albert, at Regina and at Moose Jaw 

this year. We will be improving and extending this program and I hope before too many months we will 

be able to implement a grade 12 equivalency certificate for adults who are anxious to obtain a grade 12 

standing, because it does not seem sensible for men and women, presently in the work force — 35 and 

40 years of age, to take a grade 11 and a grade 12 program that is based almost completely on today‘s 

high school program with the departmental grade 12 examinations, which after all are designed 

primarily for university entrance. I am convinced that the development of a special course tailored to 

their needs is not only a sensible step but a necessary one and one that certainly will be welcomed by the 

adult trainees who are interested in furthering their standing. 

 

Discussions on this are now taking place between our Department and the Federal Department of 

Manpower and Saskatchewan Newstart. I might mention too that Saskatchewan Newstart has done a 

good deal of research and work in this particular area and it has been of great assistance to us. 

 

I would like to turn now for a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to this question again of student-teacher ratios 

and school grants. Let us take an example of a rural unit and look at those student-teacher ratios and 

school grants. Let us take an example of a rural unit and look at those student-teacher ratios and the 

grant figures for the past few years. We heard today the examples cited by the Member from Moosomin 

(Mr. Gardner) in this connection. And I suppose we could choose almost any unit in the province to 

illustrate the trend and illustrate the patterns. I have the figures for the Lloydminster unit which I 

intended to use in the previous Debate and didn‘t have the chance to do so. I am going to use them here. 

 

In the year 1963 the teacher-pupil ratio in that unit was about 22.2 to 1 and it dropped gradually 21.6 the 

next year, 20.8, 20.6, 20 even and 19.2 in ‘68 and last year to below 19 to 18.8 approximately. In the 

meantime the operating grants provided by the Province to that unit rose from $370,000 in 1963 to 

$598,000 last year. Now in the current school year this particular unit employs 87½ teachers. In their 

preliminary budget submitted to the Department they indicated they were planning to employ 85 

teachers in the forthcoming year, September, 1970. 

 

The professional educators in the Department reviewed their enrolments not only in the whole system 

but in each and every school and the programs being offered in those various schools. They came up 

with a figure of 73 teachers and an average ratio of about 22.6 to 1 which is roughly what it was five or 

six years ago. When you look at the classroom loads in this unit the study shows that 42 of those 

teachers (87½ total staff) had 20 students or less on the register of their classrooms and of these 26 were 

in the elementary and 16 in the high school. There is one school within a very few miles of Lloydminster 

with an enrolment of 75 students grades one to nine with five teachers employed. One teacher has grades 

one and two, total 16 students. The next one has grades three and four, a total of 15 students. The next 

one has grades five and six, a total of 23 students. The grade seven and eight teacher has a total of 13 

students. The grade nine teacher, who is also the principal and something close to a $9,000 a year salary, 

has eight students in his class. 



March 5, 1970 

 

556 

Now perhaps this is an extreme example. I didn‘t particularly look for an example of this kind in 

bringing in the example of the Lloydminster unit. But we will be recognizing, Mr. Speaker, three 

teachers for that school in the coming year. Enrolment will be down somewhat as well, I understand, and 

yet Hon. Members would accuse us of undermining the quality of education by taking action to improve 

situations of this kind. 

 

I will have a good deal more to say on this question tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, and other points with 

respect to ratios, school grants, and so on, but it has been estimated, Sir, that, if present trends continue 

in teacher-pupil ratios here and elsewhere within 25 to 30 years, we would see half of the population of 

North America seated in the classroom and the other half standing in front as instructors. And I suppose 

at noon everyone would get up and change places, I don‘t know what you would do then. That 

prediction was probably made facetiously and it sounds ridiculous, but it isn‘t too far-fetched and the 

reports come, not from us, but from the States. And in a number of other places you can find a similar 

situation developing. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, I will have a good deal more to say on this and other topics tomorrow and I beg 

leave at this time to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF CADETS 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Before we proceed with the business of the House I wish to introduce to all the 

Members of the Legislature 36 cadets situated in the Speaker‘s gallery from the 10th Field Artillery 

Cadet Corps and their seven officers. They are under the direction and command of Major Bright. After 

they leave the gallery they will be inspected by the Minister of Welfare, the Hon. C.P. MacDonald. 

 

I am sure that all Members of the Legislative Assembly would wish to join me in extending a very warm 

and hardy welcome to all these cadets and to their officers. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 

 

Return No. 33 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon-Riversdale) moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 

33 showing: 

 

(1) The number of applications that were made in the calendar year 1969 to the Crimes Compensation 

Board. 

 

(2) The number that were successful. 

 

(3) The amount paid out in successful claims by the said Board in the said year. 

 

(4) The breakdown, by sections of the Criminal Code, of the said applications in the year 1969. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

557 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I have discussed this motion with the Hon. 

Member and I am proposing an amendment which I think will give him the information which he is 

really asking for, so I would accordingly move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Grant that Motion No. 33 be 

amended by deleting Nos. 1 to 4 inclusive and substituting therefor the following: 

 

(1) How many applications were made in the calendar year 1969 to the Crimes Compensation Board. 

 

(2) How many awards were made in the calendar year 1969 by the said Board. 

 

(3) What is the total amount of the awards made in the said year 1969. 

 

(4) What is the breakdown, by sections of the Criminal Code, of the said awards in the year 1969. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I move for leave to introduce 

this Bill to amend The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. This Act has been in the forefront of human 

rights legislation in Canada and this provision, we think, will make the Act easier to administer. 

 

Without the Bill to amend this Act, the provisions in the Act requiring prosecution to enforce rights are 

in our view inadequate. The amendments give the power of appointment of an officer to mediate and 

conciliate disputes which arise under the Act. In some cases prosecution is extremely difficult in this 

kind of a case, and we have found in the case of the two companion Acts, the Employment Act and the 

Accommodation Act, mediation and conciliation can quite often prove more fruitful than just a straight 

prosecution. So the amendment that I am submitting here now is similar to the provisions in The Fair 

Employment Practices Act and The Fair Accommodation Act, which makes provision for the 

appointment of an officer to resolve the difficulties between the parties. 

 

Section 4 of the Bill is a consequential amendment allowing payment of compensation to the members 

of the commission if it is necessary to establish a commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident that all the Members of this Legislature will support this Bill, which will 

allow, I think, for better enforcement of the Act which is really basic to our democratic form of 

government. I commend these amendments to all Hon. Members. 

 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon-Riversdale): — I have some few words to say on this Bill. May I 

preface 



March 5, 1970 

 

558 

my remarks by saying that unfortunately I don‘t think the Members on this side of the House can be as 

enthusiastic about this proposed amendment as the Hon. Attorney General is. I think all Members will 

agree that human rights and the preservation of them are, as the Hon. Attorney General has said, one of 

the foundations of a strong democracy. It has often been said, Mr. Speaker, that we can judge the 

sophistication and maturation of our state by the type of human rights legislation that it has and enacts 

from time to time. 

 

However, it is with some regret and some mixed emotions that we now see the introduction of Bill No. 

2. We cannot, Mr. Speaker, say that we will be voting against it, for any improvement in human rights 

legislation must be supported. But we also can say that we cannot lend our wholehearted support, as 

perhaps we ought to be lending it, to legislation that could be as important as this amendment has the 

potential of being. The best way that I can summarize the feeling of myself and the Members on this 

side is to ask the Hon. Attorney General to withdraw the Bill and take it back to the drawing board, so 

that a new Bill that truly embodies human right legislation, the best that can be presented before the 

Members of this House. 

 

We say that the proposed Bill is weak in its professed attempt to protect human rights. We say that it is 

contradictory. Perhaps, most important, it relies on the Attorney General and the Government to such an 

extent as to make it next to meaningless, Mr. Speaker, as an effective form of protection for individual 

human rights in our province. It is, I think, with respect, perhaps a sloppily drafted Bill. May I give you 

some concrete examples of what I mean. Firstly, the entire theory or the thesis of this Bill, is in my 

submission, contrary to human rights legislation as it exists in few other provinces in Canada. I think the 

basis of good human rights legislation is to firstly clearly define the principles of equality, fairness and 

non-discrimination, in sort of a broad charter in the legislation, and then, secondly, attempt to protect 

those ideals through the establishment of an independent human rights commission. Now to summarize. 

The two important things I think are the definition of those goals to preserve and secondly the 

establishment of an independent human rights commission to enforce those freedoms. Regretfully this 

Bill does not place the power for protection of human rights legislation in the hands of an independent 

commission as it should. Rather it places the power almost exclusively in the hands of the political 

personage, no matter who is the government of the day, the Attorney General of the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

For example, one of the key proposals of this Bill is that an officer should be designated by the Attorney 

General to receive and deal with complaints under the Bill of Rights. That person is to be designated 

from the Public Service of the Province of Saskatchewan by the Attorney General. Again, it is 

permissive legislation and it says that the Attorney General may appoint this officer. When a complaint 

arises, it goes firstly to the Attorney General, who may or may not refer that complaint to the person that 

the Attorney General exclusively designates as the officer deemed to investigate and recommend the 

proposed grievance. 

 

Further, proposed Section 12 (b) gives the Attorney General the power to set up a commission from time 

to time on individual cases to further hear evidence. But whether or not that 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

559 

commission is set up is again entirely and absolutely in the hands of the Attorney General. Thus the 

basic provision of the Act is such that the Attorney General may or may not appoint a proper person as 

the officer designated to receive the complaints. He may or may not ask that officer to investigate the 

complaint. He may or may not in his absolute discretion set up a commission to investigate further that 

complaint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Hon. Attorney General, we say that this places far too much power in the hands of the 

Attorney General. This is far too much power to make this type of mechanism independent and 

meaningful human rights legislation for the Province of Saskatchewan. The options are open to the 

Attorney General to make first of all a judgment call on whether or not any complaint is of sufficient 

gravity or of sufficient seriousness to merit further investigation by the officer or ultimately by the 

commission. I say that this is contrary to good human rights legislation. It is not for the Attorney 

General or for the Government of the day to grandly decide, no matter how well intentioned the 

Government might be, whether or not an individual complaint should receive further investigation. 

 

I say that the proper method would have been for the setting up of an independent human rights 

commission that would not be dependent upon the whim of any one politician or political party, no 

matter how noble or honest that party or politician may be. It is for the commission, and the commission 

alone, to search out discrimination and injustice and to prosecute it, no matter who offends it, whether it 

is an individual in our society or a government as, from time to time, allegations may arise. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, in the proposed amendment, when the commission is set up, it is set up within 

the confines of the terms of reference that are given to it by the Attorney General. As I read the Act, the 

Attorney General will not have a standing human rights commission, but rather he will, from time to 

time, designate one, as the circumstances in his wisdom apply. It is possible that the terms of reference, 

as they are given by the Attorney General when he sets up this commission under the proposed 

legislation, would be so confining and so restrictive as to effectively tie the hands of the commission that 

investigates a complaint further. Again, the important thing to emphasize to the Members of the House 

is that the commission should have absolute freedom to search out and to find its own terms of reference 

and come to the truth of the matter in a particular complaint and not be bound by terms of reference as 

given to it from time to time by an Attorney General. As a consequence of this proposal in the 

legislation, it is natural for us to assume that a commission will not be a permanent one. It will be 

transitory. It will not have the benefit of experience and it should be an independent commission that 

will be permanent, that will acquire experience that will be meaningful. It must be the object that all 

persons or sectors of our society can look to for justice in times of complaint. 

 

Thirdly, as an object to criticism of this Bill, it is my view that much good is gotten by the public being 

fully informed of complaints and violations under the Bill of Rights. This means that all matters should, 

as a general rule, be open to the public for perusal in these types of complaints from the very moment 

that the initial complaint is laid to the time that it is finally resolved. That aspect of openness is missing 

from this 



March 5, 1970 

 

560 

proposed amendment. You will note the legislation states that the officer designated by the Attorney 

General will report back to the Attorney General. 

 

In Section 12B, subsection (6), the findings and recommendations of the commission will be reported 

again back to the Attorney General and, again, may or may not be reported to the public as a whole. In 

my view, a great deal of the sanction of the human rights legislation and the strength of the Bill of 

Rights of this nature lies in the fact that discrimination and injustice are, as I have said, exposed to the 

light of day from the time the complaint is made with the proper commission or officer and until it is 

determined. That Act does not incorporate that aspect. It doesn‘t say anything about it. I say that is one 

more reason why the Bill ought to go back to the drawing board. 

 

The fourth reason is that there is a strong need to coordinate an educational program respecting human 

rights and the protection in Saskatchewan. In other provinces, Mr. Attorney General, notably the 

Province of Ontario, human rights legislation gives the power to the human rights commission which I 

must emphasize in that Province is independent, to post notices in employer‘s shops, to print in 

newspapers, to carry publications on radio and television, to carry out an educational program that it 

deems necessary and appropriate for the times in order to publicize the remedies that are available to 

eliminate these types of injustices and discriminations. 

 

This Bill makes no mention of this very important function. This Bill, in fact, doesn‘t even suggest that 

there should be a power in the temporary commission for this type of on-going education program. 

There is no such power in the hands of the Attorney General. May I say this, Mr. Speaker, even if there 

was this power in the hands of the Attorney General I would still oppose it. The manner in which 

publicity and education about human rights are disseminated and spread among the people is as 

important as the actual hearing and determination of the human rights case. I would think that the 

Attorney General (Mr. Heald) and the Government itself would not want to be put in the position where 

it can be said of them that educational programs are really political propaganda, that education is 

political breast-beating, because, if that was the case, then all of us would be the losers as far as 

education and a meaningful publicity program for human rights legislation are concerned. 

 

This program of education can only rest within the hands of this independent commission that I would 

have hoped the proposed amendment would have provided. In any event, this aspect of education and 

publicity is totally left out of the Bill. I want to emphasize that, in the Province of Ontario and 

elsewhere, specific statutory sanction is mentioned and made, as I think it ought to be in this type of 

case, for the commissions involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other problems with this Bill that one could recite. I could, for example, 

dwell on the question of the definition of creed. The definition of creed is limited to mean religious 

creed. It is open for some commission, temporary or otherwise, for some court some day to rule that 

discrimination does not extend to political creed, that discrimination, because of a political creed, would 

not be or could not be a violation of human rights. I think that danger of interpretation exists by virtue of 

the fact that creed is limited to 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

561 

religious creed only. It would be inconsistent, unreasonable and incomprehensible in my view with the 

tenor of the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights to suggest that discrimination would be allowed for political 

reasons especially in day-to-day jobs that have nothing to do with this Legislature or Government. Yet, 

the definition of creed in this Bill — and I say that definition is just another part of the failure of the 

Government to introduce proper human rights legislation — leaves that door and that possibility open. 

 

What happens when the temporary commission that the Attorney General talks of makes a 

recommendation? There is no mention, Mr. Speaker, in the Act that says that the ruling of the 

commission can be or will be enforced with the strength of law. The recommendation simply goes back 

to the Attorney General, and again in his absolute discretion they may or may not be processed to 

alleviate the injustice. We say an independent human rights commission that will have the power and the 

strength to act, freely and independently, to stamp out the types of things that are intended here, is 

necessary. There should be a provision so that the findings of this commission are enforceable and 

binding, so that the situation involved can be remedied. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation is full of traps for the real preservation of human rights. I should 

think the Government wouldn‘t want to be in a situation where it could be said that it used human rights 

legislation to cover up some misdeed or some error on its part. As governments adopt more positive 

roles in our society, it is inevitable that it is going to come into more and more contact with people. It is 

inevitable that bureaucracy will increase, and some decisions are going to alienate persons and from 

time to time there will be allegations of discriminations under the Bill of Rights. Herein, Mr. Attorney 

General, lies a potential conflict between the political interests of the Government of the day and the 

legitimate interests of the individual who says his rights on the Bill of Rights have been breached. For 

example, one year and a half ago, there was an allegation displayed in the newspapers in the Province of 

Saskatchewan against the Hon. Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan by a woman who said that she 

had been dismissed — a Métis woman — on an order from the Premier, although according to the 

newspaper reports the immediate superior had found her work to be satisfactory. The husband of the 

woman, the newspaper reported, was a campaign manager for a political party in Meadow Lake in the 

June 25, 1968 Federal election. That was a very serious allegation against the Premier and the 

Government. To be fair, the newspaper reported that the Hon. Premier denied the dismissal was due to 

political reasons. We accept those words. But I say to the Members this is the best example of the type 

of conflict that the Government can place itself in when it comes to human rights legislation. What could 

be said under this proposed legislation of this example? Can the Members see the conflict of the 

situation being placed squarely on the shoulders of the Attorney General? He would inevitably on the 

one hand, Mr. Speaker, have the pressures of politics, the Premier and other considerations to meet on 

one hand at the initial stage when he has to consider whether or not that complaint goes on to an officer 

or ultimately beyond to a commission and, on the other hand, he would have the duty and the necessity 

to have the complaint legitimately aired and heard and determined. Under this proposed Bill, it is 

possible for the Attorney General to receive the complaint and not process it any further. That type of 

power does not belong in the hands of the Attorney 



March 5, 1970 

 

562 

General nor in the hands of any government. It is not true human rights legislation. 

 

Rather the whole issue should have been placed in the hands of an independent human rights 

commission. The Government should, in this type of case or in any other similar situation, be as 

interested as anyone, including the person affected, to have the matter heard, aired and determined 

according to due process so that the issue is clear. As it was in this particular case, the person was to 

have her complaint heard by a voluntary human rights association in Saskatchewan. I have the 

newspaper clippings on that particular issue and to date — and I stand to be corrected — I have seen no 

report as to what the finding was with respect to that serious allegation. 

 

Now I anticipate the Attorney General to repeat his argument, in rebuttal of last year, that there is 

presently this voluntary human rights association in Saskatchewan. Last year, when I introduced the 

Resolution on the Independent Human Rights Commission, you will recall that the Hon. Attorney 

General (Mr. Heald) said that to set up a human rights commission would be a duplication of effort of 

the one that presently exists. Respectfully, Sir, to that I say, ―Nonsense.‖ As a voluntary human rights 

association, it exists and it serves a valuable function — an education function — we must support it in 

that role, but it has not legislative power. In the case that I have just cited supposing it was found that 

there was political discrimination, would that finding be binding on the Provincial Government and 

binding on the Attorney General, especially in the circumstances and the Premier has already made it 

clear that there is no political discrimination? 

 

The fact of the matter is that it can‘t be binding. It has no legislative authority or sanction. The answer is 

that nothing would come of it as in fact nothing has come of the allegation one and one-half years ago. 

 

Again, this highlights the need to have an independent commission that would have this binding affect 

on the Government and all sectors of our society when there is a hint of discrimination. This cannot be 

done by this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the demand for better and more human rights legislation is ever present and I say that 

today‘s generation young or old, today‘s society has a keen eye to social injustice. I think our youth and 

our press and our public at large in the Province of Saskatchewan are more aware and concerned about 

discrimination than it ever has before. It‘s their mood to stamp it out. This is also the question of the 

revolution of rising expectations in terms of economic and social demands. As people in our society 

burst out and seek more and more activity, there will be more and more conflict resulting in fair and 

equitable and independent means to resolve injustices against the people in our society. 

 

As Members can see, this legislation has not been thought out. It has those four specific areas that I 

mentioned. It places far too much power in the hands of the Attorney General. What we are plugging for 

is an independent human rights commission, as I have said, to administer that Bill of Rights of 

Saskatchewan. We agree with the Attorney General that Saskatchewan has been a pioneer in the Bill of 

Rights when it was introduced under the old CCF Government in 1944 or thereabouts. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

563 

We want this Bill of Rights to be more meaningful in the 1970s. We want the Bill of Rights, however, 

Mr. Attorney General, to be amended so that the new demands of today are set out in a new charter of 

human rights, in the new Bill of the human rights of Saskatchewan and that there are legitimate and 

truthful and lawful means, independent means to resolve those disputes. We want those human rights to 

be preserved and protected in every walk of life right up to, perhaps even including, the Cabinet. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, as I have said, we will have to support the Bill in second reading when it 

comes up, but I am asking the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) to seriously consider the reservations 

that I have listed to him about the independent human rights commission. I ask the Attorney General to 

examine the Province of Ontario and to look carefully at the human rights legislation and the human 

rights commission there. I ask him to take the leadership from the Province of Ontario, building on from 

there within the principle, to take back that Bill of Rights to the drawing board and come back with truly 

a Bill of Rights for the Province of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan. If he doesn‘t, 

although we will be supporting it in second reading, we would ask and give notice to the Members that 

wide-spread amendments would be sought by those of us on this side to make this Bill truly the human 

rights legislation that it could and should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R.H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, I am going to be very brief. The few remarks that I have 

to make are going to be strictly from a layman‘s approach. 

 

I feel very strongly when it comes to matters dealing with human rights. It always seems to me rather 

doubtful to have legislation which in the case of the Government, may be the very body assessing a 

wrong perpetrated by that body, in other words responsible for an unfair practice. Such legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, leaves a rather off flavor in the mouth of those who receive an adverse judgment. I would feel 

much happier if there was to be an independent commission. This, Mr. Speaker, would be a safeguard 

not only for the public but it would be one of the best safeguards for any government. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I wish only to add a very few comments and I 

am going to restrict my comments to the new definition of the word ‗creed.‘ 

 

I think that the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) expressed his view that the balance of the Bill expands the 

operation of the Act and widens the protection for human rights. I think that he will agree that the new 

definition of ‗creed‘ restricts the Bill. Prior to this time the word ‗creed‘ was undefined. It undoubtedly 

included religious creeds and probably included other creeds. I see no reason why protection should be 

restricted only to those who may have had their rights violated in respect of a religious creed. May I call 

to the attention of Hon. Members the fact that some of the greatest violations of human rights which we 

recall in the last couple of decades have been in respect of creeds which were not religious creeds. 

 

In the United States we had the era of McCarthy and, 



March 5, 1970 

 

564 

whatever one might say about that era, there were undoubtedly at that time violations of human rights 

based upon creeds other than religious creeds. I would, without reviewing that era, direct people‘s 

attention to, let us say, a book by say Owen Lattimore on ―Ordeal by Slander,‖ or the attention of the 

Attorney General to some of the reminiscences of Louis Nizer or other lawyers who have been involved 

in those sorts of civil rights cases. But, Mr. Speaker, we do not have to go to the United States; we can 

stay in Canada and refer our attention to the Padlock Law of Quebec. There was a law which 

undoubtedly violated human rights and did it on the basis, not of a religious creed but of another sort of 

creed. Eventually that law was struck down by the Supreme Court of Canada, but a substantial number 

of people who could not afford to appeal the matter to the Supreme Court of Canada had their rights 

abridged by the operation of the Padlock Law, which, as I repeat, was not based upon any religious 

creed. I suggest that there could be many other examples. I picked those two because I think they would 

be familiar to the Members of the Legislature. My point, therefore, is that this provision of the Bill in 

fact restricts the law rather than broadens it and accordingly ought not to be included in this Bill. I think 

that I would, therefore, ask the Attorney General to consider that aspect of it and see whether or not he 

would in Committee be prepared to delete the new Section 2(a). 

 

Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, dealing with the comments of the Hon. Members opposite starting with the 

last speaker, sure I will have a look at that. That is something which we would consider in Committee 

anyway. We wouldn‘t be dealing with it on second reading. The matter of definition of creed is 

something that we can look at. I don‘t disagree too much with the comments and the remarks of the 

Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney). 

 

I was interested in the remarks of the Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) because I think probably he 

was in this House, I think he was in this House, as he certainly was a Member of the Government during 

the days when The Fair Accommodation Practices Act and the Fair Employment Acts were passed. Now 

to go back into history for a moment or two, Mr. Speaker, there are three Acts involved in this human 

rights legislation. One is called The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, another is called, The Fair 

Employment Practices Act and the third is The Bill of Rights. Now in the other two Acts the 

Government of the day, the gentlemen who now sit to your left, had a conciliation procedure and has a 

conciliation procedure, which is practically identical to the amendments which I am seeking to put into 

The Bill of Rights Act by this Bill. So all of the comments that the Member for Turtleford has made 

saying that he would feel much better if there was an independent commission, instead of putting power 

in the hands of the Attorney General and the Government, I wonder if he made those comments in the 

House at the time The Fair Accommodation Practices Act and The Fair Employment Practices Act were 

passed, because those same comments that he made tonight would have application at that time. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, we have this curious double standard, this different standard when the 

Members who sit now to your left had when they sat over here to your right. They thought that it was 

fine to give the Attorney General power at that time, but now that they are sitting over to your left, Mr. 

Speaker, they seem to have developed a curious lack of faith, not only in the integrity of the Government 

but in the 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

565 

integrity of the Attorney General. 

 

What I am doing by this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is putting the same mediation and conciliation procedure in 

the Bill of Rights that was in The Fair Accommodations Practices Act and The Fair Employment 

Practices Act. Nothing else. That is what I am doing. I am improving your legislation. 

 

The Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) of course, is back to the old business of cheese and chalk 

and apples and oranges if I may say so. In this debate you have injected the whole question of a human 

rights commission. Now that‘s fine! You had a Resolution last year and the Resolution was voted down. 

A human rights bill is a different thing. And about 75 per cent of your remarks this evening were in 

favor of a human rights commission. 

 

What we are talking about here is the way by which we can improve and strengthen the provisions of 

The Saskatchewan Bill of Rights Act. Let‘s look at the Bill if you will for a minute or two. ‗Officer‘ 

means the officer in the Public Service designated by the Attorney General to receive and to deal with 

complaints under this Act. Now this is not a temporary appointment. Under the other two Acts an Order 

in Council has been passed appointing a law officer in my Department to be the conciliation officer. He 

is not a temporary officer. He is a permanent officer. It was Mr. Holtzman when he was working for me 

as Executive Assistant and he is now the Legislative Counsel. The appointment, the Order in Council 

under the other two Acts appoints Mr. Gary Lane as the conciliation officer within the meaning of 

Section 2. The same procedure will be followed if this Bill becomes law. Mr. Lane will be appointed the 

conciliation officer with full authority to make full investigations and report to me. Hon. Members will 

know, pursuant to the provisions of one of the three Acts, The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, Mr. 

Lane has already been to North Battleford and has made a very expeditious investigation of the 

allegations of discrimination and is now in the process of having the evidence that he took up there 

transcribed, and he is going to be making a report to me. I will give this House this undertaking that, 

when the report is available to me, I will make the report public and I will lay it on the table of this 

House. I will do the same thing in respect to any investigations under this Act. So I don‘t know what the 

Hon. Member from Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) is complaining about, this business about saying that it 

is a weak piece of legislation. 

 

Here again, Mr. Speaker, we get to the double standards. If this is weak legislation amending the Bill of 

Rights Act, then the legislation which they passed when they were the Government of the day, by their 

own admission was weak and ineffective legislation. I don‘t think that‘s right. I think that it was good 

legislation. I think it was legislation which works. But somehow or another, this particular amendment, 

Mr. Speaker, which you had in the other two Acts, fell between the chairs when you passed the Bill or 

Rights Act. You had no teeth in the Bill of Rights Act, none at all. All you had was the ability to lay a 

charge and you all know that in this kind of legislation the laying of a charge is not always the best way 

with which to deal with the matter. 

 

So this is why we are asking for this same kind of legislation that you had in your other two Bills. We 

are asking that 



March 5, 1970 

 

566 

you pass the same kind of amendments for this Bill that puts us in the same position. We will be able to 

enforce this Act. We will be able to do a good job of enforcing this Act as we are enforcing the other 

two Acts. I commend it to all Hon. Members and I know that all Hon. Members over there are going to 

vote for this Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and Bill read a second time. 

 

YEAS — 54 

 

Thatcher Gallagher Wood 

Howes MacLennan Blakeney 

McFarlane Heggie Davies 

Boldt Breker Romanow 

Cameron Leith Dewhurst 

Steuart Radloff Meakes 

Heald Weatherald Smishek 

McIsaac Mitchell Thibault 

Guy Gardner Whelan 

Barrie Coupland Snyder 

Loken McPherson Michayluk 

MacDougall Charlebois Brockelbank 

Grant Forsyth Pepper 

Coderre McIvor Matsalla 

Larochelle Schmeiser Wooff 

MacDonald Lloyd Kwasnica 

Estey Bowerman Kowalchuk 

Hooker Messer Byers 

 

NAYS — 0 

 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Public Health Act 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend 

The Public Health Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, the most important provision of this Bill relates to the Northern 

Saskatchewan Administration Districts. As the Health Services Act and The Public Health Act now read 

it is not possible for a part of the Northern Saskatchewan Administration District to be part of a health 

region. 

 

There are various advantages to this being made possible. In the first place public health services can 

sometimes be provided more effectively from a nearby health region to a community in the southern part 

of the district, if it were considered to be part of the district for this purpose. 

 

Secondly, the Northern Administration District is part of the province and its residents should not be 

isolated from existing Provincial programs merely because it has a somewhat different form of 

organization. I would like to make it clear that, if one of these communities is added to an existing 

health region, my Department will make the necessary financial arrangements to ensure that insofar as 

public health costs are concerned there will be no cost to the community affected or to the balance of the 

region by reason of the addition being made. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

567 

Another amendment provides that where the Board of Health has abated a nuisance it may recover the 

cost of abating the nuisance from the owner of the land by adding the cost to the taxes on the land on 

which the nuisance was situated. This principle is already contained in similar provisions in the various 

municipal acts. 

 

You will also note, Mr. Speaker, that the definition of communicable disease and public eating 

establishments are being revised. The revision of the definition of communicable disease is being 

proposed to bring the definition in line with current thinking respecting diseases, while the definition of 

public eating establishments is being revised for the purpose of clarifying the meaning. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Health Services Act. 

 

Mr. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The 

Health Services Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, the provisions contained in this Bill are being proposed either for the 

purpose of enacting certain desirable authorization or for clarifying certain provisions. The same 

comments apply to this Act in connection with the Northern Saskatchewan Administration District and 

portions of that district to health regions, also the same confirmation that there will be no penalty or 

discontinuance of funds to those areas as a result of the change. 

 

In addition to this, between 1948 and April 1, 1969 public health research and study programs in this 

province were paid for by the Federal Government, with payments being initially made from a 

provincial government‘s advance account. No provision was made in the Government‘s Budget for these 

expenditures. As of April 1, 1969 provision for the initial payments and studies is contained in the 

Departmental sub-vote. It now appears that our legislative authority for making these payments is rather 

doubtful and an amendment is therefore being proposed to provide this authority. 

 

The Federal Government will continue to fully reimburse the Province in making these payments. It 

should also be noted that the Federal Government grant program for public health research will continue 

indefinitely; that is, it is not being phased out as is the case in certain other fields. 

 

Another amendment concerns broad authority on the Minister of Public Health to enter into agreement 

for a wide variety of purposes. This authorization is desirable from an administrative viewpoint. 

 

Another amendment relates to the Regional Board of a Health Region. It is a technical amendment and 

has no significance insofar as government policy is concerned. This amendment repeals subsection (3) 

of Section 6 and is intended merely to clarify the point beyond all doubt that in the field of public health 

the Regional Board of a Health Region has an advisory function only and is not empowered to take any 

action in its own right. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — A very brief comment, Mr. Speaker, directed to the 



March 5, 1970 

 

568 

Minister. I wonder whether the Minister would look into the matter, so that it might be referred to in 

Committee, of whether in his opinion the new Section 59 (a) allows him to enter into agreements with 

various organizations to exercise the powers which he now has, or whether, in fact, the Minister takes 

the view that this provision would enable him to enter into agreements to do things which are not now 

within the power of the Minister. Does this broaden the power of the Minister or merely provide a way 

of him exercising the powers which he now has in conjunction with, and by agreement with, a series of 

organizations? That is a point which I think might be better pursued in Committee. I will be supporting 

the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Vital Statistics Act 

 

Mr. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The 

Vital Statistics Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains only one amendment. The Vital Statistics Act 

requires a still birth as well as a live birth to be registered with our Division of Vital Statistics. A still 

birth is presently defined in the Act as the expulsion from the mother of a product of conception after at 

least 20 weeks of pregnancy where there is no sign of life. The practical difficulties that sometimes arise 

is that the period of pregnancy may not be known. In these cases the attending physician has often 

adopted a rule of deciding that there has been a still birth where the fetus weighs at least 500 grams. The 

proposed amendment therefore coincides with what can‘t be the existing practice. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to repeal The Pure Bred Sire Areas Act 

 

Hon. D. T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 7 — An Act to repeal 

The Pure Bred Sire Areas Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister‘s order prior to January 1964, establishing the Herd 

Law in certain Local Improvement districts based on petitions submitted by the Local Improvement 

Districts, was not registered in accordance with The Regulations Act. 

 

The amendment will establish the legality of Minister‘s orders dated prior to January 1, 1964 and 

thereby avoid the expense and inconvenience of re-petitioning these areas. The problem does concern 64 

townships in seven LIDs plus two areas in the Northern Administration district. 

 

Areas established since January 1, 1964 have been properly registered under The Regulations Act. 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Stray Animals Act 

 

Mr. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture) moved second reading of Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The 

Stray Animals Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. McFarlane: — Mr. Speaker, the repeal of this Act is recommended since it is believed that it 

is no longer consistent with present livestock management practices. Repeal of the Act is recommended 

because . . . 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

569 

An Hon. Member: — The Minister is on the . . . 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — This is the one that was called Bill No. 8. Oh, they called the other one first. 

 

I think I was confused, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — We have just passed Bill No. 7 – An Act to repeal The Pure Bred Sire Areas Act and 

we are now debating Bill No. 8 and that is An Act to amend The Stray Animals Act. Bill No. 7 has 

passed the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. McFarlane: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, it may be my mistake. I thought you had called that 

one first and that was the second reading I gave just previous. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — If someone would move second reading on The Stray Animals Act we might get 

through the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. McFarlane: — I will move second reading of Bill No. 8 – An Act to amend The Stray 

Animals Act. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I really don‘t want to prolong this argument but it appears that this has 

to do almost wholly with The Regulations Act rather than The Stray Animals Act. And the provision is 

that the orders under The Stray Animals Act will not be published. That is the net effect of it. I am sure 

that there are good reasons for this, but I would like the Minister when he closes the debate to indicate 

what there is about the orders under The Stray Animals Act which makes it inconvenient for them to be 

put into the Gazette. If they are going to govern people ordinarily they should be in the Gazette, but 

there may well be good reasons for not doing so and I would be interested in the reasons. 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — Well, the main reasons, Mr. Speaker, was that this was an oversight at the time The 

Regulations Act was drawn. And if they were to enforce the regulations now they would have to go back 

to the 64 townships, as I indicated earlier, and proclaim them all as herd law areas. By bringing in this 

amendment this would cover the foresight at that time and bring them under the regulations as spelled 

out in The Regulations Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 9 — An Act to 

amend The Municipal Employees‘ Superannuation Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, The Municipal Employees‘ Superannuation Act is really administered 

independent of government. It is administered by a board composed of the secretaries or representatives 

from the SARM, SUMA, the School Trustees Association and the rural telephone people. There is one 

Government representative on this board and the Government also supplies a small 



March 5, 1970 

 

570 

administrative staff in order to administer the Act. 

 

These amendments come as recommendations from the Board of The Municipal Employees‘ 

Superannuation Act. In the main they are dealing with clarification of the provisions of the Act. For 

example, one amendment clarifies the fact that additional contributions may be made to this fund by 

both the employer and the employee. The basic contribution is now a five per cent requirement. 

 

Another amendment, for example, clarifies the fact that an employee who has left the fund and received 

a refund, may pay that money at a subsequent date back to the fund and pick up his years of service. 

You will also note, Mr. Speaker, that in this Act there is a revision of the time of vesting. This provision 

has been put in by the Board in the hope that younger people can be attracted to this work by the 

attractiveness of the pension provision. 

 

There is another amendment which arose in a case last year where North Battleford disorganized its 

police force and the members of that force were members of this superannuation plan. At that time the 

Act, and as the Act stands to date, contemplates the disorganization of a municipal corporation. We are 

amending this Act to provide that, if this situation should happen again, that is where the police force is 

dissolved but not the municipal corporation, those members of the police force will have an opportunity 

either to transfer their interest including their vested interest to another pension plan or to have the 

privilege of having an annuity purchased for them on reaching 65 years of age. 

 

There is also another important amendment to this Act. As the Act now stands a person earning up to 

$750 may join the plan but once over $750 has to join the plan. In view of the self-employed pension 

plan permitted under the income tax laws of Canada, we have had occasion where very good secretaries 

of a village are fundamentally self-employed, but yet the village pays them over $750. Last year the 

income tax people, as they do every so often, had a project and their project was to go through returns to 

find out if anyone was under two employee pension plans. We found some people in the province who 

suffered because they had contributed to one of these self-employed pension funds and had to go into 

this plan. So we are now raising the $750 to $1,500 and saying that, if you are earning under $1,500, you 

may join the plan and if you are over you have to join the plan. We think that this will take out this 

rather incongruous situation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that is probably the main point in these amendments. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, I think that I would agree with the principle of 

this Bill. As I understand it, there is a body, a trustee body, for this Act. I understand that there are some 

nine members and that these represent the employees in two or three areas, plus the school trustees, the 

urban areas and one or two other bodies as well. My question, I think, now would be: have all of these 

amendments been placed before that body and discussed with them? 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

571 

question which has just been presented to the House and which I dealt with in my initial remarks, 

everyone of these amendments has come to the Department from the board in charge of this plan. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Community Planning Act 

 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 10 – An Act to amend The 

Community Planning Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this Act deals with amending The Community Planning Act. It is an 

attempt in some regard to clarify the provisions of the Act. These trailer parks and mobile homes have 

been giving some difficulty. Certain councils have doubted whether they have the power to regulate 

such parks and in our first amendment we are putting this power in the hands of the council. A second 

amendment to this Act deals with the question of notice prior to the passing of the zoning by-law. We 

have had some difficulty with the municipal corporation publishing a long list of addresses, and the 

person to know whether they are involved or not has to go all the way through these addresses. Often 

they have not the patience to do so. In an amendment we are giving the council power where it is not 

practical to publish a list of street addresses to designate the area concerned by a map and between 

certain streets or avenues and in such a manner, we hope, that notice will come to the attention of those 

involved in a more practical manner. 

 

Now there has since time in memorial been some difficulty in regard to a building which does not 

confirm to a zoning by-law but which was in existence at the time of the passing of the by-law. For 

example, a building may not conform to a by-law insofar as use is concerned but was in its location prior 

to the passing of the by-law. We have provided that, if a building is in such a position, that is, its use 

does not conform to the by-law that ―use‖ means the whole building, you can extend that use to the 

whole building. We are also providing in this amendment that, where land has been subdivided for 

residential purposes or a low density area and then is rezoned to a higher density, once it is rezoned to a 

higher density, there is a formula set out in the amendment which is applied to the area which must be 

given for public use, and, by public use I mean other than streets and lanes. If this is done in a built-up 

area we provide in this amendment that the developer requesting the change in the rezoning shall pay an 

amount equal in cash to the municipal body in order that the municipal body may purchase sufficient 

land in order to comply with the amendment. 

 

We have also provided an amendment in this situation which has arisen throughout the province. We 

have several areas in the province, Mr. Speaker, where cottages have been built, for instance, on what 

was formally farm land. The cottage owner cannot get title to the cottage site, therefore, he or she cannot 

deal with the cottage. The owner is not anxious to go to the expensive subdividing; the rural 

municipality does not want to get involved in an urban situation. This amendment provides in such 

circumstances the Minister may subdivide that area, charge the expense of subdivision to the 

municipality and the municipality can in turn collect the costs of that subdivision from the owner 

through the tax roll. I might say at this time that there will be one House amendment come in here, and I 

believe it is the last amendment in this Act, which gives to the Planning Commission authority to assess 

costs. There have 



March 5, 1970 

 

572 

been one or two cases in the past year, or three cases I believe in the past year, where an appeal was 

taken to the Planning Commission and once the Planning Commission got around to sitting, the parties 

did not appear. What we are attempting to do in the last amendment to this Act is, in such a situation, to 

give the Commission power to assess costs, and we will be limiting the amount of costs which can be 

assessed. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I have been following with a great deal of interest in 

what the Minister (Mr. Estey) had to say in regard to this Bill. I think in the most part we are prepared to 

go along with what he has to say concerning most of the amendments. I was especially interested in 

what he said regarding the last amendment. On the face of this it says that the appeal board now — if 

this amendment is passed — would have the right to charge for the costs of the hearing before the 

Provincial Planning Appeals Board. Hitherto, this has been paid for entirely by the Province. It says the 

costs would be picked up by the Provincial Government. I think that, as this stands here, this would act 

as a deterrent to the people bringing appeals before the Board. They might say, ―Well, we don‘t want to 

get involved in a lot of expensive litigation, we will let the thing go.‖ Now from what the Minister has 

just said — I don‘t think he was quite clear insofar as I‘m concerned — if he means that there will be a 

House amendment to this section to the effect that this will only apply if the parties do not appear, this 

would place a different complexion upon it. But coupled with another section in this Act which says that 

the fee accompanying the original appeal is going to be raised from $25 to $50, I think that this in itself 

would have a tendency to possibly deter appeals which would otherwise be made. Unless the Minister is 

prepared to make it clear that this Section 10 applies only to the cases where the applicants do not 

appear, I am afraid that I would have to oppose this Bill. 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Speaker, I think what the Member for Swift Current 

(Mr. Wood) has brought out makes good sense. What are we trying to do by raising the $25 for the first 

appeal to $50? I thought the Appeal Board was set up so that individuals should be able to appeal 

because there are times when councils are divided on issues with regard to the zoning or on matters of 

conformity. You are making it more prohibitive by raising it to $50. Most of these appeals come out of 

council for the first time, Mr. Minister? 

 

Mr. Estey: — Yes. 

 

Mr. Baker: — Well, I don‘t think we should raise this at all. We should make it much easier for the 

people to appeal because a lot of them that do go to the Appeal Board are cases dealing with individuals 

who haven‘t the means to expend this sort of money. It is really a protection as I see it for the public and 

I don‘t think we should make the appeal procedure prohibitive by increasing the fee. There are added 

assessed costs in case they have to go to the Provincial Appeals Board. This could be a very costly thing 

and it might be a very small item that could be assumed locally. I agree with the Member for Swift 

Current (Mr. Wood) and I would suggest that this be looked at again. Let‘s not try to out-charge people 

who really have a grievance. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

573 

In many instances council is unable to do anything about it because of the way The Community 

Planning Act is set up. I will oppose raising this to $50. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this Section which I apologize for not referring to in my opening remarks, 

which refers to increasing a fee from $25 to $50, refers to an appeal to the Zoning Appeal Board which 

is appointed by the council. We in the Department have received representations from urban centres in 

Saskatchewan, saying that the present $25 fee doesn‘t even cover the advertising, and I, as Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, am not prepared to say that the urban centres do not have to advertise. I don‘t think 

for one moment that, if what the city says is correct, they spend more than $25 on advertising. I think 

this is very vital work insofar as an individual is concerned and I do not think the $50 is out of line. I 

want to say that this amendment was put through due to representations received from urban centres in 

Saskatchewan, and I believe off hand Regina was one of them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, insofar as the last amendment is concerned, I am prepared . . . 

 

Mr. Baker: — On a point of privilege . . . 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, he . . . There is no privilege involved . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Now he is rising on a point of privilege and when a Member rises on a 

point of privilege he has to be heard. Now what is the point of privilege? 

 

Mr. Baker: — Make him sit down. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Now, order! Let me tell the Mayor for Regina, he doesn‘t tell anyone who to stand up 

and who to sit down. Now state your point of privilege. 

 

Mr. Baker: — Well all right, my point of privilege is this that Regina as far as I am concerned did not 

make representation to the Minister personally on any occasion, so he is giving this information here. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, order! Now that is not a point of privilege. That is just a point of interruption. 

 

Mr. Baker: — Well he said Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is just a debating point and it is a point of interruption and the Member shouldn‘t 

abuse the question of privilege by rising to interrupt people on a supposedly question of privilege. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, I have been called the equivalent of a liar and I ask that the Member 

withdraw. 



March 5, 1970 

 

574 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Baker: — Now let‘s not be simple about this. How simple can this man get, Mr. Minister? How 

simple can this man get? I don‘t remember using the word ‗liar‘, I didn‘t even infer that. All I am trying 

to do is bring out a point that he is making the city of Regina a liar, because we did not put this in as a 

motion from council and from me particularly. You have received nothing, in fact I‘d like to see you 

take the $25 off. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well to be honest, for the Member of the House, I didn‘t hear the word ‗liar‘ used. If it 

was, the record would show it if the Member wishes to pursue it further. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, insofar as this restriction on costs is concerned, I think that is a matter that 

can be dealt with in Committee and I have given the House assurance that there will be a restriction put 

in there. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Absentee Act 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The 

Absentee Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend The Absentee Act. As Hon. Members will 

recall The Absentee Act was passed by this House in 1969. The purpose of the Act was to ease the 

administering of estates of absent persons and to ease the tragic burdens on people who are left — 

relatives of these absent persons. I think I can say that the Act has been well received and the Act sets 

out the powers to act which were given to the judges of the Court of Queen‘s Bench. Now the judges of 

course are vitally concerned with the administration of the Act and, although there was no requirement 

of notice to be given to the official guardian if an infant was interested in an estate, the judges required 

such notice. The same rule applied if a lunatic or person of unsound mind was interested. These 

amendments merely ensure the Court‘s ability to require notice. Sub-clause (b) will extend the judge‘s 

discretion. The Bill also makes it clear that an interim order can be made. This will further serve, I think, 

to reduce hardship on the interested parties. Often an estate can tie up in administration for some time 

and this provision will ensure that the dependants will not suffer economic hardship unnecessarily. I 

urge all Hon. Members to support these amendments. 

 

I should make one comment. Hon. Members may wonder about the wording ―the age of 21 years‖ in the 

Bill in light of the expressed intention in the Speech from the Throne to reduce the age to 19 years. We 

propose to do this by The Coming of Age Act which will be introduced. It will amend this Act along 

with a large number of other Acts from 21 to 19 so that is why we are leaving it at 21 in here. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

575 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Criminal Injuries Compensation Act, 1967 

 

Mr. Heald moved second reading of Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Criminal Injuries 

Compensation Act, 1967. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, in 1967, this Assembly supported the belief that society should 

assume some of the loss suffered by persons who are the victims of crimes of violence whether or not 

fault can be established against the offender. The Government feels that The Criminal Injuries 

Compensation Act has served its very serious purposes extremely well. In 1967, I advised this House 

that Saskatchewan was the first jurisdiction in North America and only the third in the world to 

implement this far-reaching legislation. This House was also advised that there would probably be many 

problems arising out of the getting into operation of this kind of program. I think this is always 

inevitable when a new and a progressive program such as this is implemented and there really isn‘t 

much practical experience to draw upon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government‘s goal is to provide relief from economic hardship of the victims of crimes 

of violence, and the amendments that I am asking the House to consider this evening are designed to 

foster and expedite the reaching of this goal. Now the amendment to Section 11, for example, allows a 

less restrictive approach to expenses. Section 3 of the Bill amending Section 12 allows the Board to act 

without serving the accused. We have run into the problem several times where a criminal has 

disappeared after injuring a person in a crime. That person has had no recourse if the accused can‘t be 

found. Under the provisions of the Act, the accused really is not concerned until the Attorney General 

decides to attempt to recover some of the monies from him and of course the accused will be served at 

that time. 

 

Section 4, amending Section 15 (a) sets out alternative service provisions for persons under a legal 

disability and allows service on the administrator of estates, or parent, or guardian, or the official 

guardian, or the official administrator as the case may be. These amendments have been asked for by the 

members of the Board, particularly, Mr. Eremko, the chairman, as a result of things that have occurred 

in the administration thus far. 

 

Section 5 amending subsection (2) of Section 18 sets a time limit allowing the Board to act, if an appeal 

is not taken to the Supreme Court of Canada within 60 days of the last appeal. This is so that the 

applicant is not held up indefinitely. 

 

The amendment to Section 22, set out in Section 6 of the Bill, allows the Board to make payments to any 

person who made payments on behalf of the victim or applicant. This is so even if the payor would not 

be able to legally recover from the applicant or victim. For example, a gratuitous payment would be an 

example of that. 

 

Section 7 allows payment where the payor would have a legal right to recover from the victim or 

applicant. In the past the Board had no directions as to what it should consider in varying an order and 

Section 8 of this Bill corrects that omission. Section 9 clarifies the power to regulate the application 

forms. I think it is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that these amendments are designed to ease the burdens on the 

applicant and to ensure that he obtains compensation as soon as possible and to save people 



March 5, 1970 

 

576 

who assist the applicant from needless litigation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons I urge all Hon. Members to support this Bill to amend The Criminal 

Injuries Compensation Act, 1967. The amendments in a general way, I think, expand and improve the 

benefits payable under the Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Credit Union Act 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour) moved second reading of Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The 

Credit Union Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Coderre: — Mr. Speaker, after consultation with what was then the Credit Union League, the 

Credit Society or now jointly the Credit Society, these amendments are brought in with concurrence of 

both organizations. As you know each credit union is autonomous and determines its own rates of 

interest and rather than open The Credit Union Act every time that there is a need to change the interest 

rates and to set the ceiling, it was decided that it might be best that the ceilings to be established should 

be done so by Order in Council. This would then prevent that, if there was a sudden change in the 

maximums to be brought in, these changes wouldn‘t have to wait for the following year before the Act 

was open. The same section or subsection of that Section also is to clarify the problem which could arise 

respecting loans written on demand. Another section is merely to provide for allocations of reserves 

more directly related to the conditions of the outstanding loans that are possibly lost due to delinquency. 

Another section would provide the amalgamation of the League and Society which in fact has already 

taken place. 

 

Another Section 117 merely changes the basis of assessment for the mutual aid fund from 5 per cent of 

net surplus to 1/5 of 1 per cent of shares and deposits. The new basis will provide the same annual 

amount for the mutual aid fund. The last Section removes the ceiling on the funds so that it may reach an 

amount commensurate with the increased assets of credit unions. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I advise you that I do not propose to vote on this 

vote or on further votes with respect to this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Will I take the House . . . The Member is advising they are reverting this Bill. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have done some work that resulted in these Bills. I had charged some 

legal fees in respect thereof. I want no question to rise in anybody‘s mind with respect to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Well, I am sure the House will accept the Member‘s statement. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend The Radiological Health Act 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 14 — An Act to amend 

The Radiological Health Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, the most 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

577 

important amendments are related to the use of radioactive substances, that is radioactive isotopes. The 

Radiological Health Act provides for the registration of radiation equipment, that is equipment 

producing X-rays, and for various other matters related to the installation and use of such equipment. 

The Radiological Health Committee consists of highly qualified persons and advises the Department 

with respect to the educational measures to be taken in connection with the use of radiation equipment 

and other matters relating to administration of the Act. The Federal Atomic Energy Control provides for 

the licensing of the use of radioactive substances. Radioactive isotopes are used for medical purposes in 

this province primarily in the two cancer clinics. In addition there have been approximately 75 licences 

issued for the industrial use of radioactive isotopes in the province. The Atomic Energy Control Act 

does not contain any provisions for employees of the Federal Government to advise persons about the 

dangerous propensities of radioactive isotopes and their proper handling. Radioactive isotopes are 

potentially as dangerous as radiation equipment, and it is believed by the Radiological Health 

Committee that there is a real need for an educational program to be commenced in this province to 

assist technicians working with the radioactive isotopes. The Act is therefore being amended to 

authorize the Department‘s staff to provide consultative services in connection with the use of 

radioactive substances and to authorize an educational program to be conducted in connection with these 

substances. This program would function on the advice of the Radiological Health Committee. These 

amendments are being proposed with the unofficial concurrence of the senior officials of the Federal 

Department concerned with radiological health. 

 

Another amendment removes the requirements that persons under 18 years of age or known to be 

pregnant be prohibited being employed as occupational workers and in turn authorizes such a 

requirement to be contained in the regulations. It is believed that regulations providing in some detail for 

the protection of the health of these persons as X-ray technicians would be more effective than existing 

provisions of the Act. It should be noted that the regulations would be made governing the employment 

of females in the child-bearing age, while a provision being repealed prohibited the employment as 

occupational workers of persons known to be pregnant. This change of approach is consistent with 

current thinking in this regard. The actual wording was recommended by experts in the field. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 15 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act 

 

Mr. Grant moved second reading of Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains primarily three amendments. One of the 

amendments authorizes regulations to be made providing that the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 

Commission need not make payment for an insured service where the account for payment had not been 

submitted until after the expiry of a certain period following the provision of the services. This period 

would be specified in the regulations. For example, the regulation might state that the Commission need 

not make payment for an insured service where the account for payment for that service had not been 

submitted to the Commission for payment within the period of 12 months following the provision of the 

service. At the present time the Commission is 



March 5, 1970 

 

578 

legally required to favor all insured services received by beneficiaries without regard to the lateness of 

the date upon which the account for payment is submitted. Serious administrative difficulties arise 

because of changes in the medical fee schedules made from time to time. For example, an account for 

payment for services provided before August 1, 1968, is paid according to the 1959 schedule of fees. 

Accounts for all services provided before November 1, 1967, are paid at 85 per cent of the fee schedule, 

while the accounts for office, home and hospital visits provided between November 1, 1967 and August 

1, 1968, are paid at 95 per cent of the fee schedule. Accounts for payment for services provided after 

August 1, 1968, are paid according to the new centennial fee schedule of College. The Commission with 

some difficulty is able to pay these old accounts according to the fee schedule applicable when the 

service was provided. Most beneficiaries and most physicians being paid directly by the Commission 

submit their accounts promptly. However, in a few years after the service was provided. The processing 

of these accounts involves a high volume of administrative time and expense. It is believed that, if this 

amendment is enacted and the regulation made, it will expedite the submission of accounts by those 

persons who are ordinarily slow in doing so. Another amendment relates to the composition of the 

Commission. It is now stated in the Act that three of the members of the Commission shall be 

physicians, whose appointment had been agreed upon between the Lieutenant Governor in Council and 

the Council of the College of Physicians and Surgeons. An amendment provides that, where a period of 

three months has expired following the end of the term of office of the physician being replaced and the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council and the Council of the College had been unable to come to an 

agreement, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may appoint a physician without the agreement with the 

College being required to be made. This amendment is made in order to ensure that the membership of 

the Commission will remain at the intended level. It is not expected that this amendment will be applied 

since in the past there have not been any difficulties encountered in connection with the College and the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council coming to an agreement with respect to the appointment of these 

physicians as purely a safeguard. 

 

In addition to these amendments, a series of minor amendments are being made to Section 45. 

Subsection (2) of this Section in effect authorizes the Commission to reassess certain accounts for 

medical services for which payment had already been made and collect any sums that may be owing as a 

result of the reassessment. This reassessment is to be done with the concurrence of the Council of 

College. It is also provided that this reassessment procedure may be carried out within 12 months to 18 

months. Another amendment increases the percentage of interest payable against the unpaid balance for 

30 days that expires following notification to the person in debt of the fact that the reassessment had 

been made. The interest percentage is increased from seven per cent to nine per cent. Another 

amendment provides in effect that the other provisions of Section 45 do not apply in any case where a 

reassessment of an account is made merely for the sake of correcting an error. 

 

To summarize, Mr. Speaker, this Bill basically contains these three amendments. These amendments are 

intended to improve 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

579 

and facilitate the administrative procedure established under this Act and they have, therefore, been 

introduced for your favorable consideration. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to make some comments on this 

Bill. I want particularly to confine my comments to the new Section 14 (1) and to state that I disagree 

with this Section in the most emphatic term. This Section allows the whole Medical Care Insurance Plan 

to be very seriously undermined. Whether or not the Minister agrees or knows what it is doing, the facts 

are that this Section will enable the Medical Care Insurance Plan to be torpedoed. 

 

Now let me explain what this Section says. It says that where a doctor fails to submit his Bill in the 

period set out in the regulations the service covered by the Bill shall no longer be an insured service. I 

want you to listen to that. The Minister has said that the period set out in the regulations will be one 

year, but of course he could make it six months or indeed three months. I suggest to you that the Bill 

should not provide that the period should be any period specified in the regulations but, for the 

protection of physicians, ought to be, let us say, one year or such longer period as may be set out in the 

regulations. It seems to me that the physicians should have some basic period of protection against 

regulations made by the Crown. But that, Mr. Speaker, is a peripheral point to the basic point that I 

make. Suppose the Minister (Mr. Grant) says that the period is going to be six months and suppose a 

physician does not submit the bill in six months, what is the effect? The effect is that the physician is not 

paid by the Medical Care Insurance Commission or by the approved Health Agency, but the effect is 

that it is no longer an insured service and the physician can collect from the patient. See just how that 

will work. All the Minister needs to do is say that that period is one month, or two months, and then 

everybody who goes to a doctor in this province will no longer have any protection under the Medical 

Care Insurance Plan unless the physician submits the bill in one month or two months. It is quite 

intolerable, I suggest, Mr. Minister, for you to say that I can go to a doctor today and because my doctor 

does not send in the bill for 13 months then I must pay the doctor directly. That‘s what your bill says and 

I say that‘s intolerable. I should know when I go to the doctor whether or not I am insured, and my 

status as an insured person ought not to depend on whether or not a doctor submits an account six 

months, eight months or 12 months from now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — If the idea was that the doctor should have no right to recover, fine. I think it‘s pretty 

rough legislation but that at least would say something. But to remove it from the status of an insured 

service is to say that the patient must pay himself. It is wholly inconsistent with the set-up of The 

Medical Care Insurance Act to suggest that a patient could go to a doctor and believe that he is insured 

and, because the doctor is tardy in submitting the bill, the patient could be laying himself open to having 

to pay the full doctor‘s fee 15 months from now. I don‘t know whether the Minister (Mr. Grant) 

intended that, but if he did I suggest that it is a subterranean attack on the very basis of the Medical Care 

Insurance Plan. If 



March 5, 1970 

 

580 

he did not intend it, I suggest that he look at that clause again and remove any suggestion of fact that this 

service would not be an insured service and provide rather, if you wish, that the physician has no right to 

recover either from the patient or from the Plan. I think nothing less than that will give to the citizen the 

minimum protection which he now has and which he is entitled to continue to have under The Medical 

Care Insurance Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, because of other ramifications in this Bill 

and since we have not received the explanatory notes to date on this Bill, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Sewage Drainage Inquiry Act 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 16 — An Act to 

amend The Sewage Drainage Inquiry Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, the House will recall that at the last session of the Legislature we 

passed a Sewage Drainage Inquiry Act which Act was to apply primarily to lagoons; and the initial 

adjudicating body was the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission. There are now three cases before the 

Assessment Commission and in each case the party who has suffered the damage is represented by a 

solicitor and that person has received advice that their case should be heard before the Commission. It 

has been construed by some that a sewer that‘s backed up or a sewer that broke in an urban centre comes 

under this Sewage Drainage Act rather than under the normal section of the applicable Municipal Act. 

Of course this was never the intention. Now under this amendment we are attempting to clarify the fact 

that this Act has no connection whatever to a rupture in a sewer line or to anything relating to a sewage 

works. Members may recall that under The Sewage Drainage Inquiry Act, after you go to the 

Assessment Commission, you than have the right to go to a court of law if you are not satisfied with the 

adjudication or don‘t agree with it. There is a statutory limitation there. The statutory limitation for 

bringing an action for damages under the respective municipal act is one year. A year is nearly up in one 

or two of these cases. Now what we are proposing in the second amendment to this Act is to extend the 

time for the bringing of action to 90 days from assent being given to these amendments so that the 

parties will not be bound by the year‘s limitation which now appears in The Municipal Act. 

 

Mr. E.I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that when this Bill was first laid 

on my desk I was somewhat mystified but I think the Minister has given us a very satisfactory 

explanation and I‘m prepared to support it. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 

 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The 

Rural Municipality Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Estey: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

581 

deals with a few amendments to The Rural Municipality Act some of which might be considered 

housekeeping. One of such amendments deals with the responsibility of setting a nomination day when a 

vacancy occurs on the council between elections. This point was not clearly covered in the Act. We are 

now amending the Act to provide that it is the responsibility of the council to set the nomination day. 

We are also providing in the amendments to give the council the authority to vary the hour of the annual 

meeting, which for some reason has always been set out in the forms prescribed in the Act. In the past, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the present I might add, we have certain secretary treasurers who also act as 

managers or secretaries of credit unions and we have an excellent cooperation from the Credit Union of 

the Association of Saskatchewan in obtaining a list annually of people who act as credit union managers 

and secretary treasurers. What we are providing by this amendment is really a prohibition you might say 

to a secretary treasurer who is manager of a credit union depositing the monies of the RM of which he is 

secretary treasurer in that credit union. This was suggested to us I might say by the SARM. I am not 

saying that we had difficulty with this Section. We are merely putting into legislation a practice which 

does exist in cooperation with the Association of Credit Unions. It sometimes may present difficulties if 

you have an audit of the accounts of the rural municipality and the secretary treasurer of the RM is at the 

same time manager of the credit union in which RM funds are deposited. 

 

We are also providing in here that, if a piece of land has a great deal of tax arrears against it and the 

owner gives up and transfers it to the municipal body which is unable to sell that land for the tax arrears, 

that these arrears may be prorated under the provisions of The Tax Enforcement Act. 

 

We are also providing that sewer and water systems may be established in hamlets and dealt with as a 

normal local improvement. This provision in the past has applied to organized hamlets but not to 

hamlets. 

 

In The Rural Municipality Act there is a formula set out for the taxation of railway right-of-ways and 

gas and oil pipelines. We are now providing that the Section or subsections dealing with the taxation of 

railway right-of-ways and oil and gas pipelines be taken out of the Act and put into the taxation manual 

where you might say all of the other formulae dealing with taxation are located. I might say the gas and 

oil line provision in The Rural Municipality Act is now really out of date for all intents and purposes 

because it refers to taxation of pipelines in a right-of-way. We have now reached the position where 

there is no definition of right-of-way. Some companies have 150-foot right-of-ways, others have 50-foot 

right-of-ways, and under our Section, the way it is worded today, a company with a 150-foot right-of-

way would have a real tax benefit when it comes to further lines than a company having only for 

instance a 50-foot right-of-way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the other amendments to this Act may be regarded as housekeeping and could 

probably be dealt with better in Committee. 

 

Mr. Wood: — Mr. Speaker, I have gone through this Act as carefully as I can. I will say that the labors 

in this regard 



March 5, 1970 

 

582 

would have been quite a bit easier if we had of had a few notes accompanying the . . . 

 

Mr. Estey: — I apologize for that, Mr. Speaker, I understood there was . . . 

 

Mr. Wood: — We did go through it and I would like to say that I am quite in accord with the Sections 

of the Act the Minister has mentioned. However, I feel that a little attention should be drawn to a section 

that he didn‘t mention here and I think there is a principle involved here that is worthy of mention on 

this reading of the Bill. This is in regard to where a person is paying a portion of the taxes. Hitherto he 

had the privilege of saying that this could be applied to a certain parcel of land. This Section now says 

that it has to be applied to arrears. I think the problem could arise in this in regard to a person who 

endeavors to keep his home quarter at least paid up in order to qualify for the homeowner grant. But 

under this new legislation, even though his arrears were paid up on the home quarter, I believe the 

homeowner legislation says that he must pay an amount on this land equal to the amount of the current 

taxes, but, if he has his home quarter paid up and there is $195 in current taxes against it, and he comes 

in and wants to pay $200 which is equal to the current levy on this land, this money is not applied 

against that quarter but applied against some other quarter that the man owns, and he has not paid on that 

quarter section on which he is eligible for the homeowner grant. He has not complied with the 

homeowner legislation and I think this could have quite a bearing in that regard. I would just like to 

point this out to the House in passing. 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, I will certainly go into this section to which the Hon. Members has referred 

to determine if the effect of it is as has been stated. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 18 – An Act to amend The Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan Act, 1968 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Public Health) moved second reading of Bill No. 18 — An Act to amend 

The Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan Act, 1968. 

 

Hon. Mr. Grant: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is concerned exclusively with the non-medical use of drugs. 

One of the most serious trends that has taken place in our society in the last decade has been a sharp 

increase in the consumption of drugs for non-medical purposes. In the main the drugs being used have 

been the so-called soft drugs rather than the strongly addictive or the narcotic type. The soft drugs may 

be divided into three categories; those producing hallucinations such as LSD; those used as stimulants 

such as Methedrine or Benzedrine, sometimes called speed or benny pills; and those referred to as 

depressants, the barbiturates and tranquilizers. While these drugs are said not to be addictive a number 

of persons have used them at regular intervals with consequent damage to themselves both physically 

and mentally. While this problem is believed not to be particularly serious in this province compared to 

some other provinces, it is thought that some agency of Government should assume responsibility for 

conducting educational programs about the non-medical use of drugs and for organizing treatment that 

may 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

583 

be required by drug users. The Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan seems to be the most 

appropriate body to be assigned this function and for that reason this Bill has been prepared, conferring 

these powers on the Commission. It is expected that the treatment program will be of a rather modest 

proportion at the outset. However, the important point seems to be that a treatment program could be 

started for those who need it and the program could be enlarged should the drug problem become more 

serious in the future. 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, it doesn‘t happen too often, but occasionally 

the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) produces a good thought, and when this happens I almost feel obliged 

to offer some commendation in this connection. I think the provision which amend The Alcoholism 

Commission of Saskatchewan Act give some recognition to a problem that I think most Saskatchewan 

people recognize as a problem that is becoming one of some significant proportions in relation to drug 

addiction and other related matters. A reference to the treating and rehabilitating and the provision of 

other services I think has to represent a forward step for the problems of those who are addicted and 

dependent upon substances other than alcohol. The dissemination of information has to represent an 

important factor in educating especially our young people, in the very questionable practice of becoming 

involved in experimenting with these substances which have created a great many social problems in 

other parts of the world. We lend our support to these amendments, Mr. Speaker, and we trust also, Mr. 

Minister, that when Health Estimates are before us that there will be sufficient financial provisions in the 

estimates of the Minister to give some real meaning to the provisions that we have been discussing. I 

certainly will be happy to offer my support. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 19 — An Act to 

amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill to amend The Liquor Board Superannuation Act and the 

essence of the first amendment to this Act is to increase to $16,000 the salary on which an employee of 

the Board may contribute insofar as his pension is concerned. At the present time his ceiling on which a 

contribution may be made for pension rights is $11,500 a year. We have many senior people in the Civil 

Service and in boards such as the Liquor Board where their salaries have reached quite a high level, and 

they naturally are very interested in pension rights. Insofar as the second amendment to this Act is 

concerned, Mr. Speaker, it is merely housekeeping. It has been deemed that this Act was not clear as to 

the rights of a widow whose husband had taken a deferred pension and passed away prior to reaching the 

age of 65 years. There was some doubt as to whether a pension could be paid to the widow from the date 

of her husband‘s death. This procedure has been followed and the reason for the second amendment to 

The Liquor Board Superannuation Act is simply to clear this matter up. 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — Mr. Minister, just a question. What is the maximum 



March 5, 1970 

 

584 

pension under the various superannuation Acts that are paid? 

 

Mr. Estey; — The maximum pension once a salary reaches $16,000, 70 per cent of that amount 

providing there is 35 years of service, which amounts to $11,200. As of today on $11,500, I think it is 

$8,050, if someone just figures out 70 per cent of $11,500. 

 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Just in clarification to the Minister‘s answer, Mr. Speaker, I 

think the situation is this, Mr. Minister, and you can correct me if I am wrong in this assumption, it will 

take a period of some six years after May, 1970, before the maximum that could be received on the 

$16,000 contribution could be received. Is this not right? 

 

Mr. Estey: — Right, because the pension is based on the highest average six years‘ salary. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Superannuation Act 

 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The 

Power Corporation Superannuation Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, my former remarks also pertain to this Bill, and I would move that 

this Bill be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Workmen’s Compensation Board Superannuation Act 

 

Mr. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs) moved second reading of Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The 

Workmen‘s Compensation Board Superannuation Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill is an amendment to The Workmen‘s Compensation Board 

Superannuation Act and my previous remarks also apply to this Bill. 

 

Mr. Davies — Just a question to the Minister, Mr. Speaker. Do reports on The Workmen‘s 

Compensation Board Superannuation Act, the annual reports come to you on the annual experience and 

other questions that relate to it? 

 

Mr. Estey: — Mr. Speaker, I think I will have to call on the Minister in Charge of the Workmen‘s 

Compensation Board for the answer to that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — The report on The Workmen‘s Compensation Board 

Superannuation Act has been tabled in the Legislature. They are presented to the Minister from the 

Board. It was tabled I think about three or four days ago. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

585 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Securities Act, 1967 

 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The 

Securities Act, 1967. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, in 1967 this House passed a new Securities Act. It was designed to 

assist in obtaining uniformity in securities legislation throughout Canada. It was also designed to update 

the existing securities legislation. Mr. Speaker, the field of securities legislation is, I think, one of the 

most rapidly changing fields in Canadian government. It is the very heart of much of our business 

activity of course and the Government is constantly reviewing this securities legislation to ensure 

uniformity and also to ensure security and protection to the general public and to grant a stable climate 

for legitimate business. 

 

This Bill I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is a continuation of this program. The Bill will ensure that a person or a 

company who wishes to appeal from the decision of the chairman will not be penalized by delay in 

mailing of the decision to him. There was some suggestion that there was a bit of a problem here so we 

are trying to clear that. 

 

The Bill is designed to protect a person‘s or a company‘s right of appeal. The Bill will grant more 

discretion to the Commission in its deciding of what constitutes a primary distribution of securities, a 

little more flexibility here. If controls in the judgment of the Commission serve no useful purpose, then 

the Commission may exempt the trade from the definition of what constitutes a primary distribution. 

 

The Bill will allow companies or persons to use data processing techniques in confirmation receipts. 

This is simply an updating. These provisions will serve to ensure that the business community affected 

by The Securities Act can carry on business in an efficient and up-to-date manner. 

 

The proposed Bill will protect the average investor. The Bill provides for the control of finance 

companies. It will require full disclosure by finance companies making a primary distribution to the 

public of securities. If this full disclosure is not forthcoming the Commission will have the power to stop 

trading in these securities. Financial disclosure provisions are being made to apply to persons as well as 

companies, not just companies. Now there are some very important provisions in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

dealing with enforcement of The Securities Act. In this Act there are very strong and I think very 

effective penalty provisions, but we are adding procedures to ensure that the provisions of The Securities 

Act will be complied with. 

 

As the Act is now at the present time, if there is a violation of the Act — supposing somebody goes out 

and sells securities without having a prospectus qualified — there is a provision for penalties to be 

assessed at the present time. Under the Act as it now exists, if a provision of the Act is breached there is 

no power to enforce compliance with the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure Hon. Members that this will be rectified in this Bill now before the House. In 

other words there are going to be injunction or restraining procedure provisions by application to a 

Queen‘s Bench Judge. The Bill provides for temporary orders to compel compliance and I think 



March 5, 1970 

 

586 

this will enable the Commission to better protect the public interest. 

 

I think these provisions in the Bill are a further step in our program to ensure an orderly market and to 

provide the dissemination of complete information to the investor. I think the provisions will also ease 

internal administration in companies or with respect to persons registered for training in securities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would urge that all Members support the Bill because I think it does ensure an orderly 

market place for securities. 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I simply want to indicate that we will be 

supporting this Bill. I certainly welcome Sections 2 and 3 indicating that the time limits run from the 

time of the mailing of the decision and not the date of the decision. 

 

Our firm had the misfortune of going to the Court of Appeal unsuccessfully on that particular provision. 

 

The provisions with respect to finance companies are, in my view, worthy of support. One looks at 

provisions like 148 (a) and 148 (b). They are undoubtedly very onerous provisions which allow the 

Commission to suspend trading for 15 days on its own say so. But knowing the nature of the securities 

business and knowing that, if we do want an orderly market in securities, it is regrettably necessary to 

repose a very substantial amount of authority in public officers. I cannot object to these but only express 

the plea — that I know is not necessary — that the provisions not be used unless the proper authorities 

feel that it is absolutely necessary to use them. 

 

In short I agree with the summation of the Attorney General (Mr. Heald) and will join with him in 

asking Members to support the Bill. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Statutes Act 

 

Mr. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 24 — An Act to amend The Statutes 

Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, basically this Act now states that the date of assent or of signification 

by either the Governor General or Lieutenant Governor, as the case may be shall be the date of 

commencement of the Act, unless a later commencement is provided in the endorsement. 

 

There seems to be some doubt as to the effect of the word ―later‖ on retroactive legislation. To ensure 

clarification the words ―no other‖ are substituted for the word ―later.‖ Subsection (2) of Section 4 of The 

Statutes Act is therefore repealed and the substitution made as set out in the Bill before the House. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this is merely to clarify the situation with regard to retroactive legislation. I don‘t 

here hold any brief for retroactive legislation, but the Legislature has from time to time passed 

retroactive legislation in its wisdom or otherwise, and this amendment is simply a housekeeping 

amendment to ensure the efficacy or the legality of retroactive legislation. We don‘t say that it wasn‘t 

legal before, but the advice of my 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

587 

law officers is that this is a desirable amendment to remove any question with regard to statutes which 

do have retroactive effects. 

 

With that short explanation, it is a housekeeping amendment, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask Hon. 

Members to support it. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Exemptions Act 

 

Mr. Heald (Attorney General) moved second reading of Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The 

Exemptions Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Heald: — Mr. Speaker, The Exemptions Act has served an extremely valuable and necessary 

purpose in the history of our province. It protects debtors from harsh treatment by creditors and it 

ensures that at least a minimal amount of property will be free from seizure. The Bill before the House 

will serve to extend this protection. 

 

As a result of a legal decision in one of our courts in the province there is some considerable doubt 

whether the provisions of the Act apply to small businessmen, for example, truckers or small contractors 

and many other self-employed people. I think perhaps it was an oversight in the original drafting many, 

many years ago. 

 

On studying the provisions in other jurisdictions we noted that many other jurisdictions used the word 

―business‖ or ―trade‖ or ―calling‖ or ―trade, profession or occupation.‖ These words were designed to 

ensure that the self-employed along with the other people have the protection of the Act. 

 

Section 2 of the Bill ensures that the protection of The Exemptions Act applies to many of the self-

employed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a case in Moose Jaw within the last six or eight months where this whole 

question arose. 

 

The amendment as proposed in Section 3 of the Bill removes the protection for exempt goods purchased 

with a chattel mortgage as security, if the loan is granted under The Livestock Loans Guarantee Act, 

1970, which will be dealt with at this Session. There was a problem in that the lenders would not loan 

money for the purchase of livestock which would then be automatically exempt by reason of Section 2 

of The Exemptions Act. 

 

I feel certain, Mr. Speaker, that Hon. Members will support this amendment to ensure the protection and 

effectiveness of The Exemptions Act and that is what this Bill endeavors to do. I support you could say 

it does away with a weakness which became apparent through the decision of one of the courts of our 

province. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few very brief comments on this, but I would 

like not to make them at this time and therefore ask leave to adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 



March 5, 1970 

 

588 

Bill No. 26 — An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act 

 

Hon. J.R. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 26 – An Act to 

amend The Land Surveys Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Barrie: — Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Land Surveys Act was originally taken from the 

Dominion Land Surveys Act when the lands were transferred to the Provincial jurisdiction in 1931. 

Some of its provisions are no longer applicable and some of its procedures should be updated in view of 

advances in technology. Thus the proposed amendments are mainly in the nature of housekeeping 

changes. 

 

However, there is one major proposed change which would ease the problem of numerous duplicate 

monuments and would set one policy for the re-establishment of lost corner monumentation. The 

amendment will allow a surveyor to re-establish a lost corner in the most probable location from the best 

evidence obtainable by him and to perpetuate the lost corner by planting a monument of such a character 

and in such a manner as it prescribed for an original monumentation of a similar corner. 

 

A proposed amendment to Section 58 would permit water boundaries to be plotted from aerial 

photographs rather than the traveller‘s measurements. In certain cases such boundaries can be plotted 

more accurately and much more economically from aerial photographs. 

 

A new Section is proposed which would deal with control surveys. This Section will provide legislation 

to commence on the coordination of legal surveys which will result in greater efficiency and economy. 

The amendment provides that the Minister may enter into an agreement with a municipality for the 

purpose of providing survey control. This is the establishment of precise latitude and longitude for 

monumented points on the ground. Control points would be established at approximately a quarter-of-a-

mile spacing, so the land surveys can be coordinated to give a relocatable point with an accuracy of a 

couple of inches. 

 

Utilities and public improvements would be tied to this control network to allow easy location of 

underground utility lines and to prevent encroachments on private property. The coordination of 

Provincial and municipal efforts in this line would ensure maximum efficiency as well as a minimum 

duplication and minimum variation in standards resulting in very substantial economies for all parties 

involved. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The Forest Act 

 

Mr. Barrie (Minister of Natural Resources) moved second reading of Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The 

Forest Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Barrie: — The proposed amendments to The Forest Act are for the purpose of consolidating 

two current defined forest areas in the northern part of the province. It is proposed that the schedule to 

The Forest Act be amended by deletion of the Carrot River Provincial Forest area and including it in the 

Northern Provincial Forest, also including the addition of some 6½ townships of land in the Carrot River 

triangle area to the Northern Provincial Forest. This block of land is of limited use for agriculture but 

shows a good potential for forest production. 

 

In another proposed amendment a quarter section of land 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

589 

suitable for grazing would be deleted by the Department of Natural Resources from the Northern 

Provincial Forest in return for the administration of another quarter from the Department of Agriculture 

which is more suited to production of forest crops. This exchange, I might say, was agreed upon at the 

meeting of the Land Use Coordinating Committee. 

 

The amended schedule includes a full description of those lands inside the Northern Provincial Forest 

within the Carrot River triangle area which are still administered by the Provincial Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, the explanation of the Minister (Mr. Barrie) has 

laid some question in our minds with respect to that which is really being undertaken in this amendment. 

It would have been desirable, however, if we had the opportunity to have had some explanatory notes 

and to have as well had some outline of the Forest boundaries which will be changed as a result of this, 

but I would see no reason as a result of the explanation given by the Hon. Minister for not proceeding to 

move. 

 

Mr. Barrie: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker, for not having explanatory notes and maps which I hope we 

will have when the Bill goes into Committee, if not before. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Secondary Education Act 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend 

The Secondary Education Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, this Act contains several amendments to The Secondary Education 

Act. I believe they are quite straight forward and fairly easily understood. I will comment briefly on 

each of the amendments proposed here. 

 

Section 30: The new clause extends to some extent perhaps and prescribes in more detail the 

requirements on the school boards to furnish the Department with reports, returns, budget information, 

and so on. 

 

The next Section is a new clause that makes it legal for boards to take out insurance to cover costs 

incurred on account of teachers‘ illnesses. This will cover a provision that was incorporated into a 

teacher‘s salary agreement last year, I believe, in the Saskatoon area. It is an extension really of the sick 

leave provisions that have been here for many, many years. 

 

The next Section deals primarily with the fact that the present Act requires teachers to maintain registers 

as defined in the Act and in the Regulations. No other form of recording attendance is actually legal. 

With the development of the semester system and very large schools such a system is a little too rigid, 

and not necessarily always practical. It will allow and permit other forms of recording attendance on a 

class or on a classroom basis. 

 

The final Section is purely a housekeeping section, a change in reference number. 



March 5, 1970 

 

590 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister (Mr. McIsaac) has spent a little time on 

such an important Bill. His explanations make it appear as if there is not much to it. 

 

There are certain Sections of this Bill that I agree to but subsection (2) Mr. Speaker, is another one of 

these usual education Bills that this Government is famous for further eroding the autonomy of the 

school unit boards and other school boards to the point that all the major decisions and many minor ones 

are going to be made by Government officials. 

 

This Bill once again asks the local trustees to go hat-in-hand to the Government to explain all and 

sundry expenses. Mr. Speaker, many trustees take strong objections to that part of this Bill. As one 

trustee from my area said, ―I know how my fellow compatriot in the Ukraine must feel when cap-in-

hand he is summoned by the Russian commissar to Moscow to explain his extravagance in the use of his 

farm machinery.‖ 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Whoopee! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — I intend to have a lot more to say on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. It was a few days ago 

that this Bill was laid on the table and I and others on this side of the House will have more to say on 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The University Act 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Minister of Education) moved second reading of Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The 

University Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. McIsaac: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides amendments to The University Act and is 

legislation that was requested, approved by the Board of Governors and approved by the Senate of the 

University. 

 

The principal features again I think are straight forward and relatively simple. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Progressive! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — First of all to simply provide for membership on the University Senate by two students 

from each campus of the University, Regina Campus and the Saskatoon Campus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — I should like to hear Members opposite comment on this one. I am sure they will. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We did last year! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — To provide also that the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) may now become, among 

his other duties, a member of the Senate along with the Minister of Education. 



March 5, 1970 

 

 

591 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McIsaac: — Several provisions, Mr. Speaker, dealing with the internal realignment of functions of 

the general campus council and the campus councils of the University. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to mention I think they‘ve got the wrong Senate. 

 

Mr. H.H.P. Baker (Regina South East): — The best Member from Regina, Sir. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — On a point of order! 

 

Mr. Baker: — Well I want to refer to Section 78 in what you said everything was relatively simple. 

Section 78 in what you said was substituted by the following Section ―A campus council shall consist of 

the president‖ and so forth. Does that mean that you are going to give the Regina Campus a president 

through this amendment, Mr. Minister (Mr. McIsaac)? Will we get full autonomy here, with a vice-

president and principal and all other offices that go with it? This is a bit confusing to me and I would 

like an explanation as to what it means. 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — As the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) has said 

this is an Act which, if passed means that we will put the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) in the 

Senate of the University. I suspect that in a few years time another Act by somebody else will put the 

Provincial Treasurer in the Senate in another place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — And we will all look forward to that point and I am sure that he will enjoy that particular 

action when it takes place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education in introducing the Bill noted that this had been requested and 

approved by certain university authorities. I recall that a couple of years ago those same university 

authorities requested and approved certain other changes which I regret are not here. For example, they 

requested and approved a few years ago that members of the faculty be provided with positions on the 

Board of Governors. I think it is unfortunate that that year went past and another year went past and this 

year has gone past evidently without action being taken on this. I think it is unfortunate that there is not 

provision in this Act to allow for students on the Board of Governors, something we have proposed for a 

number of years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other remarks which I would like to make about the 

Bill and I would ask leave 



March 5, 1970 

 

592 

to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:55 o‘clock p.m. 


