



















































Hansard: March 30, 1970


1230 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

30th day 
 

Monday, March 30, 1970. 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I wish to introduce to the Legislature the following groups of students situated 

in the galleries: 91 students in the east gallery from Sherwood school in the constituency of Regina 

North West represented by Mr. Whelan, under the direction of Mr. Huber; 29 students in the west 

gallery from Peart school from the constituency of Regina South East represented by Mr. Baker, under 

the direction of Mr. Molder; 30 students in the Speaker’s gallery from Massey school in the constituency 

of Regina South represented by Mr. Grant, the Minister of Public Health, under the direction of Mrs. 

Muir; 60 students in the Speaker’s gallery from Davin school from the constituency of Regina South 

West represented by Mr. McPherson, under the direction of Mr. Wilson, and 29 students in the west 

gallery from Mount Royal Collegiate, Saskatoon represented by the Member for Mayfair, Mr. 

Brockelbank, under the direction of Miss Dianne Morris. On behalf of all Members of the Assembly I 

wish to extend a warm welcome to these students and hope they will find their stay here educational and 

enjoyable. We wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

DISCONTINUING AS LEADER OF NDP 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day may I ask 

your indulgence and that of my colleagues in the Legislature to make a somewhat longer than usual 

statement at this time and hope that you will see fit to see my through. 

 

I think many Members of the Legislature will know that in public and at various times during the last 

several years I have indicated my interests in discontinuing my responsibility as Leader of this party. 

Some three weeks ago I informed the president of our party that it was very unlikely that I would be 

prepared to stand for nomination at the next convention of our party when leaders are chosen. Later 

today our president will announce the date of an annual convention at which time my term of office as 

Leader will come officially to an end and at which time a new leader of our party will be selected. 

 

May I be allowed the privilege of some personal remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it is a moment which 

is obviously very important to me. I haven’t looked very far into the future. I believe in planning and my 

planning of this particular circumstance has been not to plan even though I have given very  



 

March 30, 1970 

 

 

1231 

considerable thought to it over the past three years. Having reached the ripe old age of 56 I really don’t 

intend to vegetate for the rest of my life and hopefully I will find something both useful and interesting 

to do. I’m not quite sure what my past experience fits me for, Mr. Speaker. My first job was on a farm. 

My specialty there was driving horses and milking cows and I understand that there isn’t much demand 

for people who can drive horses and milk cows. My second job was as a teacher. I dropped out about the 

time the new math hit grade seven. I’ve given up entirely since that point. I’m tempted to write a book 

but I don’t think I could afford the lawsuits which inevitably follow because I’d be writing about a lot of 

my colleagues. The last 26 years of my life for the most part have been centred around the space within 

about 100 yards of where we are now located, and my constituency. My office when I was Minister of 

Education was down this wing and my office as Provincial Treasurer was downstairs and my office 

when Premier was across there and my office as Leader of the Opposition has been across there. In 

addition to these offices, I’ve had contact with the Provincial Library, the Public Service Commission, 

the Power Corporation, the Archives Board, the Centre for Community Studies, the Research Council 

and a few others too numerous to mention. All of these I am glad to be able to say to this Legislature, 

and the people generally in this province, have been interesting and instructive and for the most part 

very highly satisfying. Some parts of it I could have lived without but that I think is the fate of anybody 

in any job. 

 

There are two kinds of associations in a sense. I’ve had the personal associations inside the Legislature 

and outside the Legislature without my own party and outside of my own party which I value very 

greatly. In addition to that I’ve had the opportunity of taking part in public business. Some of it I have 

been able to preside over; some I’ve just taken part in as one of the group. I trust that something of what 

I’ve been able to do, or to support, or to be part of, has in turn been built into some of the strengths and 

values of Saskatchewan life. 

 

My colleagues in the Legislature will know that I am a bit included to quoting and making use of 

philosophical statements. Indeed there are some who claim, and probably quite rightly, that I am too 

much inclined that way. But I read one just the other night which seemed to me to express the sort of 

concept to which I trust I have been able to measure up in some sense. The statement made by the great 

Albert Einstein: 

 

It is the duty of every man of good will to strive steadfastly in his own little world to make this 

teaching of a pure humanity a living force so far as he can. If he makes an honest attempt in this 

direction without being crushed and trampled under foot by his contemporaries, he can consider 

himself and the community to which he belongs lucky. 

 

I hope I can consider myself lucky in that sense. 

 

It is with great and very real and very personal regrets, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I will be severing in the 

near future my association with direct political life and with the life of this Legislature. But in the end 

there is a time to more and in my opinion for me that time is in the very near future. I leave with very 

great respect for the whole parliamentary process defined in a very broad and meaningful way. I do so 

even 



 

March 30, 1970 

 

 

1232 

when things don’t go as I hoped they might do and even at times when I think they go very badly. 

Sometimes they are slow and tedious and frustrating and even wasteful but the process is of great 

importance. 

 

Obviously I want to wish my colleagues very well in their important task of deciding who is to be the 

next Leader of this party. I want to wish this Legislature, regardless of who sits where, a maximum 

success in doing well those things which are worthwhile for our Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the members on both sides of the 

House have listened to the announcement of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) with keen 

interest. In think many of us on both sides of the House will rather regret his decision. The Leader of the 

Opposition has been elected and re-elected for a greater period of time than most of us. As everyone 

knows, frequently we have not agreed with each other. But may I also tell him that never at any time 

have I doubted his sincerity or goodwill. I believe that time and again he has acted in which he felt were 

the interests of the Province of Saskatchewan. With all politicians the time comes when we must make 

way for younger men I suppose. It takes courage to make that kind of a decision. I only say again in 

conclusion, that I think the Hon. Leader of the Opposition will be missed on both sides of the 

Legislature. I hope that no matter what his future may be, whether it is political or otherwise, that he will 

be spared to make a further contribution to the people of this province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, may I be permitted a short statement. I 

want to say that we in the party which I represent received the decision of our Leader with profound 

regret. He has borne the heavy burden of being a Cabinet Minister or a Leader of the Opposition 

continuously for in excess of 25 years. He has earned in our party and I think outside our party, both in 

and outside the Legislature, a measure of affection and respect which is the lot of few in politics to 

receive and even fewer to deserve. He has decided to lay down the burden of political leadership of our 

party, but he will continue to be the intellectual and moral leader of our party. In our view we could find 

no finer legislator or no finer gentleman to whom to accord our profound appreciation, our deep respect 

and our warm affection. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ROSETOWN REDWINGS WIN PROVINCIAL INTERMEDIATE “A” HOCKEY 

CHAMPIONSHIP 
 

Mr. G.F. Loken (Rosetown): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of the 

Members of this House that the community of Rosetown and the constituency of Rosetown is once again 

in the forefront of athletic achievement in Saskatchewan. The Rosetown Redwings won the Provincial 

Intermediate “A” Hockey Championship last weekend by defeating the Regina-Qu’Appelle Monarchs. 

They won this in three straight games. I hope that all the Members of the House will join with me in 

extending congratulations and best wishes for this fine hockey club. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 30, 1970 

 

 

1233 

TOP HONORS TO JOHN GRANT OF EDAM AT ABERDEEN ANGUS BULL SHOW 
 

Mr. D.W. Michayluk (Redberry): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, before the Orders of the Day it is with a 

great deal of pride and pleasure that I rise to bring to your attention, Sir, and to the Hon. Members of the 

Legislature that on Thursday, March 26th of the last week at the Regina Livestock Show and Winter 

Fair, Mr. John Grant of Edam, Saskatchewan, from the constituency of Redberry was awarded top 

honors at the Aberdeen Angus Bull Show. Early Sunset Bardoliermere won the top award as Grand and 

Senior Champion in his class and was sold for $3,650, the second highest price of the sale to Ervin 

Schenk of Petersborough, Ontario. This accomplishment and achievement by Mr. John Grant’s exhibit is 

but another credit to this distinguished registered livestock breeder. I am confidant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that all Hon. Members would want to wish Mr. Grant best wishes and success in his future endeavours. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

LONGSHOREMEN IN VANCOUVER 
 

Mr. J.D. Hooker (Notukeu-Willowbunch): — Mr. Deputy Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I 

would like to direct a question to the Premier and in doing do I am sorry that it is not congratulating 

anyone as the last two Members have had the opportunity to do so. But I would like to ask the Premier if 

he as the Premier of the Province of Saskatchewan and as the Leader of the Government of the Province 

will be protesting the fact that the longshoremen in Vancouver have walked off their jobs due to disputes 

over the disposition of the work gang. At this time with the details available I can only assume it to be 

an illegal walkout as the news is very sketchy. It only came over the 2 o’clock broadcast. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I only heard of the walkout a few moments before the House began its 

sitting, thus I haven’t had a chance to investigate. But, if it is true that there is another longshoremen 

strike, I’m sure most farmers will learn of the news with dismay. Because between now and the end of 

the crop year, every boxcar in the country is loaded as rapidly as possible, we will still probably only be 

able to get out four bushels to the acre. I think this strike emphasizes once again the havoc which these 

grainhandlers can wreak on the Saskatchewan farmer. It emphasizes again that consideration must be 

given by Ottawa to consider putting these grainhandlers under some kind of compulsory arbitration. I 

shall contact the Prime Minister as soon as I can get hold of him on the telephone or if not him the 

Minister of Labour. We will certainly speak on behalf of the Saskatchewan farmer and ask for some 

action in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

ADDITIONAL HOUSE SITTINGS 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, before I move the motion I think perhaps I 

should indicate to the House a word of explanation — I have 



 

March 30, 1970 

 

 

1234 

discussed this with the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd). I propose to move this motion which 

has to do with morning sittings and also with Wednesday night sittings. It is necessary that this motion 

be passed in order that we can sit Wednesday night. All Hon. Members will know that we had agreed to 

sit on Wednesday nights and His Honour the Lieutenant Governor is having his dinner on Thursday 

night, so insofar as the first paragraph of the motion is concerned I propose to move the motion, but I 

give the House an undertaking that we will not be sitting in the mornings while these committees are 

still in session. What I propose to do is tonight before 10 o’clock to make a motion which can be passed 

by leave that we sit tomorrow at 2 o’clock instead of 10 o’clock and I will do the same thing tomorrow 

night. With that explanation, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Education 

(Mr. McIsaac): 

 

That notwithstanding Standing Order 2, this Assembly shall, commencing Thursday, March 31, 

1970, meet at 10 o’clock a.m. each sitting day, and that there shall be a recess from 12:30 o’clock 

p.m. until 2:30 o’clock p.m.; and 

 

That on Wednesday, April 1, 1970, and on each Wednesday until the end of the Session, Standing 

Order 5 (2) be suspended so that the sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 7:30 o’clock 

p.m. until 10:00 o’clock p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


