



















































Hansard: March 26, 1970


1184 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

29th Day 
 

Thursday, March 26, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

TANNOY SYSTEM 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I want to draw the attention of all Members to the fact that our Tannoy System hasn’t 

been working too well over the last few days. It creates some problems in connection with transcribing 

the speeches. The technicians have worked on this for some considerable time, they are certainly doing 

their very best to make this system work correctly. I would ask all Hon. Members if they would try and 

speak as directly into their microphones as possible in order that, if there are any further problems in 

connection with the transcription, it would assist the girls at least in the Hansard office when they are 

typing out the speeches. I would also draw the attention of all Hon. Members to the fact that some of the 

speeches which will come back for correction may have, due to the fault in the Tannoy System, some 

blank spots, but you will have to correct them to the best of your ability. But I didn’t say you can rewrite 

them. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I wish to introduce to all Members of the Legislative Assembly the following groups 

of students situated in the galleries: 36 students from the Caroline Robins school in Saskatoon from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair represented by Mr. Brockelbank, under the direction of their 

teachers, Mrs. Hladay and Mr. Dyck; 27 students from the Hugh Cairns school, Saskatoon, in the 

constituency of Saskatoon Nutana Centre represented by Mr. Forsyth, under the direction of their 

teacher, Mr. E. Francis; 62 students from the Kinistino school from the constituency of Kinistino 

represented by Mr. Thibault; 74 students from Lyndale school in the constituency of Moose Jaw North 

represented by Mr. Snyder, under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Shorobach; 62 students from St. 

Paul’s separate school in the constituency of Prince Albert West represented by the Provincial Treasurer, 

Mr. Steuart, under the direction of Miss Haude; 32 students from Spalding school in the constituency of 

Humboldt represented by Mr. Breker. 

 

I am sure that all Members of the Legislative Assembly would wish to extend to these visitors in our 

galleries the warmest of all possible welcomes and express the very sincere wish they will find their stay 

here educational and enjoyable. We wish all of them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

STRATEGIC AIR COMMAND 
 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Before the Orders of the 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1185 

Day, Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a question to the Premier perhaps. Some two or three weeks 

ago there was an announcement in The Leader Post that the Strategic Air Command would be 

undertaking some air operations in Saskatchewan this summer. I understand from the notice that they 

would be flying directly north to Prince Albert to north of the National Park and then turning in a 

southwesterly direction to North Battleford. These aircraft will be flying at altitudes lower than 1,000 

feet; this means of course, Mr. Premier that they will be flying at altitudes at which non-commercial 

aircraft or commercial aircraft northern flying is usually done. I am wondering what announcement or 

what proclamations might be made to alert flyers particularly in my constituency in this regard. 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — I would point out to the Hon. Member that I did not make an 

announcement in this connection. The Hon. Member for The Battlefords (Mr. Kramer) asked me a 

question. I indicated that we had been notified by the Department of National Defence that these flights 

would be taking place. I am not aware of any details. I would be pleased to look into the matter. If I 

understand the question correctly, you would like us to notify the local flyers of the dangers involved. Is 

that what you want us to do? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — I have been contacted and I belong to a number of flying clubs in my particular 

constituency and in Prince Albert. There is concern expressed by pilots being instructed and flying at 

those altitudes which certainly creates a hazard in the air for training pilots. Perhaps all we can do is… 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — If I am correct they will we above these local flights. However I shall be pleased to 

look into the matter. 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — The Regina Leader Post, didn’t say that it was you that made the announcement. I 

read in The Leader Post that they would be flying at altitudes below 1,000 feet and in that range. This is 

the altitude at which training pilots fly. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I think that is not correct, but I’ll look into it. 

 

Mr. E Kramer (The Battlefords): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the Premier if he was apprised of 

this situation at the same time Federal MPs were in a similar letter. I know that a letter was sent to all the 

MPs of this area prior to the announcement that was supposed to have been made on April 19th. I would 

also like to inform the Premier that the information that I have received, I think it is authentic, that the 

whole design of this plan is low-level flying which would indicate that it will be less than 1,000 feet, Sir. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Defence, Mr. Speaker, is a matter of Federal jurisdiction, and really we haven’t much 

to say about it. We really have no responsibility for the flights. 

 

Mr. A. Mitchell (Bengough): — I am sure that all members 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1186 

who have licences in Canada are getting bulletins from the Department of Transport. I have already got 

notification of this six weeks ago, the exact route of the flight, the minimum in 800 feet. It is all marked 

on the map exactly what route these planes will follow and the times. 

 

STATEMENT 
 

EVICTION OF INDIANS AT NORTH BATTLEFORD BUS DEPOT 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I desire to make a statement if I might. On 

February 25, 1970, I received a written complaint of the infringement of a right established under the 

provisions of The Fair Accommodation Practices Act, all signatories were of Indian descent. The 

complaint was immediately investigated by Mr. J. Gary Lane, Crown Solicitor and Officer appointed 

under The Fair Accommodation Practices Act. The facts are as follows. All complainants were in the 

Bus Depot in the city of North Battleford on February 20, 1970; all were lawfully in the Bus Depot 

either by licence or with a lawful excuse; all complainants were evicted by reason of a rule hat people 

sitting in the depot had to have tickets. None of the complainants had tickets. This rule had not been 

communicated to the Indian community. The complainants were causing no trouble and were merely 

conversing among themselves while in the depot; all complainants were evicted after it was determined 

they had no tickets; only the complainants were asked if they had tickets; two white people seated in the 

depot were not asked if they had tickets. There were allegations of assault in the eviction process, but all 

were advised that the assault allegations were a matter of separate enquiry under the criminal law. These 

allegations — that’s the allegations of assault — were not made part of the terms of reference of the 

enquiry conducted by Mr. Lane. Findings: 1. There is no evidence of discrimination in the fact that only 

the complainants were asked for tickets. There was sufficient evidence to warrant the finding that the 

persons evicting knew the other persons had tickets and had no reason to ask them again. 2. There was 

no evidence that the rule that everyone has to have tickets was applied only against Indian people. There 

was no evidence of discrimination in instructions to evict given by the manageress. 

 

In summary my law officers felt that there was not sufficient evidence to warrant either a commission or 

charges of discrimination. However, the officer investigating felt that a lack of communication of the 

rules to the Indian people and the complete mishandling of matters led to the situation which 

embarrassed and embittered members of the Indian community. Some were put to additional time and 

expense because of the situation. The situation was unnecessary and it was recommended that those 

concerned with the operation of the depot meet immediately with leaders of the Indian community and 

Indian workers to explain the rules which apply to the operation of the depot. Mr. Speaker, I have 

instructed Mr. Lane to immediately convene a meeting between these people in line with his 

recommendations. 

 

REGINA WINTER FAIR BULL CHAMPIONS 
 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to make a 

comment which U think is fairly important. It 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1187 

is with pride that I want to make it known to this Legislature that at the Regina Winter Fair last night a 

constituent of mine from Lorelie, Saskatchewan, Mr. M. A. Dreger, Alf as called, a small farmer and 

one of the old pioneer families in the district, was awarded the honored position of winning the grand 

champion shorthorn bull, Pheasant Creek Leader 4th, which isn’t anything new for Alf Dreger. He won 

the grand champion award last year as well. It is also a pleasure and with pride that I wish this House to 

know that we have another winner from my constituency, in the Neudorf district, Mr. Philip Bender who 

won with Philford Valour, a bull judged junior and reserve grand champion. I want to add my 

congratulations to Mr. Dreger and Mr. Bender and I am sure that all of us here wish them many years of 

success in their purebred cattle ventures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

EVICTION OF INDIANS AT NORTH BATTLEFORD BUS DEPOT 
 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon-Riversdale): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might with the permission of 

the House just ay a few brief words as a result of the Hon. Attorney General’s statement on the findings 

of the incident at North Battleford. I want to say first of all that it is important to be reassured by the 

Hon. Attorney General that no acts of discrimination were found by his Department in the investigation. 

I also want to say very briefly that I have great reservations about the procedure in which this matter has 

been conducted in terms of an officer of any agency of the Government conducting an investigation on 

what I think is to be a valid consideration of human rights. I am sure Hon. Members and Mr. Speaker 

will understand and appreciate that we haven’t had an opportunity to examine the statement that the 

Hon. Attorney General has given to the House, I therefore would like to get a copy of it and peruse it 

and perhaps sometime later with leave make a further brief comment. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I wonder if I might 

take a brief moment to ask the House to record its sense of loss at the death during the last week of two 

distinguished psychiatrists in the persons of Dr. Sam Lawson and Dr. Griff McKerracher. They died in 

quick succession. They were architects and builders of the mental health plan that has gained world 

renown under the name of the Saskatchewan Plan. Dr. McKerracher was director of psychiatric services 

from roughly the mid 1940s to the mid 1950s. Under his guidance Saskatchewan became a world centre 

of innovation and experiment in the field of metal health treatment and research. Dr. Lawson succeeded 

Dr. McKerracher as director of psychiatric services. At the time of his death, Dr. Lawson has retired 

from the public service. Dr. McKerracher had left the public service to become the head of the 

Department of Psychiatry at the University of Saskatchewan, which post he held at the time of his death. 

I would ask the House to join in tendering our condolences to the bereaved and in recording our sense of 

appreciation to these pioneers in the field of mental health. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, I would like 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1188 

to join the Hon. Member in the expressions of sympathy. I was not too well acquainted with Dr. 

Lawson, but I knew Dr. McKerracher very intimately. The loss of these gentlemen is sincerely felt by all 

who were associated with them, particularly with Dr. McKerracher, because he was so closely involved 

with the program at the present time. It might say that the Department is giving consideration to making 

a recommendation to the Government to give some suitable recognition of the contributions these two 

gentlemen have made to the psychiatric services in this province. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 9 — SASKATOON MASTER AGENCY PLAN 
 

Mr. R. H. Wooff (Turtleford) moved, seconded by Mr. G. R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): 

 

That this Assembly deplores the continued stripping of rail and freight services from Saskatchewan 

communities as exemplified by the CNR’s proposed Saskatoon Master Agency Plan, and demands that 

the Canadian Railway Transport Commission, before acting on this plan, schedule a series of public 

hearings across Saskatchewan so that the protests of communities to be affected may be properly 

heard and considered. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, this motion dealing with the Saskatoon Master Agency Plan is one of those 

motions that deal wit some of the problems that affect the people of Saskatchewan in their daily 

enterprise and their daily living. 

 

I am going to be brief, Mr. Speaker, because I know that there are several other Members wishing to 

speak on the motion, so I am not going to take too much time of the House. I think that no better 

terminology could have been used than that of the motion, “The continued stripping of rail and freight 

services from Saskatchewan communities.” This has been and is taking place by rail abandonment, as 

well as the proposed Saskatoon Master Agency Plan. Mr. Speaker, railways were given and have 

continued to be given real concessions and subsidies in order that the residents of Canada might benefit 

from the railway services from coast to coast. I may not agree with the way in which payments or 

subsidies have been made from time to time, but paid the railways have been throughout the years of 

their operation. I am not suggesting either, Mr. Speaker, that time does not require change, change must 

and will come. I submit that change should come in a planned and a meaningful way rather than in an 

arbitrary capricious manner of profit-oriented operations. The railways have been paid from public 

revenues to a large extent to provide a public service and should not either feel free or be free to do just 

as they please. The SNR is presenting its master agency plan by phases 2, 3, and 4 — by the way, the 

same basis that we old threshermen used to feed the separator on days when the going was tough, a 

sheaf at a time, or something like the chap that chopped off the dog’s tail an inch at a time because he 

was afraid if he wacked it off all at once, the dog might bite him. Mr. Speaker, the Master Agency Plan 

when complete is going to strip the Saskatoon area to the bone so fair as station agents are concerned. In 

my opinion, it is only the forerunner of further abandonment and retreat by the 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1189 

railways. No matter what arguments are used, the outcome will be detrimental to rural Saskatchewan’s 

smaller centres and small town businesses and enterprises which in most cases represent a lifetime of 

work and investment. This alone, Mr. Speaker, spells ruin for hundreds of families. I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that the time for change and profit alone is not good enough. When Britain was, and for that 

matter still is, endeavoring to solve some of her like railway problems, a rather different approach was 

used. A survey was carried out and the report left no one in doubt that certain areas must continue to be 

served even if it meant subsidies. Here, Mr. Speaker, is an important factor that I don’t think we in 

Saskatchewan can ignore. 

 

As I have already pointed out the 2, 3 and 4 phase policy is calculated to lull some communities into a 

state of inactivities, because they are not immediately under the gun. I would just like to read to the 

House a list of those stations that come under the phase 2, 3 and 4. In this way you will get some idea of 

the coverage of northern Saskatchewan. Phase 2, these are the places that are under the gun — Avonlea, 

Central Butte, Northgate, Gravelbourg, Bengough, Ceylon, Riverhurst, Hodgeville, Willowbunch. These 

are the places that will probably remain open. It doesn’t say they will, there is no guarantee — North 

Regina, Radville, and Weyburn centres of this size. Phase 3 — those that are likely to be closed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Colgate? 

 

Mr. Wooff: — Application was made for Colgate. 

 

Big River, Debden, Canwood, Spiritwood, Shell Lake, Shellbrook, Birch Hills, Kinistino, Carrot River, 

Aylsham, Ridgedale, Star City, Arborfield, Zenon Park, Mistatim, Prairie River, Duck Lake, Hague, 

Meskanaw, Yellow Creek, Avonlea, Bjorkdale, Carragana and Weekes. Those are the ones that are for 

closure. Hose that may remain open; Crooked River, Cudworth, Melfort, Moose Jaw, Porcupine Plain, 

Prince Albert, Rosthern and Tisdale. Again I would remind you there is no guarantee on this 

 

Phase 4 — Frenchman Butte, Paradise Hill, Mervin, Edam, Meota, Glaslyn, Medstead, Rabbit Lake, 

Mayfair, Leask, Marcelin, Blaine Lake, Krydor, Hafford, Speers, St. Louis, Domremy, Aberdeen, 

Vonda, Davidson, Delisle, Fort Qu’Appelle, Kindersley, Humboldt, North Battleford, Radisson, 

Rosetown, St. Walburg, Turtleford, Saskatoon, Lake Lenore, Maymont, Borden, Langham, Brock, 

Fiske, Harris, Vanscoy, Dundurn, Hanley, Kenaston, Craik, Aylesbury, Chamberlain, Bethune, 

Lumsden, Vibank, Montmartre, Glenavon, Lebret, and Balcarres. 

 

If this is carried out, Mr. Speaker, there will only be Turtleford left between St. Walburg and North 

Battleford in my own home area. This means, Mr. Speaker, that you have got some 80 stations that are 

now under the gun by application being made. You have only 22 out of 102 that may remain open. 

 

I would like for us now to just turn briefly to the motion. The heart of the motion of course is the 

demand, the request that people in these communities, the ones affected, be given the change to voice 

their protests at properly conducted public hearings. Surely, Mr. Speaker, this is not too much to ask of 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1190 

a service supposedly owned and operated by all Canadians. 

 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, it is not my intention to deal at length with this 

Resolution. I d, however, want to emphasize the importance of the provisions of the Resolution to the 

rural people of Saskatchewan, and in particular to the smaller urban centres that serve the farming 

communities of this province. The Resolution is not adamant about the position of the railway closing 

certain of its stations or its agencies that have become obsolete or inefficient with the passage of time, 

nor does the Resolution presume the position that any or all stations should remain open or be closed. 

But it does, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, call upon the Canadian Transport Commission to hear the position 

of those most severely affected and consider those local situations. I suggest, Sir, that this position is 

indeed a valid one. Surely if we are to have public rail transportation facilities, that public company 

must accept some bad situations with the good. I view the Master Agency Plan as rail-line abandonment 

under a different name. It is the method by which the railway company hopes to get its foot in the door 

for the eventual total withdrawal of services without any rationalization of those services. 

 

One has only to take the provisions of the railway’s proposed program and superimpose it on a map of 

Saskatchewan and you can easily determine the results. Looking at the constituencies in the northwest of 

the Province, the program proposes to have one or two agencies from Price Albert west and northwest of 

the Alberta border. Surely, Mr. Speaker, much more consideration must be given to this tremendous 

railroad reduction plan than this unqualified acceptance of Eastern planners without providing any 

opportunity for those most directly affected to have some say in the matter. I can assure the railway 

officials that every board of trade, every rural municipality and town council in my constituency is 

vitally concerned over the announcement of this program. It is grossly unjust, and in deed it is 

inconceivable that such a major public service should ever consider curtailment of its program to the 

extent proposed without some public hearing. I suggested earlier that the public services of this nature 

must accept some bad with the good. Providing this were not so, we would have smaller urban and farm 

power grids or we wouldn’t have the smaller urban and farm power grids that we have today in this 

province. I suggest, as well, if we did not adhere to the principle that through this principle power lines 

running four or five miles to serve a single farmer would in the same light be abandoned. Some of the 

smaller northern communities such as Beauval or Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, only to mention a 

few, would be cut off and left without power or left to provide for themselves. 

 

I suppose that it is possible that they day will come when we can operate railways and industry without 

people. But the facts will still remain that the utilities, services, and industry must continue to operate for 

the benefit of people. Without such an objective industrial or technological developments become 

meaningless. 

 

At this stage of our industrial and technological progress I respectfully doubt whether our Canadian 

railway system can operative efficiently or effectively for people without their agencies and their 

stations, at least in most of the smaller thriving communities. It is only four short years ago, in 1966, 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1191 

that the railways were accounted as having lost wheat sales of 200 million bushels because they could 

not move grain at the pace that was required at that time. It hardly seems to be a responsible suggestion 

that they should now reduce their local agencies and personnel and hope to improve their efficiency in 

grain handling or public transport services of another nature. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I urge that we support this Resolution, which will require the Canadian National 

Railways to acknowledge the local communities and the problems that will arise as a direct result of 

their proposals. 

 

And I, Sir, am prepared to support that Resolution. 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support this Resolution I want to concur with 

what has been said by previous speakers. Rather than be repetitious I want to bring to the attention of the 

House a meeting that was held at Birch Hills on February 6, 1970. 

 

From this meeting came this resolution and it was sent out to the authorities that I will mention in the 

course of reading this Resolution. So in order to shorten the time that we want to spend in the House I 

will read this resolution and this will certainly express the feeling of the people in my constituency. 

Therefore, I cannot choose any better words than were chosen at that meeting. 

 

The meeting was attended by the town of Birch Hills, the town of Kinistino, the Chamber of Commerce 

of Kinistino, the Chamber of Commerce of Wakaw, the RM of Birch Hills, RM of Fish Creek, RM of 

Kinistino and the RM of St. Louis. I quote: 

 

Be it resolved that the after mentioned municipalities and other interested organizations present at 

the mass meeting at Birch Hills on February 6, 1970, go on record as unanimously opposing the 

Master Agency Plan as proposed by the Transport Commission for the following reasons: 

 

We believe that the recent CN policy referred to as a direct line service is a gross misrepresentation 

of the needs of the communities so affected in that. 1. The social impact on human resources is 

being completely misrepresented. 2. There will be no significant saving because of the effective 

shadow-type administration to replace the present system. And that in the next decade or two the 

policies of Government will be that of decentralization due to the fact that the cities will be unable 

to cope financially and socially with the problem of overcrowding. 3. The type of service proposed 

under the Master Agency Plan in our considered opinion will not give a very efficient and 

personalized service as we are accustomed to and believe is our right to expect. 4. We question the 

wisdom of the CN utilization of provincial highways as a substitute for the tracks, placing an 

additional burden on highways. 5. The creation of more employment in an already depressed 

economy. Saskatchewan stands to lose alone in the area of $1 million. Some employees will be laid 

off after having given 20 years or more of their lives to the 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1192 

service of the CN. These employees will be cut loose at an age in life when it is difficult for them to 

retrain their own secure employment in any field. 6. It is our contention that the track and the CN 

facilities will disintegrate with the withdrawal of local agents. 7. We have seen our local section 

crews disappear which the CN officials assured us they would replace with a more efficient and 

economic means. The results have proven in our estimation to be more costly and less efficient. 8. 

It is our understanding that in the early formative years of the railway grants and concessions were 

given to the railway to provide service to the people. We strongly protest a railway that is 

attempting to remove some of these services. 9. Removal of services which is contrary to the 

pioneer spirit of our Canadian West causes communities to die bit by bit and will in the end cause 

complete death. 10. We, therefore, request a public hearing in the immediate area of the 

undersigned municipality before the CN takes such drastic steps, as instituting the Master Agency 

Plan, which as said, vitally affect our communities. We can assure such a hearing that many more 

important points should be brought out and fully discussed before further thought is given to the 

implementation of the Master Agency Plan. 11. We strongly resent the fact that the CN states via 

news media that municipalities had already been informed and that this Plan was being instituted. 

Of our seven municipalities and three Chambers of Commerce present at this meeting, not one had 

been informed. Resolution passed unanimously and instruction issued to forward copies of this 

resolution to elected representatives of Government of Canada, Transportation Commission, and all 

municipal bodies concerned, this 6th day of February A.D. 1970. 

 

 Signed: A. C. Davis, Chairman, Birch Hills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what is said in this resolution clearly indicates the feelings of my people. It means 

that not a single station agent will be left in my constituency if this Plan is put through. I think that 

before such action is taken that the people of my constituency should be heard. So, therefore, in support 

of my people in my constituency I wish to table this resolution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I have listened with great interest to the speeches have 

already been made on this subject. As it seriously affects the constituency which I represent, I intend to 

have something to say about it. 

 

It will mean the loss of agents on four subs in the west central part of the province: the Conquest sub, the 

Beechy sub, the Elrose sub and the White Bear sub. If the Master Agency Plan goes through there will 

be a large station with about nine CNR employees at Eston and it is my understanding that there will be 

no other agency representation between Eston and Watrous. This is going to be a big change to the 

people that I represent. I think that we are going to have to really look at the implications of a Master 

Agency Plan, as put forward by the CNR. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1193 

It is interesting to note that there are 35 Master Agencies already operating in various regions in Canada. 

This CNR people came to several meetings that I attended in the Elrose area and said that so far the 

Master Agency has been working out well, as there are no serious complaints against the Master 

Agency. About 60 per cent of the people who will be laid off will be employed in other areas of railroad 

work. Many of them will be given early retirement with some benefits. I don’t intend to quarrel with that 

aspect of the situation but I do intend to have some more to say on it and I beg leave to adjourn the 

debate/. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 13 — ENACTMENT OF A NEW LANDLORD AND TENANT ACT 
 

Mr. R. Romanow (Saskatoon-Riversdale) moved, seconded by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): 

 

That the Legislature recommend to the consideration of the Government the enactment of a new 

Landlord and Tenant Act for residential premises which would incorporate inter alia the following 

principles, as more specifically set out in a draft Act tabled with this Resolution, namely: 

 

 1. The establishment of a Rent Review Board to protect tenants from unjustifiable rent; 

 

2. The establishment of a Landlord and Tenant Relations Board so that tenants could be recognized 

in appropriate units for purposes of bargaining collectively with landlords respecting all matters of 

their landlord and tenant relationship; 

 

 3. The limitation of use of security deposits; 

 

 4. The abolition of the right of distress for default of payment of rent; 

 
 5. The standardization of notices of termination or leases; 
 
 6. The right of entry to be guaranteed for candidates and agents seeking election to public office; 

 

And further, that the Legislature recommend to the Government the enactment of a standard lease 

form in the proposed new Landlord and Tenant Act. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure today to introduce this Resolution respecting landlords and 

tenants. 

 

I think all Members of the Legislative Assembly will agree with me that the incidence of 

apartment-living in the Province of Saskatchewan, indeed, throughout Canada, is sharply on the rise. My 

Resolution, with a draft Bill that I have taken the liberty of preparing and I will be tabling, attempts to 

deal with this new phenomenon, if you will, of increased apartment-living and with the type of problems 

that result with that type of relationship. 

 

I think a word or two must be said as to why we face the need to modernize our laws on landlords and 

tenants. The most 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1194 

distinctive fact about this relationship at present is the fact that it is brought on by an acute housing 

shortage in the Province of Saskatchewan, not so much in the last several months because of the 

economic crisis but up until the last several months and in Canada as well. 

 

The crisis in the housing shortage is the single greatest obstacle, I think, to economic and social stability 

and fair dealing when it comes to landlords and tenants. Housing is just not as available as it should be. 

The cost of obtaining a house is almost prohibitive now for the average person of Saskatchewan. The 

population is more mobile and thus, I think, exhibits a greater reluctance, even when houses are 

available, to reside permanently in a particular city or area. This problem of housing and the attitudes of 

our modern generation are going to continue and are going to increase The pressure will increase on the 

Provincial Government and the Federal Government to such a point that they will have to embark sooner 

or later on a revolutionary and new program with respect to housing and a new attitude with respect to 

landlord and tenant relationships. Unfortunately, I see no such hope from the gentlemen opposite and I 

see no sign of action with respect to either housing or the other aspects that I have talked about, from the 

Federal Liberals. 

 

Thus all factors indicate that this crisis is going to continue. There will be more tenants. There will be an 

increased demand for more apartments and with this, Mr. Speaker, there will be an increased urgency to 

update our laws governing the relationship between landlords and tenants. And it is with this light, with 

that background, that this Resolution I am offering with an attempt hopefully to offer some solution to 

the Members of this House. 

 

Before I go into a brief discussion about the Resolution and the draft Bill that I have prepared, some 

comment must be made about the present Landlord and Tenant Act in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

Does this Bill do the job? That Act is archaic and obsolete in almost every way. My Resolution deals 

primarily with apartments and I must emphasize not farm leases. We are just doing the residential 

leasing arrangement. I think it can be stated with certainty and with little fear of contradiction by the 

Hon. Attorney General (Mr. Heald) or lawyers and other persons who have had direct dealings with The 

Landlord and Tenant Act that the statement about this Act being as ancient as any Act in the Province of 

Saskatchewan will certainly be true. 

 

There has been no major revision of the Act for years. I have searched the statutes to determine if there 

had been any amendments respecting the Act and I think there have been from time to time. But with 

certainty I can say there has been no new thinking and no new look with respect to The Landlord and 

Tenant Act by this Province and by us as legislators of this province. 

 

That is a deplorable situation. We must not and we can not allow our laws, in any area, to become 

anachronistic and outdated as I think The Landlord and Tenant Act has become. We must be sure that 

our laws in all areas keep pace with modern economic and social relations and developments such as, 

what I say is the special economic and social relationship existing between landlord and tenant. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1195 

I don’t know how us a legislator in the province of Saskatchewan, deal with the entire problem of 

modernizing our laws. I think perhaps a vital and active and strong law reform commission is partly the 

answer. A law reform commission that is searching and examining into details all aspects of laws that 

are on our Statue Books. This hasn’t been done by this Government in the last five or six years, to my 

knowledge at any rate. The result has been that the laws in many areas have fallen into disrepair. I would 

commend a general observation, with respect to this Resolution and other aspects, that the Provincial 

Government considers implementation of a law reform commission to review and make suggestions for 

changes in all aspects of law in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, within this context, I now present this Resolution and, I repeat it is not the 

intention of the Resolution to deal with aspects such as farm leases. That is a special problem that I think 

will require special attention perhaps at a future session. I certainly intent to dedicate myself to looking 

at that aspect of it and putting forth a resolution soon, next session or earlier if possible, on that aspect of 

it. 

 

It is my hope that the Resolution that I have presented will come to grips with the problem of modern 

apartment-living. I want to emphasize that the draft Bill is not the answer. It is my own composition, 

with a little bit of help from Ontario which has only recently implemented some similar Acts in this 

regard, and from some readings that I have undertaken in this area However, I want to emphasize that I 

do think that the draft Bill that I am going to deal with is a good Bill and I do put it forward for the 

consideration of the Members. It would be a good start for this Legislature and we ought to now accept 

the principle of the Resolution and hopefully the principle of the draft Bill that is going to be tabled with 

it. 

 

Now what do this Resolution and Bill talk about? The major provisions are as follows: 1. The 

Resolution and the Bill attempt to recognize a brand new theory (perhaps legalistic, I don’t want to get 

overly legalistic in this area but I have to enunciate this a bit) a new theory behind landlord and tenant 

relationships. The present Act and the common law that interprets it view the law and the landlords and 

tenants in a purely mechanical way, that is to say that our present Landlord and Tenant Act defines the 

relationship in terms of mechanics — how a lease is terminated, how the lease is made and the like. But 

it does not make any conclusion about rights and duties and obligations in terms of the vital interests of 

each of the landlord and tenant. What the Resolution and the Bill do is to get the legislators to recognize 

the principle that the law in this area should be cognizant of vital interests — if you will, the theory of 

vital interests — the vital economic and social interests and relationships that exist between the landlord 

and tenant. 

 

As I have said, that economic and social interests is the theory of vital interests. It attempts to add to the 

economic relationship a new definition of social relationship between landlord and tenant. It is of utmost 

importance that we acknowledge the social interest of all parties because what we are talking about here 

is a way of life and the quality of life of a large and ever increasing group of people in the Province of 

Saskatchewan, namely the tenants. So that is the first aspect of the Resolution and of the proposed Bill. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1196 

Secondly, the Resolution talks of a landlord and tenant relations board, and certification — this will 

interest the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Coderre) because he is knowledgeable and interested in 

certification — certification of tenants so that they can deal in a collective bargaining manner with 

landlords to define their economic and social interest. I am excited about this idea of a landlord and 

tenant relations board. I visualize the board and this type of phenomenon arising in large multi-unit 

apartment blocks primarily in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina and perhaps in Prince Albert, Moose 

Jaw and other areas as they increase in our province. 

 

This concept would entitle the tenants to organize themselves into a tenant association, if you will, and 

through this association get some form of certification or legal sanctification from the board so that they 

could deal with the landlord on all matters respecting their relationship. I see two advantages to this 

idea. Firstly, the individual tenant, as the present law stands, is virtually powerless respecting the 

landlord. Often in these large complexes the landlord is some unidentifiable corporate body with large 

assets who has the distinct advantage, not only because of the nature of the being but because they deal 

individually with the people involved. If the landlord acts individually against the tenants, they are next 

to powerless. I think this concept of certification would give them protection in union. 

 

Secondly, an advantage of the certification principle would be of advantage not only the tenants but to 

the landlords. I think there would be a greater feeling or responsibility that each tenant and the entire 

association would accept in respect to one and the other and the landlord when it comes to the use of the 

building and the facilities. I think there would be a spirit of cooperation that would prevail with respect 

to the dealings of the tenants and the building concerned. But they are now interested not only in the 

small individual apartment but they are interested as much as the landlord is in making sure that the 

building isn’t going to fall into disrepair and into a run-down condition. 

 

I feel that this concept would result in a decreases in the type of activity that landlords so rightly and 

unfortunately, so frequently, complain about, the type of activity that results in deterioration of building 

causing disharmony and loss to all parties concerned. 

 

I could not think of a better name to call this board other than Landlord and Tenant Relations Board. I 

attempted to incorporate the features of our present Trade Union Act in the Province of Saskatchewan 

into the draft Bill in setting up the board. Some of the provisions there may not be fully applicable. I do 

say, as a brief word of explanation, that the board could be the arbiter of disputes between landlord and 

tenant. It could be expanded not only on certification but on arbitration of disputes between landlords 

and tenants. It could be the judge of allegations of unfair practices as between the parties concerned. 

And of course it would be the certifying body of the association and the building where the tenants 

decided voluntarily to so associate. It is necessary for the board to have legal teeth and power to enforce 

its rulings. I have incorporated strong penal provisions and this power in the proposed Bill in the hands 

of this board. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1197 

So to sum up, a framework of collective bargaining will help to serve all the various problems that are 

associated with landlords and tenants. It gives the tenant a direct say in the right of his dwelling house, 

the entire unit, and I think it is a great step forward to acknowledging the special social and economic 

relationship that I talked about earlier. 

 

Thirdly, the Resolution and the Bill urge this House to set up a rent review board. Individual 

municipalities could set up such rent review boards in their region to supervise and control rent 

increases. I am flexible in this suggestion. I think nothing really stands or falls whether it is done on a 

Provincial basis or on a regional basis. I like the concept of regional basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is an urgent need for public involvement and public control in the question of rent 

increases. The February 1970 Federal-Provincial Conference at Ottawa talked of rent control, Mr. 

Speaker, as a means of fighting inflation, talked of holding the line on rent increases. Prime Minister 

Pierre Elliot Trudeau talked — and there was considerable Press coverage — of the need for Provincial 

Governments to go back to their individual jurisdictions and implement laws and provide the facilities 

whereby there can be meaningful rent review and rent control. He said it should be done as a means of 

fighting inflation and I think that is important. But apart from that there should be an attempt to 

eliminate once and for all, in times of inflation or non-inflation, practices which cause unjustifiable, 

unfair and gouging rents that exist right here in the Province of Saskatchewan in the larger cities from 

time to time. 

 

When the housing shortage is particularly acute, landlords, it only stands to reason, will charge 

accordingly. This rent review board that I propose and advocate will not only concern itself with rent 

increases but also, as I have said, would go out and actively investigate and prosecute unfair rents even 

if they are too high now and forgetting about increases only in a period of inflation. Mr. Attorney 

General (Mr. Heald), this suggestion is one of consumer protection. We are now looking into ways and 

means to ensure that people who need money are not fleeced with high interest rates. There is no logic 

whatsoever why we should be concerned about legislation to protect consumers on high interest rates 

and not be concerned about the renter who is being fleeced by unfair and high rents. Those of us who are 

in need of accommodation would be victimized by unscrupulous landlords and it is time now that the 

public and the Government show their direct concern by setting up such a rent review board. 

 

Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, I propose in the Resolution and the Bill a standard lease form. I might add that I 

haven’t prepared the standard lease form for the consideration of the Members. It isn’t included in the 

Bill. A standard lease form I propose should use simple laymen’s language to define the rights of the 

tenant so that he knows clearly where he stands. Any variations in the standard lease would have to be 

indicated by special print, perhaps a distinguishing form or color or type, so that the tenants and the 

landlord know exactly what they are getting into when they sign the lease. We have often receive 

complaints, legally and in our positions as MLAs, about tenants who feel that they have been taken in by 

leases that perhaps in their own neglect they have not read as carefully as 

 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1198 

they should. Again, the odds are by and large with the landlord and there is very little equality in this 

area. 

 

I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that we do not have to wait for a new Landlord and Tenant Act to 

bring about a standard lease form for the protection of the renter now. We don’t have to wait. 

 

The Government and the Attorney General can introduce such an aspect that I think would be a 

progressive step with respect to consumer protection. I would commend the Hon. Attorney General (Mr. 

Heald) to this task as soon as possible. 

 

Fifthly, Mr. Speaker, I propose that the use of security deposits be greatly curtailed. There’s a variety of 

abuse in security deposits. Time and time again I am told by people who are renters who come in and 

say, “I have to move in three days’ time because I have been transferred in my job to Vancouver; I have 

to put down a $150 deposit with my landlord; he doesn’t want to give it back to be now because he says 

I have caused some damage in the building.” He is faced with a very difficult economic situation and a 

legal one. He either sues the landlord in lengthy and expensive and sometimes complicated law suits to 

try and recover the $150. He can’t do it if he has to go outside the province or if he has to move from 

city to city. This is an unfair situation with respect to the tenants. Personally I feel we ought to move to 

the day where deposits of all kinds will be totally abolished. 

 

There is no other area of abuse that is as evidence as this security deposit, whether it be damage or 

whatever other type of deposit. The landlord takes this amount and the tenant has very often lost it 

unfairly. Often it simply does not pay to go to course as I’ve said. There is no reason why the landlord 

should have any special privileges as compared to other persons. If the Minister of Labour owes me 

$150, I have to sue him in an ordinary court of law and obtain judgment and then pursue my ordinary 

remedies in the right way by garnishee and execution. Why should we have this outdated special 

privilege for landlords whereby he has this $150 right in his hand at the time. What makes him a special 

privileged citizen in our society when it comes to collecting a debt? In other areas of the law, this 

situation does not exist. I have tempered, however, my own personal views in this area when I came to 

preparing this Resolution and preparing the draft Bill because my seconder, my colleague from Regina, 

has had much practical experience in this matter and he has had much to say about the question of 

deposits. I think there is an argument that he will be advancing, I hope, in this area which has resulted in 

myself coming to the conclusion as far as this Resolution is concerned. We won’t, at least I won’t, 

advocate the total abolition. It is sufficient to say that this proposed Act and Resolution do call for the 

establishment and acceptance in principle of a drastic curtailment of the sue of security deposits as may 

be determined from time to time by this Landlord and Tenant Relations Board that I have talked about, 

or perhaps the Rent Review Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am now going to very briefly sum up some other provisions. The right of distress is 

abolished in the proposed amendment in the proposed Resolution and Bill. This means that the landlord 

will o longer be able to barge in and seize personal items of the tenant because of arrears of the renter 

around some make-believe concept of damage or otherwise. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1199 

If there is damage or if there is rent owing, the landlord, as I have said, has his legal recourse in the 

normal way to the courts of law, by proceeding by way of statement of claim and judgment, as we who 

have had occasion to deal with this matter know. Again, I say our distress places the landlord in a 

special position in our common law that just is not consistent with modern-day life. 

 

Another provision, Mr. Speaker, is the right of entry of the landlord being seriously curtailed to times of 

emergency and only after 24 hours’ notice is given to the tenant. Again, this underlines the special social 

relationship between the two, that for the tenant his apartment is his castle as much as for those who own 

houses, the home is his castle. There is not justifiable reason why any landlord should have the right to 

enter holus-bolus with respect to the tenant’s living accommodations. He would be subject to trespass 

and further action if he did it to our private homes. He ought to be so subjected to the responsibilities 

when it comes to the tenants living accommodation and his home. Again, to re-emphasize the theme of 

the Act and the theme of my remarks and the theme of the Resolution, this provision underlines the 

special social and economic relationship that I talked of. 

 

One other provision interests me, Mr. Speaker. That provision is to the benefit of a person who seeks 

public office. He has the right to enter into an apartment building to express his views. It is my 

contention that every person who seeks public office, whether it is a public office of dog catcher or a 

president or a prime minister or a premier, has the right to seek support for the public office by 

campaigning and canvassing tenants in apartment blocks. All MLAs, I am sure, have heard of instances 

where — I have had the personal experience — candidates for public office, for city elections or towns, 

or RMs or whatever the situation may arise when they present themselves to the apartment building., 

find that they are locked out by a mechanical device. There is no way they can get in to canvass the 50 

or 150 family units or however many units there happen to be. There can be no reason why the person 

who is making the sacrifice, concerned with the aspects that affect all of our lives, namely, democracy 

and the issues, why he shouldn’t have the right to step in and present himself at the door of the tenant. 

Let the tenant make the decision as to whether or not his views should be expressed to him. It is a 

question of whether or not a tenant wants to listen. When the Hon. Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) 

comes around canvassing for the Liberal party I wouldn’t blame the tenant if he said, No. That right lies 

especially and particularly on the tenant. It doesn’t lie with some corporate landlord or some other 

landlord who decides as a matter of politics or as a matter of ant other reason that he is going to take it 

upon himself to be the sole arbiter of 50 or more family units’ right to listen to a candidate. I’ve heard it 

told that far too often this entry has been denied. This Bill makes a special provision for that so that 

every person who seeks democratic office in our society will have his luck only determined by the 

tenant and that is the way it should be. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Members can peruse the Act for themselves which I would now like to take the 

liberty of tabling for consideration. I also have prepared additional copies for the individual Member’s 

consideration. I say again with respect to the Bill, it doesn’t have all the answer. It is my own 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1200 

composition with all of the weaknesses to it. I say this, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, we as MLAs are out 

of touch with the times by failing to improve this area of human relations. Ontario has set up an Act and 

to my knowledge is the only province that has done so. Every once in a while this Government opposite 

makes a rash political statement that it’s going to do something in this area, but like far too many other 

Liberal promises, it is forgotten as soon as it gets into power. Every once in a while I have heard the 

Hon. Attorney General tell a Liberal convention somewhere to satisfy the Liberals at the convention that 

there is going to be action on the Landlord and Tenant Act, and he does nothing about . Every once in a 

while I see some Liberal get on some television set trying to fool the people of the Province of 

Saskatchewan that there is going to be a Tenant Act, and he does nothing about it. Every once in a while 

the people are getting fed up with the promises of the Liberal party in this area and other promises that 

are coming too late and are not kept. I remember when I got up in this House, very early in the Session, 

and before the Orders of the Day at the notices of motion, I gave notice of my motion with respect to 

The Landlord and Tenant Act. I was confronted by the Hon. Premier and the Hon. Treasurer and the 

Hon. Attorney General that I was too late. The Hon. Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy) was in there 

also in the cacophony of sound saying that we were tool ate, that some Bill would be introduced. Here 

we are in the latter part of March and there is nothing before this House that is going to take remedial 

steps. They say we are too late. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and Members of the House, who is too late now 

when it comes to this question of landlord and tenant law. Where is the Bill that the Government is 

supposed to put forward? Well, I heard on television of couple of days ago that the Attorney General 

(Mr. Heald) said, “Not this session.” He hasn’t got time to try and sneak through another election before 

they make another promise about bringing in a Landlord and Tenant Act. I can say to the Hon. Attorney 

General and the Government concerned opposite, that if they are going to take that stand, when it comes 

around to cities, when they come around to campaigning with respect to tenants, they are going to be in 

for a rude awakening, like they are for all other aspects of this Government’s inactivity. In City 

Park-University, I can tell the Hon. Member that university students have got a crisis with respect to 

housing and apartments. They are more particularly vulnerable about landlord and tenant law than 

perhaps any other segment or factor of our society because they are there for a 4-month period. They are 

economically strapped. They have landlords who are taking advantage of them. They have been 

complaining to the Hon. Member for City Park-University (Mr. Charlebois) and they have certainly 

been complaining to me. Yet his Government does nothing for the university students in Regina and 

Saskatoon in this area. That’s a regrettable situation, Mr. Speaker, an absolutely intolerable position 

when it comes with respect to this Government. I receive letters, as the Hon. Attorney General does, and 

I know he does because there are carbon copies sent to me of the letters he gets, urging this House to get 

on with the job of passing a new Landlord and Tenant Act. Still no action. Six long, long years of 

Liberal rule in this province and no action, not even a Landlord and 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1201 

Tenant Act but in any other aspect of our society, all take but no action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all Members to vote for this Resolution, as I am sure they will, especially in the 

light of my non-partisan remarks. I invite the Hon. Attorney General to peruse the draft Bill, make 

changes, make criticisms, propose amendments and come down with a charter for tenant’s rights that is 

consistent with the 1970s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, in rising to support this motion and the draft 

Bill, it brings to my mind an experience I had with The Leasehold Regulation Act for a number of years, 

legislation which in effect controlled rentals in the relationship which existed between landlords and 

tenants. Mr. Speaker, during this period of time we ha a good deal of experience with The Landlord and 

Tenant Act as it is presently written. There was no doubt then that it was out of date; it needed 

redrafting. Provinces of Canada have begun studying The Landlord and Tenant Act in its present form. 

Ontario has just placed a new Landlord and Tenant Act on the Statute Books. I would suggest that all 

Members study the Ontario Act although it may be inadequate in some respects, because it does update 

and it does provide some of the principles called for in the Resolution on the Order Paper, that is, 

Resolution No. 13 moved by the Hon. Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). 

 

The old legislation made the landlord almost the custodian or the tenant in many respects. Sometimes he 

maintained an interest in the tenant’s ethnic background, religion and even his place of employment was 

deemed to be part of the landlord’s business. Landlords and tenants often begin as close friends and 

sometimes end up as feuding friends. There is fixed in my memory, Mr. Speaker, disputes we were 

called on to mediate when the Province controlled rentals. A number of them I quote to prove my point: 

case, Mr. Speaker, where two close friends, who had sat together in the House of Commons, built a 

duplex. One became a landlord and the other a tenant. The landlord and tenant arrangement lasted for 

one year. At the tend of that time they had gotten on one another’s nerves to such a degree that the 

landlord advised me that he couldn’t stand to have the tenant on the premises any longer. They parted as 

former friends when the lease was terminated. There was a case of a landlord who owned a number of 

homes. He would pick out an unsuspecting tenant and insist on reducing the rental for the entire home if 

the tenant would allow him on the premises. Every tenant who made this arrangement with him found it 

be foolish, found it to be a foolish and unbelievable mistake. No landlord or tenant legislation could 

have changed the personality of this owner of the premises who now became a tenant, a subtenant of the 

main tenant. He had a dozen peculiarities, each more irritating as the days went by. One of them was 

counting a pailful of money each night after the rest of the house had gone to sleep. It got to be a 

common remark at the Provincial Mediation Board when the rental was approved on one of his leases, 

when the lease was filed, the remark would be made, “How long will this tenant put up with him?” 

Sometimes it was three weeks, sometimes it was a month, never more than three months. The tenant’s 

wife would appear in a state of shock under the impression that no more 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1202 

irritating person was in existence and yet in some ways the man made a contribution to society. When he 

died he left a fortune to the churches and religious organizations in the city of Regina. 

 

There were landlords who were too kind; senior citizens who were landlords and depended on the rental 

in order to live, rental that wasn’t paid by an irresponsible tenant. There were tenants who paid their rent 

religiously and on time. There were tenants who looked after the premises diligently. There were tenants 

who never made any attempt to keep up the premises and who could and would do a thousand dollars’ 

worth of damage in a one-year period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Mediation Board or The Leasehold Regulation Act, which controlled rentals at that 

time, controlled services, notices, possession and all other aspects of the relationship which did or might 

exist between the landlord and tenant, served a real purpose. Mr. Speaker, this purpose is not in evidence 

anywhere in any legislation in existence and the need for this type of adjudication is very much in 

demand because of the inadequacies of the present Landlord and Tenant Act. From the outset, Mr. 

Speaker, let me be emphatic and clear in this respect. Most landlords, 95 per cent of them, are 

reasonable and live up to a contract, do not interfere with the tenant’s day-to-day existence, provide him 

with decent services, 95 per cent of the tenants too respect the landlord’s property, respect the same 

rights of other tenants, in an apartment for instance, the same duplex, the same fourplex, respect and 

keep in good condition the property they are using for a period of tie because they have paid a rental for 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are times when you will be confronted, if you are tenant, with the landlord who will 

include in his lease the right to increase rent by a one-month’s notice and will increase that rent in the 

winter when it is impossible for the tenant to seek other accommodations. Two years ago in February a 

landlord increased the rental on a number of accommodations in this city, some of them in my 

constituency, 25 per cent in one hike. Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of unjustifiable increase that no tax, 

no maintenance or other kind of costs can possibly explain. Mr. Speaker, this is just plain greed and 

there should be a method of appealing such an increase. There should be, as this Resolution suggests, a 

rental review board, a board that the landlord and tenant could appear before. The landlord should 

appear to justify his increases if the tenant appeals, if the tenant’s request for an adjudication to that 

board is made. This Resolution calls for the organization of a rent review board. This Resolution calls 

for the establishment of a landlord and tenant relations board. One board might serve to adjudicate in 

both instances. The boards might be under Provincial control, might be under local control, municipal 

control. There is at the present time a need for establishing rules and regulation regarding the tenant’s 

rights, for instance, to keep children on the premises; for a procedure set out in an Act adjudicated by 

this type of board in a new Landlord and Tenant Act and enforced by this board, a procedure that would 

establish a period of notice required, the type of notice required, the subletting rights regardless of 

whether there is a written lease. The board should have the right to hear disputes, disputes which are 

sometimes nothing more than clashes of personalities. The board should have the right to terminate a 

lease between a landlord and a tenant if they are 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1203 

not getting on together. The tenant and the landlord should be separated. If they are kept together it will 

produce nothing but ulcers and in some cases fisticuffs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole area of services: heat, liability protection, that is, insurance on the premises 

which are rented, particularly in an apartment block, the landlord’s obligation to decorate, the tenant’s 

right to have company on the premises, the tenant’s and landlord’s jurisdiction regarding deposits. These 

are areas which should be adjudicated or could be adjudicated. This board might well have the power to 

referee bargaining between tenants’ association and groups of landlords for overall increases for 

maintenance of service, for payment of deposits, for laundry facilities, for parking facilities, for car 

plug-ins and the like. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ontario Act which has been drafted recently says that these types of disputes should be 

taken to a judge. Mr. Speaker, I am completely opposed to this type of procedure. Landlords and tenants 

are reluctant to appear before a judge, cannot afford it, and a judge, unless he is a specialist in the field, 

is far removed from the realities of the landlord and tenant relationship. The new Landlord and Tenant 

Act in Ontario in this respect does not meet with my approval. It would only add more costs to both 

parties in dispute, would take too long to settle disputes or to decide on a termination date. The board 

that is suggested in this Resolution, with rental officers, would be more versatile, would be more 

practical and would solve more problems. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I turn for a moment to the limitation regarding security deposits. Security deposits 

when rental accommodation is scarce are often and have in the pat been used as just one more gimmick 

to get a little bit more rent. The new Landlord and Tenant Act, Mr. Speaker, should forbid postdating 

cheques for payment of rental, should restrict the payment of security deposits to one-half month’s rent 

unless the accommodation is furnished. In furnished accommodation were furniture and appliances are 

easily damaged by a tenant, the security deposit could be or might be one month’s rental amount. The 

whole area of furnished accommodation versus unfurnished accommodation in the area of deposits for 

security should be brought entirely within the new Landlord and Tenant Act jurisdiction. If the security 

deposit is held it should be placed in the hands of a neutral body, preferably the Landlord and Tenant 

Rental Relations Board, and if that is not the case, it should carry a payment of interest to the tenant 

when it is returned, on termination of the lease, if the deposit is in the hands of the landlord and he has 

the full use of the money. 

 

The rights of distress and its present enforcement leave much to be desired. The new Act that we are 

suggesting, Mr. Speaker, should set out a procedure where rent is recoverable but not a distress action, 

which at the present time humiliates the tenant, hold furniture which he needs to live, must have if he is 

going to live from day-to-day, prevents him from paying an obligation which may or may not be owing, 

but which has him at a disadvantage because his furnishings are being held. Mr. Speaker, many times in 

my experience, furnishing and property of a tenant have been held when in actual reality the rent was 

paid. The tabulations made by the landlord was inaccurate and the figures he used for distress were his 

own figures. In my estimation, Mr. Speaker, a landlord and tenants’ relation 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1204 

Board or review board could in most instances prevent distress by adjudicating to the satisfaction of both 

parties concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, may I turn to the types of notices that are required under law. In my experience I have seen 

notices that were three foolscap pages in length, and notices that were four words. The latter, Mr. 

Speaker, were written on a page of scribbler paper and spelled out in large block letters, “Get to H out.” 

There is a real need for standardization of leases, standardization of leases in a simple form that anyone, 

be he landlord or tenant, can easily understand without referring him to a lawyer. By providing a 

standard lease we could do away with many of the intricate legal documents that are floating around, 

documents that are never understood by either the landlord or the tenant… 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Or the lawyer. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — My hon. friend from Riversdale says, “Or the lawyer.” In election after election 

recently, Mr. Speaker, there have been disputes regarding a candidate’s access to rented premises. This 

has involved apartment blocks in most instances. But it could apply to duplexes or fourplexes or 

sixplexes. The principle is that of omitting or shutting out or not permitting or chasing off or refusing 

admission in a democratic country, Mr. Speaker. No candidate for any office should be denied access to 

the voters. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — That is a principle that has been in existence since the Industrial Revolution. All of us 

recall the factory-owned towns where the owner of the factory was the mayor of the town because only 

he had access to the voters. History documents the legislation that finally brought change for those who 

were held in political slavery by virtue of the fact that the mayor owned their homes. In today’s world, 

apartment block owners where there are hundreds of tenants have been known to bar the way to two 

candidates and allow a third on the premises. This was a direct interference with the right of the tenant to 

see every candidate. Mr. Speaker, the landlord’s case for preventing people on the premises, people who 

aggravated tenants, is trivial, unimportant, irrelevant, compared to the candidate’s responsibility to 

participate, to practise, and to function in a democratic country. No landlord, Mr. Speaker, should have 

the right to interfere with a candidate’s access to a voter. The new Act in Ontario recognizes this, 

provides a $1,000 fine to a violator. A new section, Section 93, in that Act reads as follows, and I call 

the attention of the Hon. Member or Regina South West (Mr. McPherson) to this clause of the Act. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A lot of money gone. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — $1,000. And this is what the Section says: 

 

No landlord or servant or agent of a landlord shall restrict reasonable access to rental premises by 

candidates or their authorized representatives for election to the House of Commons, the Legislative 

Assembly, any office in a municipal government or a school board, for the purpose 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1205 

of canvassing or distributing election material. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this section is crystal clear. In Ontario recommendations from a Legislative Committee 

wrote this section of the Act. The experience in that province has not been good, the experience in 

British Columbia has not been good. With the large number of apartment blocks being built in the main 

cities of Saskatchewan, with this situation, I submit that the introduction of this amendment in our 

province is necessary, is timely, and is in the best interest of democracy. 

 

If we are going to function as a democracy, if candidates are going to have access to every voter, if they 

are not going to be interfered with in their campaign for office in a democratic country, this section is 

absolutely essential in The Landlord and Tenant Act and should also be included in The Elections Act. 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that Ontario has adopted it, the fact that restriction of a candidate’s activities is 

recognized in both Ontario and British Columbia by several of the political parties as restrictions on the 

tenant’s right, the tenant’s right to see the candidate; in view of these circumstances, in view of this 

recognition, in view of the Ontario legislation, I am sure that every Member of this Legislature 

understands and appreciates and will support this type of amendment to the new Landlord and Tenant 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — In the drafting of forms of standard nature, whether they be for notice or for a lease, 

The Landlord and Tenant Act should spell out and include these standard forms in its written legislation. 

The present involved lengthy document that is presented to a tenant and signed by a landlord is often 

misunderstood, misinterpreted, and never removed from a file until a dispute arises. And at that stage 

lawyers interpret the contents of the lease. This is an unnecessary expense and an impractical way of 

establishing a relationship between a landlord and a tenant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Hon. Member for Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) for 

putting this Resolution on the Order Paper with the draft Bill. The need for the legislation is of 

paramount importance. The Landlord and Tenant Act has remained unchanged for so many years, it has 

proved so impractical that the Resolution was long overdue. The writing of the Act cannot wait any 

longer. It needs immediate attention. I urge all Members to support Resolution No. 13. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. R. Heggie (Hanley): — Mr. Speaker, there is good deal of what has been said by my hon. 

opponents in the Opposition about the need for overhaul of The Landlord and Tenant Act that is valid. 

In certain aspects of it, I most heartily agree. However, I do differ from my colleague on the other side 

from Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow), in that he gives the impression in his remarks that he starts 

from the premise that the landlord is always wrong and the tenant is always right. I was happy to note 

that the Member from Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1206 

Who appears to have a had a good deal of practical experience in administering The Leasehold 

Regulation Act, that he could see, to a much greater extent, both sides of the story, and that about as 

many tenants were in the wrong as landlords. Probably the growth of high-rise apartments and 

apartments generally in the last ten years has focused attention on some revision of The Landlord and 

Tenant Act. I couldn’t more heartily agree with my Hon. Members opposite that The Landlord and 

Tenant Act of this province — although I haven’t checked it out fully — is as old as the province and 

was adopted almost wholly from the old English Act which has served England and perhaps in the 

Territories for many years in the 19th century. However, it has worked very well in the majority of cases 

and I agree with the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) that it is only in about five per cent 

of the cases on both sides where some revision is necessary to define the rights and obligations. 

 

I think what the Member for Riversdale (Mr. Romanow) is trying to do — and I commend him for it — 

is to try to even up the process that is has been weighted a little bit heavily in a practical aspect on the 

side of the landlord. But I would like to remind him in his idealistic view that there are many landlords 

who are widows, senior citizens, and all sorts and manner of poor folk who depend on renting out a 

room, or renting out a small suite for part of their livelihood, and in many consideration of a new 

Landlord and Tenant Act, or a revision of the old one, these rights and obligations of the 

non-professional landlord must be taken into consideration. I think the main complaint is that the present 

Act doesn’t take into consideration the high-rise apartments where the problem presents something new 

in our way of life. I couldn’t more heartily agree that in any new legislation, and I am sure this 

legislation will be forthcoming at an early date. The overhaul of security deposits should get close 

scrutiny. 

 

I won’t comment anymore on the individual points in the Resolution because I have a good deal more to 

say about this at a later time and, therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn this debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 16 — BASIC HEARING AIDS TO BE INCLUDED 

IN SASKATCHEWAN MEDICAL INSURANCE PLAN 
 

Mr. G. T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North) moved, seconded by Mr. R. H. Wooff (Turtleford): 

 

That this Assembly recommends to the consideration of the Government that action be taken 

immediately to broaden the coverage of the Saskatchewan Medical Insurance Plan to include a basic 

hearing aid for the hard of hearing as prescribed by a medical practitioner. 

 

He said: This Resolution, Mr. Speaker, is similar in many respects to the one which I introduced to this 

Legislature a year ago, which was seconded by the Member for Turtleford (Mr. Wooff) who is to second 

my Resolution again this year. It is the hope of us on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and the hope 

of many more outside of these Chambers that the Government will 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1207 

give recognition to this medical problem which has more significance for the over 70 age-group than 

any other single category of people. 

 

Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, hearing loss is one of the penalties of growing old and as such the 

financial burden is one which descends on the vast majority of people at a time when their earning 

power is at its most restricted level, I am afraid. It is a time when they are struck with declining income 

in retirement years, when other sicknesses and physical disabilities are likely to occur. I don’t intent, Mr. 

Speaker, to repeat at great lengths arguments which I advanced a year ago. Members will recall that the 

Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) was the lone speaker I believe to enter the debate from the Government 

side of the House and after offering general agreement with the point of view expressed by the Member 

for Turtleford and myself, he amended the Resolution by wiping out the original intent and substituting 

therefor: “That this Assembly requests the Government when considering extensions of service under 

the Medical Insurance Act and having regard for other priorities, to consider also the inclusion of 

hearing aids as an insured service.” Well, Mr. Speaker, as time passes that amendment has a more and 

more ominous ring about it. To suggest that Government will keep hearing aids in mind when it 

considers extensions of service under MCIC is tantamount to saying that the issues is almost dead and 

forgotten I am afraid, if the Government’s record over the past number of years is to be a guide. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, this Government has devoted itself to removing benefits and restricting services rather than 

looking for ways to improve and upgrade the most important of all services that governments provide to 

our people. The only exception that I am able to recall, Mr. Speaker, was the addition of the services of 

an optometrist which was a requirement for Saskatchewan’s entry into the National Medical Care Plan, I 

understand, a plan which enriched our Provincial Treasury by around $14 million the very first year. 

Since that time in spite of cost sharing from Ottawa, deterrent charges have been imposed on hospital 

beds and doctor’s services, and the Plan has been eroded further, Mr. Speaker, by deterrent charges 

being levied for the services of a physiotherapist. 

 

Now, under these circumstances, Mr. Speaker, it appears that the Minister (Mr. Grant) in moving his 

amendment a year ago to consider hearing aids when consideration of extending other services under 

MCIC was being contemplated, quite carefully and quite deliberately placed the whole matter in never, 

never land. I sincerely hope, Mr. Speaker, that I am wrong in this assumption and that the Minister is 

giving more than just his fleeting attention to a matter which is of real importance and real significance 

to large numbers of Saskatchewan people and particularly to Saskatchewan’s senior citizens. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, if governments are to be responsible and respected by the electorate, it is 

necessary to define in precise terms the philosophy and the general intent with respect to services which 

are vital to all Saskatchewan citizens. The position of the New Democratic party is clear. I believe we 

have demonstrated by both words and action that we believe that the widest range of health services 

should be made available to all of our people at the most reasonable cost. The two decades between 

1944 and 1964 saw the evolvement of health regions in Saskatchewan; it saw the CCF government 

breathe the first breath of life into a cancer program which the former 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1208 

Liberal Government had paid tribute to by drafting legislation but failed to move when it was necessary 

to provide the necessary money to develop the program; it saw the development of a remarkable TB 

program, Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with the TB League and saw the development of a mental health 

program without its equal on the North American continent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Snyder: — In 1947, Mr. Speaker, hospital care became an insured service for every Saskatchewan 

citizen and it operated without a penny of assistance from Ottawa for 10 years. Then in 1962, we saw 

the introduction of a medical care plan which provided the Saskatchewan Liberal party with the 

opportunity to mount a campaign of fear and distortion, some of which had a very lasting flavor about it, 

and no doubt had a part to play in the defeat of our Government in 1964. But be that as it may, Mr. 

Speaker, you may be sure that regardless of the political consequences if we had that decision to make 

again, Members on this side of the House, and all members of our political party would assume the same 

position that our Government assumed in 1962. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in contrast to the development of health services under those CCF years, we have 

seen a retrenchment in services, we have seen a deliberate shift in cost to the individual which is well 

known to all Saskatchewan people. The hostility of this Government to public programs appears to be so 

deep and so ingrained that the Minister of Health couldn’t bear to see the new NDP Government in 

Manitoba under Premier Schreyer cut the per capita premium in half without registering his disapproval. 

The Moose Jaw Times Herald of September 6th, 1969 carries a news item which draws attention to 

Health Minister Grant’s criticism of the Manitoba Government in reducing the combined premium for 

hospitalisation and medical care to $99.60 from a high of $204 for a family, and reducing it to $49.80 

from $102 for a single person. The article quotes Saskatchewan’s Health Minister as saying: 

 

It seems to be unrealistic to shift a larger amount of the cost to some other sector of the population or 

simply bury still more of the cost of these health services in the general tax levy. 

 

But what is the Health Minister really saying, Mr. Speaker? I suggest that this single statement alone 

says volumes about the principles and philosophies of the Government opposite. It is well known that 

personal premiums in Saskatchewan represent only about 20 per cent of the cost of providing these 

services. The remaining dollars necessary to finance the plan are gathered from tax sources which 

generally bear a greater relationship to the ability of the individual to pay for these services. It has been 

our position consistently, Mr. Speaker, that this is a principle which should and must be recognized. The 

Minister’s criticisms of the actions of the Manitoba Government in cutting the premium in half indicates 

that his Government favors a much higher personal premium. Without doubt political considerations 

alone are responsible for the Government’s hesitation in heaping more of the cost of hospital and 

medical services upon the shoulders of the individual. I am sincerely hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Minister of Health may have undergone some metamorphosis and that his change in character may 

allow him to 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1209 

look more seriously at this Resolution than was the case a year ago. 

 

When I was in the British Isles with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association’s course last spring, 

I visited the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast in May. I made it a particular point to spend some time 

with the technician who performs the tests and issues the heat aids to patients who are referred to him by 

a medical practitioner. The Minister of Health indicated when he spoke a year ago on the hearing aid 

debate that he had ordered a hearing aid from overseas and that it has cost him $33 for a single model. I 

am sure that it will be welcome news to hear that the cost to the hospital in Belfast, Northern Ireland, for 

the basic Medresco hearing aid was ten pounds or approximately $26. So it appears that inflation and 

profits have not played a very large part in the operation at least in that part of the world. The unit in 

England, Northern Ireland and on the Isle of Man is provided free of cost to the individual and its repairs 

and batteries are also supplied free of cost. 

 

It will be remembered, Mr. Speaker, that a similar resolution to the one under discussion brought a reply 

from the Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Association and the matter was debated on the floor of this 

Legislature last session. At that time a representative of the Association claimed that prices were indeed 

not excessive and to quote the statement by the Secretary Treasurer of that Association in the Leader 

Post a year ago: 

 

In a free competitive economy competition regulates prices. If one company attempts to charge its 

customers excessive prices, others can take away the business with lower prices. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I hardly think it is necessary in these days of administered prices to point out to 

Members of this House the faulty reasoning that is involved in this basic premise. It has been 

demonstrated time after time, Mr. Speaker, in the case of farm machinery and in the case of 

automobiles, or in the competitive soap and detergent industry that competition and supply and demand 

in the standard free-enterprise jargon have really no bearing upon the cost of consumer products. In the 

final analysis, Mr. Speaker, the customer has little or no bargaining power in the market-place. 

 

Just a brief reference, Mr. Speaker, to the British Columbia survey of 1966 into the hearing aid industry 

which showed that among five different firms a retail markup of from 49 to 306 per cent for the least 

expensive hearing aid was common. It showed that for the most expensive hearing aid the same five 

firms showed markups of from 97 per cent to 278 per cent. In the great majority of cases the markup 

was from 200 per cent to 300 per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, without belabouring the matter it seems 

reasonable to expect that we could very well draw upon the experiences of others. In Great Britain the 

cost of the basic Madresco hearing aid is about one-tenth the cost of those being sold commercially. By 

bulk ordering of common essentials and by cutting out unnecessary retail profit margins very substantial 

economies have been realised. 

 

With these facts in mind, Mr. Speaker, and remembering the additional costs that have been levied on 

the senior citizens by the Government opposite in recent years I hope that the 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1210 

Minister of Health will lend his support to this very important Resolution and translate the intent of the 

motion into action very shortly. 

 

Mr. R. H. Wooff (Turtleford): — Mr. Speaker, some of what I am about to say may sound a little 

repetitious from a year ago, but the problem of defective hearing is still with us and from the standpoint 

of both the number of people affected and the cost of hearing aids it has grown even worse. Perhaps 

many of us do not readily realize that noise pollution in our modern society is continually increasing and 

the number of people who find their hearing damaged are increasing correspondingly. It is not 

necessarily any particular age group although quite naturally the largest number are among those who 

are in their latter years and those who are constantly working with noisy equipment such as pneumatic 

hammers, riveters and a farmer with tractors and what have you. One could include in this day both TV 

and radio, especially when the advertisers start to shout. Because of the rise in the incidence of those 

afflicted more money is being spent year by year by haring aid equipment, a great deal of this by people 

who have real difficulty in just living from day to day. As I pointed out a year ago too many people 

seeking hearing aids have too little independent information at hand as to the quality obtainable at given 

prices. I think this problem still prevails. Again I am speaking of information that should be available to 

those needing aid quite independent of the companies that manufacture and sell the equipment. The 

House may recall I pointed out an aid I had purchased here in Regina in 1966 along with the ear fitting 

cost me $340. I priced these aids just the other day and I find an aid such as this is still $325 but the 

newer model is up to $350. I also find that this little plastic ear fitting molded to the individual’s ear has 

gone up 25 per cent. I don’t know whether you can see it across the floor of the House or not, but I paid 

$12 for this one and the price I received the other day on the same fitting is not $15. So this gives you 

some idea of the problems that many of our senior citizens are faced with at today’s prices. The only 

reason for this ridiculous situation, that is the cost between here and Great Britain, and incidentally this 

particular model sells for half that price in Britain after paying the shipping costs. The only reason that 

there is this difference, Mr. Speaker, is, as my colleague has pointed out, hearing aids in Great Britain 

are received under the Health Plan. True, the aids that are procured through the Health Plan are not the 

sophisticated models that we see among the more affluent of our population, but from the standpoint of 

performance they are just as good, or in many cases, even better. In today’s economy thousands of 

people have no choice between $140 to $700 models. It is a case of the cheapest they can get that gives 

any kind of performance, and this, Mr. Speaker, leaves them in a real need of assistance. 

 

I take great pleasure in seconding the motion of my colleague from Moose Jaw North (Mr. Snyder) 

requesting coverage under the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Plan to include a basic hearing aid 

model as prescribed by a medical practitioner. Such a service, Mr. Speaker, must and will eventually 

come. The pity is that many in the eventide of life need the service not tomorrow but today and find no 

relief for this difficulty and this cost squeeze that they are in. Surely, Mr. Speaker, out of a more than 

$400 million Budget some help could be given many of these people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1211 

 

 

Debate adjourned on the motion of Mr. Forsyth. 

 

MOTIONS 
 

HOUSE ADJOURNMENT 
 

Hon. D.V. Heald: (Attorney General) moved, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Thatcher: 

 

That when this House adjourns on Thursday, March 26, 1970, it do stand adjourned until Monday, 

March 30, 1970. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Hon. D. G. Steuart that Bill No. 

39 — An Act to amend The Fuel Petroleum Products Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains a substantial number of minor 

changes in The Fuel Petroleum Products Act. Most of them can be discussed more conveniently in 

Committee and accordingly I will confine my remarks to three changes. Some of them are not all that 

momentous but I do want to comment on them. 

 

Firstly, there are a series of amendments which generally change the fines and penalties throughout. 

Generally the finds and penalties imposed by this Bill are increased and may I recall, Mr. Speaker, an 

objection which I have made in this House a goodly number of times to bills which contain minimum 

fines. In this Bill there are a number of sections which say that there shall be a fine imposed of not less 

than $50. Mr. Speaker, I object to these sorts of provisions because there are a number of occasions, 

there are always a number of occasions, when infractions may be of the purely nominal kind where a 

magistrate should have the discretion to impose a smaller fine than the minimum. I agree that there may 

well be a reason for putting in a minimum figure as a general guide to a magistrate of giving him some 

idea of the seriousness which the Legislature attaches to the infraction. All I am asking is that these 

changes also provide that the magistrate in his discretion might impose a fine lower than the minimum if 

he felt that the circumstances were exceptional. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next change is that the Bill increases the tax on ordinary gasoline from 17 cents a 

gallon to 19 cents a gallon and the tax on diesel fuel from 20 to 21 cents. The relationship between these 

two increases is in itself remarkable. It has the effect of decreasing the spread between the cost of 

gasoline and the cost of diesel fuel and it makes it, therefore, relatively cheaper to operate a 

diesel-operated vehicle than a gasoline-operated vehicle. This must proceed on the assumption that 

diesel-operated vehicles, mainly larger trucks, involve relatively less wear and tear on the highways than 

gasoline-operated vehicles. This is a remarkable conclusion and one which I think would not be justified 

by the facts. Historically there has been a larger spread between the cost of gasoline and the cost of 

diesel fuel than this Bill now provides and the larger spread was because it was thought that diesel 

vehicles travelled more miles per gallon and if you are actually levying a charge on road usage then you 

would have to put a higher tax 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1212 

on diesel fuel than gasoline. At this time the Minister has decided to narrow the spread. I find that rather 

strange and I hope that there is an explanation forthcoming. 

 

Turning now, Mr. Speaker, to the increase of two cents in gasoline. This is the third increase in gasoline 

taxes in the six budgets introduced by the Government opposite. This is an increase in tax of gasoline of 

five cents in six years at very nearly one cent a year. Now, Mr. Speaker, that can’t long continue. As I 

recall it the increase in the 20 years of CCF Government would have been about five cents and in six 

years this Government opposite has increased gasoline taxes by five cents. At the rate of increase of 

approximately one cent a year the people of Saskatchewan can’t long afford the Government opposite. 

Fortunately they won’t long afford the Government opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) and to the 

Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) that they might embark upon an economy drive and start building 

some highways primarily for Saskatchewan motorists and not primarily for potash companies or start 

building highways for motorists and not primarily for road contractors, start building highways for 

motorists and not primarily for pulp companies. And certainly I would suggest that they start building 

highways for motorists and not for moose as has been so frequently indicated by the Member for The 

Battlefords (Mr. Kramer). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure that motorists in Saskatchewan would be prepared to pay a 

gasoline tax if they though they were getting value for their highway dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — But, Mr. Speaker, they are not getting value for their highway dollar. The people of 

Saskatchewan know they are not getting value for their highway dollar and accordingly they resent these 

increases in tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — The proof of the pudding is in the fact that the Minister of Highways (Mr. Boldt) has 

very conveniently changed the nature of his annual report. For years I used to look at the figures in the 

annual report to show the increases in unit costs of highways. How much does a unit of base coarse 

cost? How much does a unit of grading cost? How much does a unit of earth-moving cost? How much 

does a unit of paving cost? And for years we had these and then all of a sudden they were taken out and 

they were taken out for reasons which are not hard to find. It showed that costs were going up an 

average across the board, in two or three years of 67 per cent. It showed that in some cases the cost of 

some units of work had exceeded 100 per cent between 1964 and 1967. And the Minister of Highways 

did two things. First, he pulled all those figures out of his 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1213 

report and next he came into the House and said, “Oh, but we’ve changed all that. Now the costs are 

increasing, in fact they are going down.” If this were true, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Highways had 

figures which he could parade before this House showing that the unit costs of building highways were 

going down he would have included them in his annual report. But not a bit of it. He comes in here and 

gives us these figures but he very, very carefully doesn’t put them out in published form where they 

could be analysed and attacked for the fraud that they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now turn to the tax on farm fuels. That amendment has already achieved distinction, the 

one that is brought in this year. It has been popularly called throughout Saskatchewan “the Kelvington 

amendment.” Farmers across this province can give their thanks to the voters of Kelvington for forcing 

this frightened Liberal Government to remove the burden from their backs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — In the days since the Second World War, Mr. Speaker, and probably further back 

than that there have been possibly no two years in the history of Saskatchewan agriculture when farmers 

have had a tougher time than between 1968 and 1970, during no two years since the war has the price of 

grain dropped in such a remarkable manner as during the years between 1968 and 1970. And during no 

two years has the price of things which the farmer has to buy gone up more sharply than they have 

between the two years of 1968 and 1970. During these two years the farmer was caught between the 

millstones of a new and North America-wide inflation and an international grains price-war with its 

serious effect on grain prices. And during these two years, Mr. Speaker, when the farmers have suffered 

the worst of the cost-price squeeze, during these two years the Government opposite decided that it was 

going to add to the cost-price squeeze. It was going to put an extra tax on the farmers. It was going to 

put a tax on farm fuels. Mr. Speaker, when that tax was put on 1968 it was fought and fought bitterly by 

those of us on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And it was voted for by every Member opposite, voted for by every Member 

opposite. The Member for Maple Creek (Mr. Cameron) is very, very free with his accusations, very, 

very free with his calls upon us to say where we stand. Well, at least on this, Mr. Speaker, we know 

where we stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And we stand on the same foot that we stood two years ago and that’s more than 

Members opposite can say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, the voters of Kelvington have given a little message to this 

Government. They have given a little message to this Government saying that we’ve got a lot of scores 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1214 

To settle with you. One of the scores is the tax on farm fuel. That one will be settled by this amendment 

but they have other scores and they will settle them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I was glad that the farmers of Kelvington spoke. I was glad that they 

spoke for the farm people of this province and that they spoke with such a decisive voice. And I am 

glad, frankly, that the Government opposite was scared. I am glad that it decided that it was in trouble 

and that it has reacted by taking this burden off the backs of the farmers. And I am glad that for once this 

Bill to take off the tax on farm fuels will have the support of Member on both sides of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Since, Mr. Speaker, I want to record my support for the removal of this tax and my 

gratitude to the voters of Kelvington. I will be supporting this Bill. I will be supporting it even though it 

means that in one sense of the world I will be supporting a further increase on the cost of gasoline and I 

want now to record the reason why I support this Bill. It is because I have sympathy with the farmers of 

Kelvington and the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And I want to express that sympathy to them. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am a little amused by the Provincial Treasurer’s (Mr. Steuart) 

mathematics. He always puts forward these remarkable calculations. It is called, I think, the “Steuart 

method” of mathematics. We have heard of the “Cuisenaere method” but now we have a new method 

called the “Steuart method.” It sort of works this way; if you are imposing a tax, calculate what that tax 

will be and divide by two, and that’s the answer. However, if you are taking off the tax, calculate what 

the relief will be and multiply by two, and that’s the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Because this is how it seems to work, because you remember this tax on farm fuel 

was put on about two years ago. And when this tax was imposed in 1968, two cents per gallon, here is 

what the Provincial Treasurer said, “We estimate that the two-cent per gallon will yield #3.2 million in 

1968-69. We estimate that the cost to the farmers will be about $2.4 million.” In 1968 these two cents 

were going to cost the farmers $2.4 million. Now I admit that since 1968 the amount of farm fuel which 

farmers might use will have gone up fractionally but certainly not more than 5 per cent. But when the 

Provincial Treasurer is removing the tax, is he all of a sudden removing $2.4 million? On, no! When he 

is removing a tax — the tax which he said was going to cost the farmers $2 million and may now be $2 

million plus 5 per cent — he multiplies by two. He says in his Budget Speech this year, “We are 

eliminating the 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1215 

tax on farm fuel at a saving of $3.8 million.” This is tax escalation in a large way. The Steuart system of 

mathematics is interesting but I think it is as unlikely to find favor with students and teachers who are 

looking for accuracy and not fantasy. That method is not likely to find favor and these tax increases are 

not likely to find favor with the voters of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — We have hard lots about Alice in Wonderland, you know, but here we’ve got sort of a 

Mad Hatter of mathematics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it is perfectly obvious that, while we object to the tax on 

gasoline, while we object to he tax on diesel fuel, while we don’t for one minute believe the Provincial 

Treasurer’s figures which he is trotting out this year on the tax relief which the two-cent removal of farm 

fuel tax will provide, we at least welcome the minimum level of tax relief which this Bill provides. We 

welcome this belated recognition on the part of the Government opposite that farmers do have problems. 

We welcome this fact that the message of Kelvington has got this far anyway. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — And we welcome the fact that when this Government opposite is removed after the 

next election there will be further opportunities to provide relief for farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. N. E. Byers (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, with respect to this Bill I want to comment only upon 

that part which is referred to as the “Kelvington amendment” — the section which repeals the two cents 

tax on farm fuel. 

 

I am particularly glad, Mr. Speaker, that the Government has finally admitted that this tax was a bad tax 

from its very birth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Byers: — I think that there was very little thinking done by the Government before this tax was 

imposed. I think it is an accepted fact that before a tax is imposed for any given purpose that it be a fair 

tax. I am sure the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) wouldn’t want to impose a tax unless he thought it 

was fair, and that the taxpayer knew why he is paying the tax. I am not so sure that the farmers of 

Saskatchewan or the farmers in my constituency were really convinced why they were paying this 

particular tax in the first place. 

 

The other thing about this tax that made it bad was that, when the Government moved to collect revenue 

from a new source, the amount of money collected from that source would be 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1216 

Sufficient to pay for the service for which it was collected. Now I don’t think the Government ever 

really tried to establish or justify to the farmers why this particular tax was being levied. I think this is 

one of the reasons why the farmers found it objectionable. Furthermore, they found it objectionable 

because it was a tax levied on production costs and the farmers should not be forced to pay $2.4 million 

up to $3.8 million per year on this kind of production cost when they can least afford to do it. 

 

I am glad that the Government has finally recognized the errors of its ways. I am sure that, as the 

Liberals travelled about our good constituency last spring it was whispered in their ears and maybe in 

the odd cases shouted in their ears what the true feelings of the people were with respect to this tax. 

 

This is the tax that did add considerably to the production costs of the Saskatchewan farmer. For a 

farmer who bought 2,000 gallons worth of fuel per year, it would add up to $40 to his production costs. 

 

Well, I don’t want to add much more to it than that. I know the opposition to this tax came from many, 

many places — from farm groups, from municipal groups — and I think that we are happy on this side 

that the Government is going to remove this tax. I am very glad that it has started to listen. I am sure the 

farmers in my constituency spoke not only for themselves, because they don’t want good things only for 

themselves, but also that this was a fair measure of opinion of the farmers right across Saskatchewan. I 

don’t think this Government would have had the courage to go to the country again with this tax still on 

the farmers’ backs. I am very pleased to see that this tax will be removed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A. Matsalla (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a few brief comments on this Bill and I 

want, of course, to make particular reference to the meal tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — I am sorry, Mr. Speaker… 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to remind the Members opposite that I will intend to speak on 

that Bill when the time comes. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just so many things you can’t sort them all out. 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — I want to say here that I am certainly pleased that this Bill provides reduction in the 

farm fuel tax, removes it completely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — I note that the Members 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1217 

opposite are admitting their mistake. It didn’t take too long. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — The tax was a wrong tax in the first place and it was most unfair and it didn’t take too 

long before they were able to have the feeling of the farmers out in the rural areas that this was an unfair 

tax to them. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Kelvington, $8 million later! 

 

Mr. Matsalla: — I want to add too that the rural economy, as it was, certainly was in a desperate 

position even to be taxed two years ago. I am certainly very pleased that this tax has been removed and 

this is in all fairness to the farmers of Saskatchewan. Perhaps in another year they may be able to 

consider more tax removal and I suppose, too, this will come with an election. 

 

I want to say that because of this section of the Act for removal of fuel tax particularly, I will be 

supporting the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, the Government’s proposals to raise the 

gasoline tax two cents, and one cent for diesel fuel for commercial use are hardly fair to the vehicle 

owner when one looks back at the series of events since this Government took office. There was the 

increase in the vehicle fee from $15 in 1963-64 to $21 in 1970-71. There has been an increase to the 

motorists in the cost of the package policy, an increase in the compulsory insurance from $12 million in 

1964 to $25 million in 1969. A $25 surcharge introduced in 1968 cost the motorist $610,000. 

 

Mr. B. D. Gallagher (Yorkton): — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The tax on package policies and the tax on … 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Point of order! 

 

Mr. Gallagher: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I think on second reading on the adjourned debate 

here that he is not supposed to be talking about all taxes that have ever been collection. He is supposed 

to be talking about this Bill. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Member for Yorkton doesn’t like to hear what is happening to 

the motorist, but I intend to prove that this particular Bill before us is loading the motorist up with more 

taxes. Just one more, and in order to draw to your attention what’s happening, and since you are a rebel 

in the group and probably the only one, the Hon. Member from Yorkton, I want you to get up and tell 

what is happening to the motorist when I have finished. I challenge you to get on your feet and tell them. 

Give them some facts because if you 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1218 

are so anxious to be a rebel on behalf of the farmers on estates and this sort of thing, now is the time. 

Never was there a better time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I challenge you after I have listed some of the taxes against the motorist, to get up and 

vote with us. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where do you stand? 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — How are you going to vote? 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Speak against the two cent tax on gasoline because I’m going to do that. There has 

been an increase in the package policies, an increase in compulsory insurance — just 108 per cent, you 

know, just from $12 million to $25 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Oh, shame! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — $25 surcharge introduced in package policies and the tax on compulsory insurance 

$844,000. From 460,000 vehicles look at… 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I must draw to the attention of the Hon. Member the fact that package policies are 

rather a long way from the gasoline taxes. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Mr. Speaker, the principle of taxation on a motor vehicle is what I am talking about 

and this, Mr. Speaker, is two cents more that is being loaded on this motor vehicle. I am going to list all 

of the taxes that are on this motor vehicle to prove this is an impossible burden that is being added, and I 

cannot do it without listing these taxes because it is just unbelievable. I must remind the house, I must 

remind the people of Saskatchewan, what is happening to the motor vehicle owner in this province. I 

think it is my duty to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Just look at one other area. 460,000 vehicles. These charges represent millions of 

dollars, you know, because they have already had one increase in the gasoline tax. We have already had 

one increase and the owner is going to pay. In addition you pay the education and hospital tax on your 

automobile when you buy it and that’s gone up, you know. It went up from 4 to 5 per cent. 

 

Hon. C.P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Just back where it was in 1964. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — The vehicle owner is being asked to assume a fantastic burden, a burden that has 

become so heavy that the people of the rural population are unable to purchase automobiles, 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1219 

licence plates, and operate a vehicle the year round. And this was evident in Kelvington. Instead of 

getting something for the money that has been paid, if we were getting some of this back as vehicle 

owners, this would be fine, but instead of getting something, another dollar to cover the cost of the 

reflectorized plates, something like the $460,000 has been added. According to a brief submitted to the 

Legislative Committee on Highway Traffic and Safety these things can be produced for about 30 cents a 

set. So there you have another $300,000. And $295,000 added this year for the Treasury Board for 

producing the compulsory automobile insurance. Another $295,000 has been loaded unto the motorist 

along with the two-cent gasoline tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you start looking at this two-cent tax on gasoline, there is the fact that parents are 

asked to pay a greater share of the cost of driver training, and if the student fails and repeats the test the 

fee is repeated as well. If we were getting something for this two cents, but we aren’t. We are getting it 

early and often! Let’s just look at this again. All of this is just set up to fill the coffers of the Provincial 

Government. Let’s look at it: increased cost in driving training; the surcharge for those 25 and under; all 

the taxes on insurance; package policy compulsory insurance set up. And this $460,000 or so for the 

reflectorized licence plates, that’s the final straw. Now we see a two-cent tax on gasoline. When will it 

stop? I say for goodness sake, stop. 

 

You know most people need their vehicles to drive to work or drive to market or to obtain groceries and 

supplies. And to these people, this two-cent tax only means one thing — Liberal times are hard times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — That’s what it means to these people! In a recent survey in my constituency, I said 

people have to pay more taxes if they want more services. How do you think you should pay these 

taxes? And I gave them a choice of about 12 items. Right at the top of the list, 77 per cent of them said 

that there should be an increase in corporation taxes. Eight per cent said an increase in sales tax and six 

per cent that wanted an increase in the gasoline tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to look for a moment at the reduction of the two-cent tax on farm fuel. This section 

of the Bill when it is finally written will be known as the Kelvington amendment. I don’t think there is 

any doubt about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — Up and down the length of this province it won’t be the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart) or the Premier (Mr. Thatcher) or the Cabinet or any back bencher on that side of the House, but 

the people of Kelvington who dictated the working of this Bill and this Section. And in the honor of the 

representative that they chose, I think they should call this amendment, The Kelvington Amendment, 

and specific reference to farm fuels, the Neil Byers Subsection. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1220 

Someone in this House said that, when I campaigned in Kelvington and found someone opposed to the 

tax on the sick, I said that Neil Byers would remove the deterrent fees if he got elected. They were only 

half right. I also said that he would remove the tax on farm fuels if he got elected. Let’s not kid 

ourselves, he did remove the tax on farm fuels. Neil Byers did! 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whelan: — And I want to tell you something else, Neil Byers will remove the tax not only on farm 

fuel but also the tax on the sick and on the dying and the told and young if we are elected. And 

furthermore the Members opposite may one day regret not removing the tax on the sick. One can be sure 

that the tax on farm fuel or the tax on the sick did not elect their candidate. You can be sure of that. 

 

You know, noisy speeches are not nearly as effective as the almost silent sound of a ballot dropping into 

the ballot box. The ballots from Kelvington that wrote the Kelvington amendment and Neil Byers 

subsection said, in the loudest terms without doubt and without challenge, that the Provincial Treasurer 

who put this tax on in the first place was without discretion, without judgment and without sympathy for 

those enduing economic hardship in the rural communities. 

 

Mr. Romanow: — Heartless, absolutely heartless. 

 

Mr. Whelan: — I congratulate the people of Kelvington. I commend them for writing the Section of the 

Bill that removed the tax on farm fuel. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. G.T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I want to only add a few words in connection 

with the Bill that is before us on a second reading. I was a little disappointed that that my colleague who 

just took his seat, (Mr. Whelan) didn’t include also another impost that has been placed upon the 

shoulders of Saskatchewan people — the independent taxi driver. This is the one that I want to make 

special reference to because I have had calls from a number of these people who indicated to me that in 

1968 the price that they paid for plate and insurance was $343. By 1969 it has risen to $389 and in 1970 

to $406. In addition to this they tell me that they are placed in a position where at the existing gas tax 

they are contributing about $600 a year to your Treasury on an individual basis, Mr. Provincial 

Treasurer. And that this additional two-cent tax is just another nail in their coffin and it is another 

indication of the kind of consideration that this Government has for small businessmen of any 

description, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is just another nail in the coffin of the small independent taxi operator who is struggling for an 

existence and making only a bare wage. Some of them will perhaps realize a wage of between $350 and 

$400 a month after they have paid all their expenses and allowed for depreciation on the taxi cab. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1221 

I just suggest that, in your benevolence and in your astute political manoeuvering in taking this two 

cents off farm fuel and placing it in other areas, you have added another very substantial burden to 

another group of people who can ill-afford to pay the kind of tax levies that this Government has been 

heaping on Saskatchewan people for quite a number of years. 

 

I don’t intend to belabor the issue, Mr. Speaker, except to indicate that I have had a call from a large 

number of these people who find that this is just another Liberal burden and it is getting pretty difficult 

to bear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. G.D. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — You know, Mr. Speaker, it is very enjoyable to watch 

the Members opposite wiggling and waggling. And I must say I enjoy it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, I am going to watch how you vote. Our friend, wiggle, wiggle little Al, you are 

not the farmer’s pal — as someone dubbed him back here — went through this Bill from top to bottom 

and really scalded it and then finished up kind of lamely, and said, “But I am going to vote for it.” 

 

You know when I listened to the Member for Regina North West (Mr. Whelan) — really I feel like 

resigning from the Irish race. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Wrong gerrymander, it is Regina Centre. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — No, no. I am talking about him. You are not an Irishman. By God if you were an 

Irishmen I’d really quit. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Still wrong gerrymander, it is North West. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Anyway, Mr. Whelan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Mr. Speaker, I sometimes think that may be those Protestants over in Ireland really 

have something. But the highlight was the Member for Canora (Mr. Matsalla). He had real trouble with 

his hot-dog speech. First he got his petition in on the wrong day and then he made his speech on the 

wrong day. I don’t think he knows a hot-dog from a gallon of purple gas and I don’t think he knows 

much more about the farmers. 

 

The Member for Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) says that he regrets the necessity of raising the minimum 

fine and we regret it too. I think that this is good coming from a lawyer, because the reason we regret it 

and the reason that we find it necessary more and more to put these minimums on, is because of the 

judges. You look around at the record of the courts and you will find that the minimum fine in all these 

cases 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1222 

Becomes the fine. It is the maximum fine. So if the course would show that they would use some discretion 
I don’t think we would have to do this, but unfortunately we have to do it. I regret it too, but it is just a fact 
of life. 

 

Now let me say that this tax increase is tied to our great highway program. We have built more 

highways and spent more money on highways in the six years that we have been the Government than 

any 10 years that the Opposition were in. And it amuses me that they say the people of Saskatchewan 

don’t like it. Well it is an amazing thing that if they don’t like it, we are over here and you are over 

there. I suggest that by your present performance you won’t be over there, you won’t be over here, you 

will be out there somewhere. You had better keep your eye on those Tories. 

 

Let me just ell you what we have done with this money, and what you are voting against, and what you 

are really talking against. You are talking against snow clearance. You people talk about us putting some 

taxes on the gas tax. We have put some tax on the gas we admit. Let’s take a look at what we have done 

with it. Snow clearance, gravelling of streets, the greatest road building program in the history of this 

province. The proof that the people are satisfied is what they did in the last election. The by-election in 

Kelvington, a forgivable error, a slight forgivable error which I am confidence the people of Kelvington 

will rectify at the next election. In fact I almost guarantee it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — The Members of the Opposition at that time claimed that it would cost the farmers 

double what I said. And you know they have made a boob here. For the first time in history they were 

right. They were right. It did cost double. We have got the figures. We admit it, because now I say when 

we take it off we are going to save about $4 million. But the first time you were right in a long time and 

you blew it by coming out and showing your ignorance. 

 

Let’s look at the Socialist record for a minute, at what they did for the farmers. You know for years 

when we were in the Opposition we pleaded with the Opposition to take off the mineral tax on farm 

lands. A tax on farm land — it didn’t matter whether they had any minerals or not — but did they take it 

off? No. Year after year, after year, they refused to take it off The first thing when we became the 

Government we took off the tax and left it where it belonged just on the big corporations. We are 

supposed to be friends of the corporations. They are supposed to be the friends of the farmers. We don’t 

talk about being the friends of the farmers. We act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — What about the biggest thing? The tax on purple gas. How many years did we pass 

resolution after resolution asking the former Government to let the farmers burn purple gas in their farm 

operations. Never mind two cents. It was 12 and 14 dents you used to charge them. Time after time they 

refused and so we became the Government; and that is one of the first things we did. Some of them even 

had the nerve — Mr. Thibault and a few more — to vote against it but most of them 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1223 

after wigging and waggling voted for it and that is another step we tool to help the farmers. 

 

What else did they fail to do for the farmers? No home-owner grant when they were the Government, no 

help to the towns for gravelling, no help to the grid roads for snow clearance. Somebody talked about a 

Driver Training Program. They didn’t have a Driver Training Program. You never had a Driver Training 

Program that amounted to anything when you were the Government. We have the best Driver Training 

Program in Canada, right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — But you know what really shows the hypocrisy of the Opposition — I want to know 

how many people are going to vote against this Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: — None. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Well, Mr. Blakeney isn’t. I don’t know that any farmers are. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Call a vote! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — We’ll call a vote but it is the usual old Socialist hypocrisy. They talk one way but when 

the chips are down they vote another way. I predict that most of them will vote for this Bill. Maybe the 

odd fellow in the city will have the nerve to get up and vote his convictions. I don’t know. Maybe Mr. 

Whelan will. Mr. Blakeney has already announced that he is wiggling and waggling and waffling and he 

will vote for it. I don’t know how the Member from Shellbrook (Mr. Bowerman) will vote. I don’t know 

how there people will vote. The Member from Saskatoon, is he going to vote in favor of the farmers? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Always! 

 

Mr. Steuart: — Always. What about the people in the city that have to pay that extra tax that your 

Member moaned about? What about those taxi drivers? Are you going to vote against it? If you are 

really worried about the taxi drivers, then have the guts to get up and vote against this Bill. I don’t think 

you will have. Mr. Speaker, I predict that every Member over there will show that they will stand up like 

little mice. They will stand up like little sheep and they will vote in favor of it because they haven’t got 

the intestinal fortitude to vote against it. It is a good Bill. It helps the farmers. The money we will raise, 

the little bit of extra money that we will raise, that and twice as much will be spend on feeder roads, on 

grid roads, on help to our farmers, on help to our rural communities, and for the first time in the history 

of this province, help for the streets, for street clearing and police protection for our cities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division: 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1224 

Yeas — 52 
 

Thatcher Heggie Romanow 

McFarlane Breker Dewhurst 

Boldt Radloff Meakes 

Steuart Weatherald Berezowsky 

Heald Mitchell Smishek 

McIsaac Gardner Thibault 

Guy McPherson Whelan 

Barrie Charlebois Snyder 

Loken Forsyth Michayluk 

MacDougall McIvor Brockelbank 

Grant Schmeiser Baker 

Coderre Lloyd Pepper 

Larochelle Bowerman Matsalla 

MacDonald Kramer Wooff 

Estey Messer Kwasnica 

Hooker Wood Kowalchuk 

Gallagher Blakeney Byers 

MacLennan   

 

Nays — Nil 
 

Motion Agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. D. T. McFarlane that 

Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend the Conservation and Development Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, this Act to amend the Conservation and Development Act has 

a number of changes such as the increasing of the number of petitioners to establish a conservation and 

development area from 51 per cent to two-thirds, from one to another, amalgamations of two ore more 

conservation development areas, and so on. It is generally, I believe, an improvement on the present Act 

that we have and, due to the fact that most of the comment that I would like to make can be made better 

in Committee of the Whole, I will then deal with it at that time. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. D. T. McFarlane that 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend the Agricultural Implements Act, 1968 be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, we are in support of this Bill in principle and I am sure that all machine 

dealers in the Province of Saskatchewan will welcome such a Bill. I know that there have been a great 

many instances in the past because of the lack of such legislation, of considerable amounts of hardship 

when machine dealers were closed out due to bankruptcy or death of the owner of the businesses, 

because large volumes of parts would be in stock at that particular time and the supplying companies 

were reluctant to give them a fair reimbursement of those parts when they were sent it. It is unfortunate 

that a large number of the farmers in the Province of Saskatchewan 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1225 

under the present economic circumstances will have to be taking advantage of such a Bill, but it does 

give them some relief in regard to returning some of the monies that they have invested in regard to 

machinery and parts. I believe that there are some problems; the lack of some initiative in some areas of 

this Bill. I know the dealers in the Province were asking for some control or some consideration given to 

them in regard to the interest rates that the supplying companies assessed them on parts and machinery 

when they do have accounts receivable to them. I notice that it doesn’t stipulate the length of time that 

the machine dealers may have these parts of machines in stock before the supplying company takes them 

off their price list, meaning that they may not be eligible for a given time. Because I think some of these 

areas could be dealt with better in the Committee of the Whole, I will then also deal with those at that 

time. 

 

Mr. P. Schmeiser (Watrous): — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to see this Bill come before the 

Legislature. It is a Bill that will have far-reaching effects of the farmers and dealers of this province. The 

Bill will make it possible for dealers on termination to return new parts and new machines to the 

companies. IT will also be of great benefit to the family of a dealer who has died as there will be no 

misunderstanding on what can be returned. 

 

Under the previous arrangements dealers were reluctant to increase their parts inventory because they 

knew that, should they decide to go out of business or in case of death, they could only return a 

percentage of parts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will make it easier to obtain new dealers in towns where they are no machine 

agencies and young men will be more anxious to start a business because they will know that they will 

be in a position to sell and choose a different line of work at any time. The most important result of this 

Bill is the advantage to the farmers. As dealers will be in a position to stock more parts the —f will not 

have to drive as great a distance to obtain them. Dealers and farmers most surely would have welcomed 

a Bill like this years ago because in many towns — and some of them fair in size — they do not have a 

farm machinery dealer left. The farmers are not pleased when this happens and, although modern 

transport and roads make travel to nearby towns relatively easy, it is still very frustrating to have to drive 

80 miles for a small part in the middle of harvest. 

 

There are many other gripes and frustrations by farmers and they are echoed throughout the province. A 

farmer will buy a tractor or other piece of equipment from the only dealer left in town. Although he may 

not have any other equipment in that line he did this only to patronize local business and to be 

reasonably sure he could get parts and service in a hurry. Then the dealer closes and the farmer is left 

with a machine and no service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many farmers are experiencing difficulties in obtaining warranties on new machines. They 

are sometimes forced to go to other dealers to obtain this and sometimes have to go directly to the head 

office of the company, wherever it is located in the province. Some farmers end up having to load the 

machine on a truck and take it to the nearest dealer in the 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1226 

next town. When there is a local dealer and the farmer has a problem, the dealer generally comes out to 

take a look at the machine and recommends what should be done or he will send a mechanic out. These 

are some of the hardships that occur when dealerships close in a town. Having to deal with a distant 

dealership or a city-branch office is not the same as doing business with a local man whom you know 

personally. For one thing there is a time element and for another you naturally do not get the same 

attention to the problem. 

 

Disappearance of the local dealer is a bad thing and this Act will help to make it possible for dealers to 

stay. I have had farmers tell me that they now have to drive up to 100 miles for repair parts. A small 

breakdown can cost the farmer the loss of a whole day and sometimes more, plus many miles of driving 

and telephone calls, and he just cannot afford this. As an alternative many farmers are keeping a lot of 

parts on hand themselves and this kind of expense does not endear the implement dealer to the farm 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, dealers throughout the province have had a tough time in the past few years and I do not 

believe that the companies have given them as much support as they could have. The only support many 

dealers get from their companies comes in the forms of threats of losing the agency if they don’t sell 

more. This is not much help when farmers are faced with lack of grain sales and tight money. Many 

companies have tried to free themselves from all responsibility for sales in the field and push it on to the 

dealers. I think it is completely ridiculous that any good-sized town cannot support one machine 

dealership. Mr. Speaker, when there is a disappearance of dealers from a town it has quite an effect on 

other business as well. The person who ran into town for parts is also likely to pick up things at the 

grocery store and items for his family Now that he has to go to a different centre for his parts, he will 

more than likely pick up his family requirements there as well. 

 

I know that this Bill will help dealers stay in business and this in turn will provide better services to 

farmers of our communities. It will also help to keep our smaller centres alive. 

 

I am very happy to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. J. C. McIsaac that Bill 

No. 28 — An Act to amend The Secondary Education Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. J. Kowalchuk (Melville): — Mr. Speaker, when I adjourned debate on Bill 28 — An Act to amend 

The Secondary Education Act the other day, I said that I would have more to say about this Bill. 

 

The inclusion of Section 69, paragraph 2, whereby attendance records are part of the additional duties of 

a teacher is of minor nature and I think quite acceptable. The same can be said for (b) part of subsection 

(1) of Section 30 in respect to insurance benefits. 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1227 

The Section of this Bill that I object to, Mr. Speaker, is subsection (1) of Section 30 whereby, I think, 

the bureaucratic fingers of the Department of Education dig deeper and deeper leaving little or nothing 

for the good common sense and jurisdiction of local boards. The Section which I object to, and the 

Trustees’ Association has voiced strong opposition to, is that area where it says: 

 

And to transmit to the Department annual and semi-annual returns respecting budgets to be perused 

and dealt with by the Minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have said before in dealing with many of the education bill during the last two 

sessions, the erosion of local autonomy of the boards is evident in nearly every education bill introduced 

in this House, from small ones to important ones and lesser ones. The school boards have been told 

through many of the bills in the last two years that the Department shall have jurisdiction as to where the 

school is going to be built, how it shall be financed, and, this last year in times of difficulty, forcing 

many of them to spend almost their last cent; forcing boards to pay 10 per cent out of current revenue or 

surplus on new capital expenditures. It says what kind of a school shall be built, what size, etc. etc. It 

says by doing this that they, the Department, determine the physical make-up of the school and thus they 

determine the programs that go into this school. Anyone who has had anything to do with education 

knows once you build the physical features, once you build the physical parts of a building, the program 

that does in it goes in according to the kind of a building. They even tell you now how much money you 

have to spend for your building in dollars and cents. For the first time in history, that I can recall, we 

have been told that you are allowed either $60,000 for four classrooms or $40,000 or whatever the price 

is. And in fact I know in a couple of cases where we were told you had better cut some from $85,000 to 

$60,000. You are told how many teachers you can have, how many children you are to put into each 

room and so forth. You are being told in no uncertain terms what you can do and many I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that in many cases what powers you have, are not too much. 

 

This Bill 28 places other restrictions on boards. Among the restrictions is one that school boards covered 

by this Act must present the half yearly and yearly budgets. Mr. Speaker, we have done that this very 

thing this year, as many other boards have done. As a trustee who has had quite a bit of experience as a 

member of a local board I want to place a defence of the school boards across Saskatchewan, in rural 

areas as well as in cities and towns. I base this upon what I consider a pretty good record of the Melville 

school unit. I agree many school boards made errors. If these boards like ours, especially when it came 

to building comprehensive schools, were only given more guidance! We took great pains to consult 

people in different departments at different times, but again and again we got little or incomplete 

answers and sometimes none at all. I don’t blame the Department, Mr. Speaker, they just didn’t have the 

information and many times the information was not there to be given. There are a number of good 

examples of this kind of thing when boards go into building comprehensive schools. Many questions 

have to be asked and no answers are to be gotten. What technical course is the one to pursue; what to 

include or not to include? What vocational areas to include or not to 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

1228 

include? A thousand questions, Mr. Speaker, about the usefulness of a certain area. Really, Mr. Speaker, 

many times there were no answers. Now this Government who initiated the comprehensive school 

program has had no answers in many area. Now it is asking the local Trustees’ Association to research 

some of the aspects of the comprehensive school program, the cost again to the local taxpayers, asking 

them to find some answers. I think, Mr. Speaker, as has well been expressed in this House before, 

because of some of the things that have gone wrong with this kind of construction, all this criticism is a 

little bit too late. It is no wonder that Yorkton and Estevan are being accused of overdoing something 

there and something elsewhere. Where were they to go for their questions to be answered? 

 

This Government should have initiated a research program into the comprehensive school program, a 

total research task force on this and other aspects of education in general, as was suggested last year as I 

recall by my colleague from Saskatoon-Riversdale (Mr. Romanow). In fact many of these questions 

should have been researched and spoken about quite a number of years ago. Comprehensive schools are 

proceeding with the buildings today and really, Mr. Speaker, some of them do not know where they are 

going. I say, Mr. Speaker that this Government through the Department should be researching 

educational trends and guiding school boards and not eliminating their powers. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that, if this Government is out to do away with the school boards like I fell it is 

doing, then do it openly and honestly. Tell them that they are not needed, instead of paring and cutting 

and emasculating their powers to the point where they are of little or no useful value expect to serve as 

figure hears. I still maintain that local boards in spite of their failings are closer to the local scene and 

know more readily what is needed in the education field. They know more than any group of appointed 

people far removed from the real humanity of local education dependent upon cold hard facts and 

figures worked out by a computer. Some of the people in the Department today, Mr. Speaker, I maintain, 

who may be, as I said once before, good enough bolt and nut salesmen and maybe good enough 

policemen but they do not fit into the education picture, Mr. Speaker. Their training is not the kind that 

is conducive to making conscientious and human decisions regarding the welfare and education of our 

youth. I know that the Minister of Education (Mr. McIsaac) will say that the budget reviews are really 

nothing but reviews, that they are suggestions but there are some pretty tough regulations that go along 

with them. If you don’t do this and you don’t do that, then of course, you are going to be penalized, if 

they don’t heed the Department’s suggestions. Our unit board found the Budget review a bit offensive in 

places if I may say so. I know that little insignificant items — and I think they are insignificant — such 

as a $600 repair truck operation being questioned, the phone bill and even the number of meetings being 

held by the unit boards. Now personally I thought that the questions were a bit picayune, Mr. Speaker. I 

say, Sir, leave some concrete decisions to school boards. Leave some body and soul to the school 

board’s significance. I hope that they Minister and all Members of this House see the need for leaving 

some local board autonomy instead of putting more and more power into the Government’s hands. I say 

too much power there can be dangerous. I also ask, Mr. Speaker, where does it all 



 

March 26, 1970 

 

 

 

1229 

end. Universities have been hemmed in, the hospitals have felt the iron fist of this Government! Are 

rural municipalities next on the list for budget reviews, Mr. Speaker? I want to say to the Minister and 

this Government that, if you want to do away with school boards, then do it in the open. Let this 

Government tell the people in honesty and sincerity that they are not needed. That’s what they are 

driving at. We as school board members don’t like to be lackeys to anybody. I say, Mr. Speaker, this 

isn’t just good enough. Who is there really that can say that Government Departments can do a better 

job of local affairs than people close at hand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalchuk: — Yes, Mr. Minister, the Department of Education certainly should be involved, 

should give guidance, should leave some powers of running a school to the school boards. If we 

continue to take away autonomy of school boards there will be no incentive to creating larger regional 

boards, Mr. Speaker, because I say they are coming and as I’ve said before, the boards will be left with 

nobody and no real decision-making powers. They will simply be a sounding board for the Department 

with some policy-making powers left, yes, but even then they will be curtailed by the inevitable forces 

of the ever-growing bureaucratic Department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, I will only take a moment or two to 

comment on some of the remarks made by the Member from Melville (Mr. Kowalchuk). He took 

exception to Section 2 of Bill 28 which really, if he would compare it to the previous section which has 

been there for many years, there is very, very little difference. He mentioned a number of points that 

really are not relevant to the subject and the principle of this Bill and I will deal with them later. But this 

section ensures that the Department of Education has authority to call in budgets for review and analysis 

by Department officials. I would point out that the SSTA, the official School Trustees’ Association does 

not oppose this legislation in principle; the taxpayer does support it, both in Melville and all over this 

province; and the only real reason I can think why the Member for Melville opposes this is because his 

unit was the last unit board to submit their budget for review and it was one of the worst prepared. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:40 o’clock p.m. 

 


