



















































Hansard: April 02, 1970


1315 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

33rd Day 

 

Thursday, April 2, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‘clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker:  On behalf of all the Members of the Legislature I would like to extend a warm and 

cordial welcome to 32 students from Holliston school, Saskatoon, in the constituency of Nutana South, 

represented by the Member, Mr. Estey, under the direction of their teachers Mr. Krause and Mrs. Van 

Janff; 42 students from Riverhurst High, Riverhurst, in the constituency of Morse, represented by their 

Member, Mr. Thatcher, under the direction of their Principal, Mr. Krislock; 40 students from Wetmore 

school, Regina, in the constituency of Regina South East, represented by the Member, Mr. Baker, and 

under the direction of their teacher, Mr. Thompson; 83 students from Lakeview school, Regina, in the 

constituency of Regina South West, represented by the Member, Mr. McPherson, under the direction of 

their teachers, Mr. Muirhead, Mr. Barlow and Mr. Pledger; 73 students from Central Collegiate, Regina, 

in the constituency of Regina South East, represented by their Member, Mr. Baker, and under the 

direction of their teacher, Mr. Johns. I am sure all Members wish to extend a very warm welcome to all 

of these students and to express the very sincere wish that they will find their stay here in our 

Legislature both interesting and informative and that it will add to their education. We wish them the 

very best and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, may I take this opportunity to pay tribute 

to an outstanding Saskatchewan citizen. Dr. W.P. Thompson was a distinguished scientist and a 

respected university teacher and administrator. Above all, he was a great man and a man of great 

understanding. No lesser terms are adequate. 

 

Dr. Thompson‘s early research was the basis for development of rust-resistant grains, the value of which 

cannot be estimated in terms of welfare of people in Saskatchewan and in a much wider area. 

 

My closest association with Dr. Thompson was while he was President of the University and I was 

Minister of Education, 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1316 

University and government relations are extremely sensitive and complex. Dr. Thompson understood 

this and, as a result, the role of both university and government was more productive. I count myself 

fortunate in having had the opportunity to work with him in his capacity as university president. 

 

When he retired from direct university responsibility, he accepted the arduous and important position as 

chairman of the Saskatchewan Royal Commission on Medicare, the report of which formed the basis of 

the medicare legislation we now have in the Province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Following that he continued his interest in this subject. He established himself as an authority on 

medicare plans and continued to research and write on this subject. 

 

Members will know he died a few days ago. He leaves a family of two, a son who is in a senior position 

at the College of Medicine, Toronto, and a daughter, Mrs. Smith who lives in the United States. 

 

I am sure all Hon. Members would want to join in recording at this time a special note of our good 

fortune in having had such a distinguished public servant as Dr. Thompson with us for so many years 

and extending our sincere regrets and condolences to his son and daughter. 

 

Hon. C.L.B. Estey (Minister of Municipal Affairs): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to associate Members of the 

Government with what the Leader of the Opposition has just said in regard to Dr. Walter P. Thompson. I 

knew Dr. Walter P. Thompson throughout my life. He attended Harvard University with my father, they 

came west at the same time both to teach at the University of Saskatchewan. Dr. Thompson had a rather 

unique experience through his lifetime in that he only had one employer and that was the University of 

Saskatchewan. He came as a professor in Biology, subsequently headed the Department of Biology, was 

for a few years the Assistant Dean of Arts and Science, subsequently Dean of Arts and Science, then 

President of the university of Saskatchewan. 

 

Anyone who attended the University knows that Dr. W.P. Thompson was regarded as amongst the 

leading teachers that the University has ever been privileged to have within its buildings. After proving 

himself to be a very able teacher, he was an able administrator. He took a year‘s leave of absence I 

believe in his last year of presidency to be chairman of an international symposium on genetics which I 

believe was held in Montreal. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition has mentioned Dr. Thompson‘s work in regard to rust. I am not an 

agriculturalist or a farmer, but I understand that Dr. Thompson was one of the first persons to realize that 

there was some connection between rust and genetics. Saskatchewan in both the field of education and 

in the field of education administration, is I think 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1317 

much richer because Dr. Walter P. Thompson passed our way. 

 

Mr. W.E. Smishek (Regina North East): — Mr. Speaker, I, too, want to join the Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) and the Minister of Municipal Affairs (Mr. Estey) in paying my respects and 

tribute to the last Dr. W.P. Thompson. 

 

I first had the privilege of meeting the last Dr. W.P. Thomson about 1950, shortly after he became the 

President of the University of Saskatchewan. It was in connection with arranging for the use of the 

University facilities for a trade union education institute. His cooperation in making arrangements for 

the use of the facilities was greatly appreciated. He always wanted the University to become a much 

more meaningful place for the people of the province as a while, not just for the students and the faculty. 

I can recall the day that particular educational project was opened. He was personally there to ensure 

that all the arrangements were taken care of. We had him address the group that participated in that 

particular educational project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my next and perhaps much closer experience and association with Dr. Thompson was 

when he was appointed chairman of the Advisory Planning Committee on Medical Care. I had the 

privilege of representing labour on that committee. The two years of service on that committee were 

difficult years. It was his steady and calm role as chairman that made the committee‘s study and report 

possible. As everyone knows there were sharp differences within the committee from time to time. As 

chairman he played a leading role in helping to make medicare in Saskatchewan possible. For this the 

people of Saskatchewan will forever be grateful. For that matter the people of Canada helped found the 

basis of the medicare plan and laid the foundation for a national medicare plan. Dr. Thompson will be 

remembered as a scholar, a great scientist and author, a very gentle person who make Saskatchewan a 

better place to live in. 

 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 17 – ESTABLISHING A PRAIRIE INSTITUTE ON 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition) moved, seconded by Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): 

 

That this Assembly, recognizing the present and potential threats to our natural environment posed by 

chemical waste and other pollutants, urge the Government to initiate discussions with the University 

of Saskatchewan and the Governments of Alberta and Manitoba with a view to establishing and 

financing, under joint auspices, a Prairie Institute on Environmental Problems. 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1318 

He said: Mr. Speaker, motion No. 17 subject which has had such frequent reference that to some it may 

have become almost trite to try and talk about. But trite or commonplace, the implications with respect 

to pollution in our society are so immense that better we talk about it much more. It is in order to get 

some discussion in the Legislature and hopefully in the public that I place this Resolution on the Order 

Paper for consideration at this time. 

 

Certainly there is ample evidence, Mr. Speaker, that, in our larger centres of population at least, where 

the population are highly industrialized, the evidence is that we are literally choking on our own 

technological and biological excrement. It is not just however in areas of industrial concentration or 

population concentration that the problem is making itself known. Here in Saskatchewan the evidence 

admittedly on a large scale is somewhat less dramatic than that which we frequently read about. But the 

evidence is here and increasingly it demands our attention. The evidence is becoming more and more 

dramatic right here in Saskatchewan and I shall have some specific reference to make to that later on. 

 

Certainly the effect of some of the procedures which are used with respect to agricultural practices is 

causing more and more concern to farm people and to other people. One thinks for a moment of the 

increasing number of feedlots in the province, some of these close to centres of urban population. One 

thinks of the feedlots, some of them adjacent to waterways and water basins. That in itself is enough to 

give us some additional concern. 

 

Because we are likely to forget about the impact and the fact of pollution in our agricultural areas, I 

thought I might refer to a news item which appeared in The Regina Leader Post on March 10th. It tells 

of a lawyer, Mr. John Vance, speaking in Winnipeg. He was speaking at a conference on pollution 

sponsored by the Universities of Manitoba and North Dakota. The news item says that the North 

American prairies should be particularly cautious about pollution because agriculture pollution often is 

more extreme and dangerous than in urban areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think, if we view this in its widest context, which I suggest we must do, we will be 

reminded that pollution is a consequence of human society. It is in a sense a symbol of the technological 

age in which we live. It is in one way a symptom of the extent to which we have allowed technological 

factors to override human and environmental factors in making our decisions. It is certainly a challenge, 

as it increases in intensity and extent, to many of our existing values; it is a challenge to many of our 

methods of production. 

 

We have to be reminded too that if we are going to meet with effect this challenging situation, then we 

must deal with 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1319 

the total environment. We have, as a result I think, to beware of trying to fragment either the problem or 

the solution. The question is, indeed, one of total environment, some of which is natural, some of which 

is created by technology, an important part of which is human. Man is a part of the human environment, 

he‘s a part of that equation, he‘s very much at the centre of things, I hope. We have allowed man to be 

shunted from the centre too frequently and this is one of the instances. 

 

Because, in my opinion, the topic has that kind of consequences I thought that it was important for the 

Legislature to discuss this matter of the development and the protection of the environment in our 

province. The Resolution which suggests one course of action might admittedly have suggested a 

number of others which would have served perhaps equally well to initiate the kind of discussion I hope 

can result. May I suggest some of those other courses of action. 

 

It, I think, would have been well to discuss the possibility of asking the Government to associate itself 

with the University, the Saskatchewan Research Council, local governments and organizations such as 

wildlife organizations to sponsor a public conference at which the evidence and the problem and the 

possibilities of correction could have been discussed. Secondly, it would have been possible to have 

simply asked the Government to increase the testing program and the research program so that we know 

more about the extend and causes of our pollution difficulties. Thirdly, I think, we might have urged the 

Government simply to provide more adequate information because the public needs to be informed and 

the public, I think unfortunately, is not being informed. The public deserves to know more about the 

problem. It deserves to know more about the responsibility both of individuals and of organizations if 

we are going to meet this serious problem. I want to say to the Government that if the public is going to 

be asked to support the regulations and the costs which are necessary to protect our environment, then 

the public has to know and to accept the dimension of that problem. The fourth way in which we might 

have been able to discuss this would have been to ask the Government to establish in the province a 

continuing Council on Environment; to ask the Provincial Government to ask the Government of 

Canada to set up a Canadian body for that purpose. 

 

However useful any of the above would be the decision has been to urge the Government to establish a 

Prairie Institute on Environmental Problems. Since it is a Prairie institute that is proposed, this would 

involve the Government in discussions with the Governments of Manitoba and Alberta; it would involve 

discussions with the University of Saskatchewan and ultimately, I would expect, with the other Prairie 

universities as well. Such an institute would be regional in nature and the Prairies would be the region. It 

would be regional in financing since it could hope to get support from the three Prairie Provinces. I think 

the regional approach is important because pollution after all doesn‘t respect any boundaries. 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1320 

An organization, such as is usually meant by an institute, located at a university would be able to 

undertake some of the testing and research and from this would flow some definition of the problem; 

from this could come some means to guard against the extension of the problems of pollution. At the 

very minimum the work of the institute could state some of the consequences of just doing what we are 

doing. Hopefully it will also devise some remedies which might not now be in effect. It would serve as a 

collection centre for research and for the dispensing of information and of ideas about this problem 

which is of increasing concern. 

 

I hope that we do take it with increasing concern. I get worried when people shrug it off. I recall, Mr. 

Speaker, an incident in the Legislature last night when, in the face of discussions about this, the Minister 

of Health (Mr. Grant) said, ―That‘s life‖ — an acceptance of things as they are — I had to feel the 

comment was not really impressed of the need for some greater action on it. Certainly an institute of this 

kind would undertake some scientific study in nature. I think it is important to note this because, while 

the physical and chemical sciences are naturally intimately involved, so too are the social sciences 

intimately involved. If in looking for solutions or prevention with respect to pollution we overlook the 

role of the social sciences, then we invite defeat before we start. I emphasize again that what we deal 

with in this matter is the total environment. The total environment is more than physical. Our total 

environment has a social component and a part of that social component is man, all his habits, all his 

hopes and his values, all his laws and his institutions. 

 

I said earlier that there was a danger in fragmenting our approach and I think we have done just that too 

much to date. There is a danger in tackling this from a point of view of a single resource such as looking 

just at the effects on soil, or just at the effects on forests, or just at the effects on water. There is danger 

in trying to do this through the means of any single professional group, such as just the agrologist, or 

just the forester, or just the hydraulics engineer. The approach must be of physical and chemical sciences 

along with social sciences. I can‘t say too often how important it is to deal with our total environment. 

That means that the work must be interdisciplinary and the institute approach which we are 

recommending is of course fitted to this interdisciplinary use. 

 

Now so much admittedly has been said and so much screened and so much written, there is so much 

evidence of difficulty and danger, that little argument for more action should be needed. And yet, as I 

said a minute ago, those who claim there is not much of a problem are probably the greatest danger. I 

regret that I have seen reported in the newspaper from time to time statements of the Premier and some 

statements of other persons of the Government of Saskatchewan, suggesting that we haven‘t got much of 

a danger from pollution in Saskatchewan. I submit that the greatest danger of all is from too many 

people saying that there isn‘t much danger, and I hope we can overcome 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1321 

that handicap. 

 

It is encouraging on the other hand to note that there is a very marked increased interest and awareness 

on the part of many people and some that has been expressed already in this Legislature during this 

Session. This takes different forms depending undoubtedly on the particular interests of people or 

organizations. For some it is simply a matter of being interested in preserving a certain species of 

wildlife; for some it is the concern that we may continue to enjoy clean air and water; for some it is the 

entire quality of our environment. There are those indeed expressing their concern because to them it is 

the preservation of all life, including the life of people. 

 

I want to refer to some of the references that have been made in relatively recent times. One person who 

has written widely on this subject is Dr. Paul Ehrlich of the Department of Biology at Stanford. In an 

article published just last fall, Dr. Ehrlich, looking into the future and basing his expectations or his 

predictions on what has happened already had this to say: 

 

The end of the ocean came late in the summer of 1979, and it came even more rapidly than the 

biologists had expected. There had been signs for more than a decade, commencing with the discovery 

in 1968 that DDT slows down photosynthesis in marine plant life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he is one of the acknowledged, foremost world authorities on what is happening to our 

environment and he begins his article on looking into the future by saying, ―The end of the ocean came 

last in the summer of 1979.‖ While that is a startling sort of prediction we don‘t need to go to the ocean 

or we don‘t need to wait until 1979 for evidence. We have it right here in Saskatchewan, right in our 

own back yard in increasing amounts. We know from news reports that fish in the Saskatchewan River 

system have been destroyed to the extent of some $500,000 worth in recent months. They have had the 

paper a little while ago a warning by the minister of Health. He pointed out that pike and pickerel in the 

Saskatchewan River system from Saskatchewan to Manitoba should probably not be used for human 

consumption. As I say some $500,000 worth of fish has been destroyed in recent months. 

 

Most of us here or many of us here who from time to time like to enjoy the very great beauty of our 

Qu‘Appelle Valley, one of our most beautiful valleys of all Canada, are aware of the extent of the 

problem there because of the algae in the lake. I think it is correct, according to news reports, that the 

Hon. Mr. Lang who was at one time not so long ago the Minister in charge of Water Distribution or 

water concern in Canada included both the Saskatchewan and the Qu‘Appelle Rivers in the list of what 

he called ―polluted rivers.‖ I can tell the story, Mr. Speaker, of a man in Saskatchewan whose pasture 

was this past year made unusable because the stream which watered the 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1322 

cattle there was polluted. It went by some of the disposal from a potash plant, the water became 

brackish, the cattle were unable to drink it and the pasture wasn‘t usable last year. Action had already 

been taken, perhaps not to the law courts, but certain legal action has been entered and discussed 

because of it. 

 

Last evening in this House my colleague from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) put on the record something of a 

story of a woman who has had to go to hospital because there was too much hydrogen sulphide in the air 

due to the operation of an industrial plan nearby. I could add examples of this kind but will not take the 

time of the House to do it right now. The point I want to emphasize is that while we hear much about 

this in other parts of the country and because we are liable to shrug this off and say, ―But that‘s there and 

not here,‖ we have to be reminded that we have a problem here in Saskatchewan. We don‘t yet know 

how much of a problem here. The question has to be: are we prepared to make the effort and provide the 

machinery of imposing the necessary penalties, of introducing the necessary protective and curative 

measures? It is a big job. It will require public support. The institute proposal which I am suggesting 

would provide some of the essential information. It would give the public a chance to respond, it would 

guide the Government in its doing. 

 

I wanted to read also, Mr. Speaker, some excerpts from an article or a series of articles really in the 

January 13th issue of Look Magazine. This is a magazine which is based on the theme entitled 

―Mankind’s last and best chance.‖ Pollution is one of the problems dealt with in that series of articles. 

The lead paragraph in one of these articles goes like this: 

 

What if some foreign power threatened to poison every major stream? What if this enemy threatened 

to cast noxious clouds over our cities so that many old people would die outright and children would 

huddle indoors on sunny days? What if this enemy also boasted that he had the means to inject 

cancer-producing agents into our food, kill off our wildlife, destroy our most beautiful hills and clog 

up our lakes? Would we then be willing to get ourselves together against this enemy? 

 

Now I submit that there is no doubt about the fact that we would be willing to join together with respect 

to defeating this enemy. But we have that kind of an enemy in all the different ways in which we pollute 

and consequently destroy our environment. I think that the challenge is to us to get something busy and 

do something about it. 

 

Now, I don‘t want to go too far afield in all this argument about how serious pollution is, but I submit 

that, if we are serious about having a quality environment, about having a quality environment for our 

use and leaving this as part of our heritage, if we accept the evidence which is here for us from the 

highly industrialized and urbanized centre society 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1323 

such as we find in parts of Canada and United States and elsewhere, then we will begin to profoundly 

question some fundamental assumptions of the kind of society in which we live. We will begin to raise 

questions such as: how should we regulate economic activity? You know one of these questions is 

facing the Canadian people right now with respect to oil in our Arctic regions. The question is this: 

should we try to develop that oil or are we better off to leave it in the ground where it is? There are a 

great many people in Canada and there is a rising body of opinion which says that the best thing for 

Canada is to leave that oil there until we know something more about producing oil under those 

conditions. The danger of not doing this is very, very great. We have to ask more and more the question 

of what sort of social and economic goals should we accept. If I may go back again to the article in the 

magazine Look from which I read before and read this paragraph: 

 

The West has told its sons, ‗Take from this earth as you wish, the more the better. Consume what you 

wish, the more the better. Build what you wish and where you wish, the more the better. Dominate as 

many markets and as many people as you wish, the more the better. Make as much profit as you wish, 

the more the better.‘ 

 

That is the sort of value which we have accepted and I submit are accepting to our peril and we continue 

to accept. 

 

The same article poses the answer which it says the living earth gives to this kind of value-based 

activity: 

 

The living planet answers: ‗Please stop. Turn around. You can‘t keep on doing any of these things. 

This isn‘t addressed to your altruism. Just for you and your children to survive, you‘ll have to stop 

grabbing at every natural resource; they are running out. You had better consume more carefully. You 

can no longer build, dominate and profit without considering the true long-term consequences of your 

acts. All people are tightly linked together on this spacecraft now. What hurts and costs others will 

hurt and cost you.‘ 

 

Mr. Speaker, one could read on and on and talk on and on in this vein. I am doing it obviously to try to 

convince people that this is an important problem, that this is one that, I think, we have for too many 

years been delinquent in recognizing, facing or trying to do something about. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, one institute won‘t solve all of our problems and one institute, of course, 

won‘t work any miracles. But I think that the kind of action which the Resolution proposes — to 

establish an Institute on Environmental Problems — can give us some of the tools which we need to 

protect and 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1324 

develop quality environment in Saskatchewan. We can do more than that. Let‘s remember that here in 

Saskatchewan we are indeed fortunate. We haven‘t lost nearly as much of the quality of our 

environment as has been lost in many parts of Canada. And the pleas behind this Resolution is, for 

heaven‘s sake let‘s not lose any more of the quality that we have lost to date. Let‘s keep it; let‘s improve 

it; let‘s preserve it. 

 

Back on 1964 we had a conference held in the city of Saskatoon which was called the Resources for 

People Conference. The keynote speaker at the conference was a Mr. Irvin K. Fox who was at that time 

the Director of Resources for the Future, Washington, United States. And in emphasizing what I have 

just said about how fortunate we are here in Canada, I read a paragraph from Mr. Fox‘s address at that 

time. Speaking to the delegates there he said: 

 

You are fortunate in being removed from the congestion and the environmental problems of many 

other areas. But implicit in what is happening elsewhere is the need to preserve and enhance the 

amenities of space, clean water and clear vistas which you now enjoy. This is one of your great assets 

which has economic significance while contributing to the quality of life of those fortunate enough to 

live here. 

 

One further quotation, Mr. Speaker, comes from Dr. W.A. Fuller now of the University of Alberta. Dr. 

Fuller, a Saskatchewan resident originally, Professor Zoology at Alberta, speaking to some of us at a 

conference in Prince Albert in November, 1969, had this to say: 

 

Man is capable of destroying his own life-support system and has begun to do so. It is not too late to 

reverse this trend, but to do so will require positive action. A start must be made somewhere; why not 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

That is essentially the question which I asked the Legislature to consider today — to recognize that man 

is capable of destroying our life-support system and has begun to do so. We to some extent, a lesser 

extent than in many places, are guilt here in the Province of Saskatchewan. It is not too late to reverse 

this trend, to reverse will require a more positive action than we have yet taken. We have to make a start. 

Why not now? Why not to a greater extent in the Province of Saskatchewan? 

 

I submit that the endorsation in this Resolution is one such step. Consequently I urge your support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak to this Resolution, which has been 

moved by the Member for Biggar (Mr. Lloyd), I 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1325 

do so because I feel there is a great deal of need to make our people aware of and to take immediate 

steps in safeguarding their life against this huge problem that threatens our natural environment – the 

problem of pollution, a problem that is not just in any specific area, but one that is spreading like fire in 

all areas of the world. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that only by joint effort can we ever hope to control it 

successfully. If we do not act now it can prove to be too late, because I firmly believe that we are 

altering man‘s environment in ways that we do not understand and in ways which may prove very 

disastrous. Unless we begin to match our technological power with a deeper understanding of that 

environment, we run the risk of destroying this planet as a suitable place for human inhabitation. 

 

Dr. Barry Commoner, director of the Centre of Biology of Natural Systems at Washington University in 

St. Louis, stated that the youth of nuclear reactors had to be evaluated in a light of hidden cost to human 

health from the release of iodine 131, a radioactive substance that could settle in the thyroid gland and 

possibly cause cancer. He then went on to say that, because of our illusions, we have become unwitting 

victims of environmental pollution, citing the damaging effects of automobile smog, insecticides, 

detergents, radioactive fallouts, chemical weapons. All these are examples of technological affronts that 

are made, not out of creed, but out of ignorance. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, we must have immediate investigations and continued research to give us a more 

accurate knowledge of the consequences of our actions. This is what this Resolution sets out to do. 

People today are becoming very disturbed because they begin to realize that we have reached a critical 

point in human habitation of the earth. In Princeton University, as far back as 1947, there was a question 

before a conference on the fate of man. The question was: would man go the way of the dodo and the 

dinosaur, or would he take his destiny in his own hands and make a better creature of himself? Even at 

this time the opinion was divided. 

 

At the UNESCO headquarters in Paris last year, more than 200 experts from 50 countries met in 

conference. They decided that within 20 years life on our planet would be showing the first sign of 

succumbing to pollution. the atmosphere will become un-breathable for men and animals. Life will 

cease in rivers and lakes, and plants will wither from poisoning because of man-creating far-reaching 

imbalances. 

 

Might I say, Mr. Speaker, as cities become larger and spread in monstrous fashion, this total problem of 

pollution becomes greater, and is accelerating at a very crazy speed. Carbon dioxide and all the air- 

borne industrial wastes are fouling the atmosphere and poisoning fresh water. My question, Mr. Speaker, 

is this: what are we going to do about it? 

 

I would like to refer at this time to an article in the 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1326 

Saskatchewan Business Journal, the winter edition, page 9, entitled The Challenge of Pollution: 

 

Pollution in North America is shaping up as the biggest challenge of 1970s. We in Saskatchewan have 

traditionally felt relatively untouched by this problem. Many of us have maintained that the prairie 

climate is one of the healthiest. Admittedly we have less of a problem than some of the more 

industrialized areas, but we need not be smug about this, according to university biologist in Regina, 

Dr. D.H. Shephard. 

 

Dr. Shephard goes on to say that mercury pollution in the Saskatchewan River will cost the taxpayers at 

least $1 million and represents a risk to human health to an extent as yet unknown. He continues, saying 

that in the south of the province we have very little water. We cannot afford pollution, yet the 

Qu‘Appelle lakes continue to be fertilized by sewage effluent from Moose Jaw and Regina and other 

places. Perhaps what is needed in Regina is an independent Task Force, says Dr. Shephard, similar to a 

recently formed group of concerned scientists in Manitoba, the group which calls itself ―Manitoba 

scientists to control pollution.‖ It has set itself two prime objectives: one to encourage collation of facts 

about specific pollution problems, and the other to stimulate the interchange knowledge and ideas to 

help solve or reduce the problem. Saskatchewan has a tremendous amount of scientific talent, but this 

brainpower must be mobilized into a coherent action team to provide concrete and constructive expertise 

on how to abate pollution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we think of the areas that are more apt to be faced with this great problem, we think 

of our perhaps larger urban centres. But let me remind you that this is not only happening in our urban 

centres or urban areas. There are examples or symptoms of this great danger and its effects taking place 

in our rural areas and our rural areas and our rural industrial areas. As I mentioned last night in 

Estimates, Mr. Speaker, I have had brought to my attention a case in my own constituency where a 

family is living in the oil-industrial area. Their farm area is in a northwesterly direction of some 40 to 50 

rods from what we refer to out there as a water flood plant, but it is an oil-collecting plant where oil is 

gathered from some 600 oil wells. This gas is burnt off in flare pits, water is injected down into the 

surface of the ground some 4700 to 4900 feet in depth in order to build up pressure so as to force out 

more oil. Some of this poisonous gas escapes and pollutes the air. It is believed that this is the cause of 

the lady of the house who lives in this farm dwelling having to be hospitalised on various occasions. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Minister of Health as well as the Minister of Mineral Resources has 

information regarding this case, and I fully understand that they are trying to come up with some 

solution or cure in co-operation with the oil companies at least to lessen or control the poisonous fumes 

to a point where they will not be injurious to human life. 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1327 

I am only trying to point out, Mr. Speaker, the great necessity for further study and immediate research 

work into this whole problem, and why I think that a resolution such as this one, which we are asking 

the Members to adopt, is on such importance at this time. I believe that a joint effort of establishing and 

financing a Prairie institute on environmental problems would benefit the provinces and would 

co-ordinate the findings of this institute, save on any overlapping that might take place rather than if 

each Province tackled it individually. It would certainly assist in the financing of such an institution and 

its benefits could certainly be more rewarding. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we seem to look today upon smog and air pollution as incidents of urban life. 

Until such public health disasters as the death of some 4,000 people in London — I think it was in 1952 

— takes place, we forget that this can be such a killing negligence. At least one hundred air pollutants 

have already been identified. The cost of air pollution in Canada along has been estimated at from $20 to 

$65 per person, depending on where he lives. This, Mr. Speaker, is only for laundering, painting, 

cleaning of buildings, filtering of air, and doctor bills. 

 

But I do not think the costs and loss in dollars and cents tell the whole story. Air pollution as I have 

stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, constitutes a serious hazard to health. It lowers resistance to disease, it 

reduces vitality, and it increases sickness. It has been stated that relatively low levels of air pollution 

may be involved in the development of chronic degenerative diseases, including skin and lung cancer, 

heart and vascular disorders, as well as chronic bronchitis. These to me are the main reasons that we 

should be taking some immediate action toward the correction of this very serious situation. I think this 

can only come about by more research or into the causes of pollution and how we can take proper steps 

and measures to alleviate them. 

 

When a situation becomes so desperate that it demands attention, we seemingly are usually satisfied to 

treat the symptoms rather than to try and discover the fundamental causes. I am sure that our natural 

resources constitute a delicately balanced system in which all parts are interdependent, and we cannot 

upset one factor without causing widespread repercussions in unsuspected areas or places. I fully believe 

that the time has come when we must take a closer look at enhancing the quality of life. We must take 

measures to restore the balance of nature. There is a work, Mr. Speaker, which some people seem to shy 

away from because they think it means ‗stop using.‘ This work is ‗conservation.‘ but resource 

conservation means nothing more than the wise use of our resources in accordance with the laws of 

nature. Nature maintained her balance for many years, but she is now up against something new. I am 

afraid that man today is taking too much for granted and is trying to manage things and is forcing things 

into new ways. His interference has brought about the deterioration in living 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1328 

conditions which alarm us. We see the extinction of many animals and plants and the defilement of air 

and water. In order to have continued existence, Mr. Speaker, man must be called upon to re-think many 

things, to re-learn lessons long forgotten, and to get back on the right road. 

 

Government programs are being established, but I am afraid at a snail‘s pace, Mr. Speaker. The problem 

of pollution is growing and spreading at a much faster pace. What we need — and we have no time to 

lose — is to take immediate steps with a view to establishing and financing a Prairie institute on 

environmental problems, which I believe can be best accomplished under joint auspices with our 

neighbouring Provinces and our University of Saskatchewan, just as this Resolution calls for. We need 

people rich enough in understanding and imagination. We need people strong enough in fibre that they 

will insist that adequate forests and outdoor space be left to be admired and not to be destroyed. Unless 

natural outdoor spaces remain, young people will be denied their instinctive wanderings. They will be 

cheated of experiences that are by nature necessary to them, and in many cases end up by turning their 

energies to protest and evil. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, unless we recognize and teach that it is more important to enhance the quality 

of life than to raise the standard of living, I am afraid we will go on creating conditions where wealth 

accumulates and men will decay with the final result of having an affluent society dwelling in an 

environmental slum and perhaps perishing in it. It is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I urge all 

Members to support this Resolution, because I feel this problem of water, air and land pollution is one of 

the greatest problems facing us today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.A. Forsyth (Saskatoon Nutana South): — Mr. Speaker, I would first like to commend the mover 

and the seconder of this Resolution for the interest and the concern that they are showing for the 

problems of pollution I spoke at some length on this subject in another debate this Session, and I really 

only want to re-emphasize my own feelings of concern at the bleak future which faces all of mankind, if 

we fail to meet the challenges of providing adequate environmental control. I would like to endorse 

almost everything that has been said on the necessity of focusing our attention on the environment 

during the next decade. Unfortunately, we have a problem, and it is a problem that is fairly new to 

society. It is a problem that all of our TV people face, it is a problem of overexposure and the possibility 

of having a subject discussed to the point, as the Leader of the Opposition mentioned, a subject 

discussed to the point where it becomes meaningless and people just tune out. This we do not want to 

do. I don‘t want at this time to go into a lengthy discussion again of the dangers of pollution; I think 

these have been adequately pointed out to us, in almost every magazine we pick up. I 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1329 

would like to suggest that we in Saskatchewan are remarkably fortunate, no real credit comes to us for 

this — we just happen to have been born in a situation where we have a scattered population and a 

relatively limited industrial development, so that we don‘t have the massive and sometimes almost 

insoluble problems which face more heavily industrialized areas. 

 

I was quite impressed with the suggestion, the reiteration of many other suggestions which Mr. Lloyd 

gave, that studies of the environment must include the total environment. There is very little use in 

cleaning up a situation as far as the physical part of our life is concerned and finding that we are really in 

a state of moral turpitude, which doesn‘t allow us to enjoy in the fullest sense that clean physical 

environment which we may or may not be able to create. Here I think we have a much broader 

challenge. One could quote from almost every magazine that one picks up on some aspect of pollution. I 

think I have a file about so thick, and I am certainly not going to bring any of this before the House, 

except for one small suggestion that I would like to read. Saturday Review is a very respected journal 

and I have a good deal of respect for Mr. Norman Pleasance, the editor of this journal. He has seen fit, 

starting with his March 7 issue, to run a regular section on environmental problems and the first section, 

which appears in the March 7th issue, is very frankly headed, “Cleaning Humanity’s Nest.” The 

editorial which accompanies this section — I would just like to read the first paragraph of it — and Mr. 

Cousins says: 

 

Philosophy precedes ecology. What is most needed today are new realizations about man‘s place in 

the universe, a new sense of life, a new pride in the importance of being human, a new anticipation of 

the enlarged potentialities of mind, a new joyousness and the possibilities for essential human 

humanity and a new determination to keep this planet from becoming uninhabitable. 

 

I was most interested in the alternatives which Mr. Lloyd presented, the possible alternatives which he 

could have presented to this Resolution, and frankly I think in almost any of them I would have been 

more interested than in the one which he has chosen. 

 

I feel that we in Saskatchewan have a breathing spell, we are fortunate in this respect, we have 

legislation on our Statute Books which is for the most part adequate. We are moving towards an 

interdepartmental structure which assures us of a coordinated approach by the people in government 

who must cooperate in order to make meaningful action possible. In other words, I think we have the 

mechanics of a good environmental program. I hope we don‘t take too much pleasure in this. I think that 

we must learn to use the mechanics that we have. 

 

The Member from Weyburn (Mr. Pepper) made mention of the need for more research. This is one field 

where I have a 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1330 

feeling that research has gotten ahead of action. Very often it is the other way around – we tend to act 

without having researched our position. Here I feel that we are almost in a position where research may 

be way ahead of action and, when one reads the writings of people like Dr. Erlich from Stanford who 

was mentioned, one gets to the point of feeling that these men have a definite program to offer and their 

fear is that they cannot arouse politicians to action in time to make the research which they have done a 

meaningful thing. 

 

This is why I am rather doubtful about the last part of the Resolution which is before us. I think I would 

endorse wholeheartedly the first part but it seems to me that there is a possibility that we are creating 

just another tier of committees and another lengthy series of researches which might be desirable but 

which really would not help us in getting any action immediately. I think immediate action is required. I 

therefore must reserve my comments on the last part of the Resolution and, because I would like to 

consider it further, at this moment I will beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

RESOLUTION NO. 19 – JUDICIAL INQUIRY RESPECTING RELEASES AND 

FOLLOW-UP CARE OF MENTALLY ILL PATIENTS 
 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords) moved, seconded by Mr. J.A. Pepper (Weyburn): 

 

That this Assembly recommend to the consideration of the Government the establishment of a judicial 

inquiry into the programs and policies respecting releases and follow-up care of patients known to be 

potentially dangerous from Saskatchewan mental hospitals and other institutions. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, I shall not in moving this Resolution spend a great deal of time in discussing it. I 

think the less that is said at this particular time about the unhappy situation that brings this Resolution to 

the House the better. I have evidence of too many cases where there have been known violent 

psychopaths who have been institutionalised, treated, and then released upon an unsuspecting public, 

and the results of some of these releases are only too well-known. I don‘t think that anyone in this House 

is aware, possibly the Minister may be aware, of how many people there are in Saskatchewan today that 

are in the category of a time bomb and the people that may have them in their homes or in the 

community do not even know about them. 

 

I want to make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that I am not talking about all the people who are released 

from institutions and I want to make this point clear. There is a small group of people — and the 

situation isn‘t peculiar to Saskatchewan – that have committed some of the more violent acts and have 

possibly repeated the offences of rape, murder and arson. I believe that these people should be in a 

special category and 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1331 

subject to some special study and special care and special supervision. It isn‘t good enough, Mr. 

Speaker, for society to say we have to treat them exactly the same as we do everybody else; because 

these people are helpless, they have to be protected from themselves. There are as I say many instances 

-the Minister has been good enough to supply us with some of them — there are a good many instances 

of tragedy that are on record. There are some that I know about that are not on this record that have been 

supplied by the Minister to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I think the law enforcement people are demanding that some better liaison be established, so that they 

know when these people are released that they are being supervised by a social worker — if in fact they 

are released — and also that the people who do harbour them should know what their potential is. There 

has been one recent tragedy which I think cannot be discussed. I don‘t want to abuse the privileges of 

the House – I believe that the Attorney General would tell me if I alluded to the incident byname that it 

was sub judice at the present time. I only want to outline a situation where we seem to have in many 

instances, cases where a patient, that has been proven psychotic, has done considerable damage in the 

areas that I have mentioned, where he is declared, or she is declared, to be fit to stand trial but 

potentially dangerous. I am not expert enough to know what this means but I am expert enough to 

observe what the results have been in many of these cases. I am simply saying in this Resolution to the 

Attorney General, to the minister of health, to the Minister of Welfare — because all of these are 

concerned — I am simply saying that we must look into this – if you want to amend my Resolution to 

say that it should not be a judicial inquiry, that it should be some kind of a study along the line of the 

Frazier Commission. But certainly we have not got much further along the way since the Frazier Report. 

I suggest that in moving this Resolution I sincerely hope that the Government will take the matter up and 

assist the law enforcement people, the judges, and the people in the field of psychiatry to devise a better 

method of protecting the public, not only the public but these unfortunate people who do not really know 

what they are doing. The public must be protected and, Mr. Speaker, I believe these people must be 

protected from themselves to prevent further tragedies. 

 

I must repeat here that the incidence of tragedy in this province over the last five years has been 

considerably higher than it ever has been in the past. The Frazier Report — I wonder sometimes how 

often the departments concerned take a look at it; there were several recommendations in the Frazier 

Report. I don‘t want to belabour the points that were raised, but I think in view of the present Budget, 

for instance, that we have to raise them again, draw them to the attention of the Minister. I look at this 

year‘s Estimates for psychiatric services and I see that the estimate is down by $155,000. I look at last 

year‘s spending and I see on the Frazier Committee recommendations that it was under spent by 

$100,000. I remember 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1332 

that Dr. Frazier said that in order to meet the minimum requirements $2 million must be injected into — 

at least $2 million — must be injected into this psychiatric service program, if not immediately, then 

over a short period of time. This year I look at the Estimates and I see that there has been no budget. The 

$500,000 that was there for the Frazier recommendations last year, Mr. Speaker, was not there this year 

and I suggest that this is some cause for worry. 

 

I suggest that the Minister should be reminded that Dr. Frazier recommended that the salaries of 

psychologists be raised by 15 per cent, that the salaries for social workers be raised by 20 per cent, and 

that other workers be raised 10 to 15 per cent and that, I would assume, based on the salaries and wages 

of that day and not considering the natural increment of 6 per cent that is usually entertained by the 

Government. These objectives have not been met. I don‘t know at this point because I was not present 

yesterday when the Minister‘s Estimates were read. I hope the Minister will tell us how close he has 

come to those recommendations. 

 

I wonder if I could refer the Minister for a moment to another section of the Frazier Report which says 

something more about the situation and I think it points up what some of my worries are. On page 35, I 

believe it is, it is part of recommendation No. 43 in Long Range Planning. Dr. Frazier said: 

 

We failed to find evidence of long-range plans or projects. Despite lip service to the Saskatchewan 

plan it was clear that this plan had never been fully implemented. Furthermore there was much 

uncertainty about which unit would be developed next, why the Prince Albert centre was not in 

operation, what the priorities were among the many critical needs. 

 

I wonder if that situation has been changed with the meagre amounts of money and the under spending 

even of that meagre amount of money that was allocated last year. I wonder too if — getting back to 

another recommendation which was part of recommendation No. 36 — No. 3 under (d) and again on 

page 32 and this goes back once more to the subject at hand. No. 3 says, quoting Dr. Frazier: 

 

That there are no adequate provisions for the handling of psychopaths, sex offenders, and similar 

troublesome individuals. They do not fit well in a mental hospital. 

 

Hear this. He says: 

 

They do not fit well in a mental hospital in a ward primarily set up for the treatment of functional 

psychotics. 

 

and my Resolution does not concern myself with those. 

 

One manipulatory psychopath can undermine the treatment 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1333 

program for 30 schizophrenics. Yet magistrates and law enforcement officials feel that something 

should be done with these individuals to protect society. This is a worldwide problem and is in no way 

unique to Saskatchewan. 

 

And that again is beside the point. We are here conducting the affairs of Saskatchewan. I think that we 

have to put our hands and minds to curing this problem in Saskatchewan. And I think especially so when 

we have a situation and a continuing situation such as the cases that are on record and some of the cases 

that are not yet on record but will be, that in my opinion create a hazard and a danger and a worry. 

 

I cannot go home or travel without hearing people express concern. The scare talk is surging at a higher 

pitch now among people who say surely something must be done about the situation. Certainly the 

public must be protected against further incidences of this kind. 

 

I want to say at this point that the people who are concerned in this work in psychiatric services, whether 

it be the social workers, psychiatric nurses, or the doctors concerned, are doing the very best, in my 

opinion, that they can with the material at hand, but they lack the personnel, as was said in the Frazier 

Report. They lack it now, they lack the sinews of war and the finance to do the job. The Department 

lacks it and I think the Minister of Health (Mr. Grant) is no doubt aware of this, but more supervision 

has to be done. I am talking about the dangerous psychotics. I do want to repeat, Mr. Speaker, in no way 

is anything I am saying today a reflection on the staff in any institution that I know about. They are 

doing a cardinal job and I congratulate the Department, the whole Department, for this. But in spite of 

the job they are doing, we have these incidences of tragedy which seem to come about because of a lack 

of cohesion, a lack of communication between the various areas of car and law enforcement. Somehow 

or other we just don‘t seem to be able to allow the left hand to know what the right hand is doing. 

Somebody slips through the mesh and then you find another situation where lives are lost and a situation 

develops where no one can be happy and a family or a life is ruined or lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said I wasn‘t going to speak at any great length on this. I hope that we can approach this 

Resolution with the welfare of the people of Saskatchewan in mind, without any political controversy. If 

the Minister or the Attorney General chooses to amend this Resolution so that the spirit of it can be 

carried out better, I would welcome this, but I plead with you to take a look at this situation in order that 

the general public of Saskatchewan can feel safer about the entire situation and that these unfortunate 

people can be protected from themselves and their families from further embarrassment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1334 

Hon. D.V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I have some observations I would like to make in 

this debate and I would therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

RETURN NO. 82 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North 

West) for Return No. 82 showing: 

 

(1) The total amount that was paid in 1969 for architects‘ fees in respect of the South Saskatchewan 
Base Hospital. 

 

(2) To whom these fees were paid. 
 

(3) The amount that was paid to each payee. 
 

And the proposed amendment thereto by the Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Health): 

 

That clauses (1), (2) and (3) be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 

 

(1) Whether the South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre will be preparing an annual report for the year 
1969. 

 

(2) If so, whether the report will include details of the amount of money spent by the Centre for 
architectural fees and of the name or names of the architectural firms to whom these payments 

were made. 

 

(3) If not, the amount spent by the Centre for architectural fees during the year 1969 and the name or 
names of the architectural firms to whom these payments were made. 

 

Hon. G.B. Grant (Minister of Health): — The report in question has been tabled and I don‘t know 

whether the Hon. Member wishes to make any comments on it, but the answers to the question are 

contained in the report that is in his hands. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, the information that I asked for in the 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1335 

motion that is the fees and the other material from the South Saskatchewan Base Hospital is contained in 

the report as the Hon. Minister says. It arrived on my desk about 15 minutes ago. All the material is 

contained in the report so I am in favour of the motion as amended. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

RESOLUTION NO. 14 – STUDY OF THE PROBLEMS OF FEED GRAIN 

MARKETING 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed Resolution by Mr. G.R. Bowerman 

(Shellbrook): 

 

That this Assembly urge the Federal Government and the Governments of the Prairie Provinces to 

consider a joint study of the problems of feed-grain marketing with a view to devising a plan, under 

the Canadian Wheat Board, which would permit movement of feed grains on a uniform basis both 

within and between the individual Prairie Provinces. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, before I proceed with my 

argument I would like to point out to you, Sir, today, the Farmers‘ Union are having a meeting here in 

Regina, I regret that as a member of the association I am not able to attend because of this Resolution on 

the Order Paper. If the president is here I might, in spite of what he said concerning certain Members of 

this House, assure him that every Member on this side of the House is quite aware of the farm problems, 

whether it be grain marketing or whether it is prices, and they do not have to have any concern about us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hon. Members will remember that when I adjourned the debate on this Resolution the 

other day I had indicated that many farmers of Saskatchewan, and many whom I represent, already have 

a problem with marketing feed grains as well as oil seeds and wheat. I said at that time that the Wheat 

Board followed a policy which obviously does not meet all the needs of coarse-grain producers. I 

mentioned that different policies are enunciated by such organizations as the Federation of Agriculture, 

UGG and other organizations as well. I stated at that time that most people would agree with orderly 

marketing of feed grains but, because we as farmers were uncertain of the best policies to pursue in the 

area of marketing, it appeared to me to be a good idea to have a joint study by governments on this 

whole subject of marketing in order that farmers producing feed grains could be assured of some kind of 

security. When I think of security for producers, Mr. Speaker, I am thinking of not only efficiency in 

farming 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1336 

but of the prices received for farm products in whatever markets these products may be sold. 

 

Today we hear much talk about wheat farmers and their income deficiencies. We now have Operation 

LIFT from Ottawa which is not going to lift anybody out of this despondent situation, I‘m sure. Let me 

say that it is obvious, particularly for feed producers such as myself, that we are in a much worse 

economic situation than even the wheat farmers, much worse than we should have been. I would say it is 

partly because a great deal of wheat has been sold at ridiculously low prices in competition with feed 

grains. So far we have not seen the Federal Government inject any cash into the farming area and I 

would say again that assuredly the feed producers are the ones who have been hit most. We are presently 

being asked by the Hon. Otto Lang to grow more barley and feed grains in order to help remove the 

wheat glut on the Prairies. It is clear to me, at least, that the problems of wheat marketing will be shifted 

now to coarse-grain farming and to oil-seed producers. Now the Wheat Board maybe somewhat relieved 

of headaches of one kind, but it will find that it will have headaches of even a greater kind when the 

crops are gathered because the surpluses of feed grains and of oil seeds will be such as it will not be able 

to handle at all. 

 

Now let us look at the supply and disposition of barley and oats for example over the past three years as 

given by the Dominion Bureau of Statistics. I‘m not going to bore you, Mr. Speaker, with a lot of 

figures, but I would say this that in the case of oats Canada‘s share of the world market has dropped 

from 51 per cent in 1953 to only 5 per cent in 1967, a tremendous drop in sales. The world market 

dropped from 35 per cent in 1953 to 14 per cent in 1967 for barley. This is a tragic situation. It is much 

worse than the situation is with wheat. I can say that Canada has been practically eliminated as an 

exporter of feed grains. When I look at the reports in the Press and elsewhere I find that we have lost our 

markets to Britain and we have lost our markets elsewhere. Therefore it is quite a serious situation. The 

reason we would want this whole problem studied is because different organizations of farmers have 

different answers. For example the Pools say this in their policy and I read from the Pool‘s Yearbook, 

1968-69, on page 7 at the bottom. They say this: 

 

International commodity agreements are in the best interests of producers. The current International 

Grains Arrangement should be supported and renegotiated for the future. 

 

The second point they say is: 

 

The Canadian Wheat Board should be retained and its jurisdiction extended to cover all grains as 

defined in The Canada Grain Act. There should be Board control of marketing of all Prairie grains 

through public elevators 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1337 

and mills, feed dealers and any other merchants or feedlots that purchase grain. The quota system 

should be retained; improvements may be necessary and the Pool will put forth some ideas. 

 

That is one point of view. We find a point of view of the Farmers‘ Union of Alberta and I presume this 

is the Farmers‘ Union view in Saskatchewan. Now may I refer to a press release in the Free Press 

Weekly of March 21, on page 4, under the heading ―Constitutional Obstacles to Feed-grain Pricing.‖ 

This is not what the farmers said. This is the attitude of Ottawa. I will read just a paragraph or two. 

 

The Federal Government is prevented from establishing minimum and maximum price of feed 

grains within a province by constitutional obstacles, Canadian Wheat Board Chief Commission 

MacNamara said. 

 

So here is the problem. Here is the way Ottawa looks at it. Maybe I should read a little more of what Mr. 

MacNamara said in that article because I think it is relevant to what we are discussing. I quote: 

 

Mr. MacNamara said he does not believe minimum-maximum feed-grain pricing within a province 

would solve the current low prices of feed grains resulting from a glut of international grain markets. 

 

In other words he agrees with what I‘ve said and he agrees that they don‘t seem to have the answers. It 

says here that he took exception to M.P. Gleaves‘ description that the current method of price and feed 

grain is about as ineffective a method as could be conceived. Although not perfect, Mr. MacNamara 

claimed this pricing system provides for usage with a higher overall return than they were to receive 

under a price flexibility scheme proposed by some critics. Now there are some that propose price 

flexibility schemes. But such is not the policy of the Farmers‘ Union. I agree that we must have a system 

that is going to satisfy the needs of the farmers. Now we find Mr. Babey, who is the president of the 

Alberta group, speaking and I quote from the Western Producer, Thursday, March 19, on page 14 under 

the heading, ―Babey Supports Curbs on Feed-grain Movement.‖ He says and I quote: 

 

There is an urgent need to stabilize prices and to do this in an excess supply situation, such as we are 

now in supply management, along with regulations that provide for orderly sharing of the market and 

becoming more and more essential. 

 

He says this also in another paragraph referring to feed grains: 

 

We discussed this matter fully at the FUA Convention and at the AFA meeting in Calgary and the 

majority of delegates agreed that lifting of provincial boundaries 



 

April 2, 1970 

 

 
1338 

in the movement of feed grains would further erode such orderly marketing systems as we have. 

 

And I agree but many people maybe don‘t agree. Mr. A.M. Runciman, for example, as quoted by Mr. 

Babey apparently said this and I read a paragraph, Mr. Babey referring to a statement by A. Runciman, 

president of the United Grain Growers, to the Commons Agricultural Committee which advocated 

changes in regulations to permit free movement of grain outside the jurisdiction of the Wheat Board. 

 

Then you have a section on nonsensical statements such as I read the other day by Dr. George D. 

Friesen. 

 

Mr. Thatcher (Premier): — I wonder if the Hon. Member would permit an interjection? 

 

Debate interrupted by leave. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

FARMERS’ UNION DELEGATION 
 

Mr. Thatcher: — I have just come from the rotunda and there are four or five thousand members of the 

Farmers‘ Union, who are meeting in Regina. They are very anxious to speak to Members of the 

Legislature. I suggested to them that we would be adjourning at 5:00 in any event, but Mr. Atkinson is 

very insistent. He would like all members to join him. He is speaking from a balcony. I would with 

unanimous consent, and only that way, like to move that the house do now adjourn for the balance of the 

day until 10:00 o‘clock tomorrow morning. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — I am quite prepared to second the motion. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:15 o‘clock p.m. 


