



















































Hansard: February 13, 1970


8 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session - Sixteenth Legislature 

2nd Day 

 

Friday, February 13, 1970 
 

The Assembly met at 2:30 o‟clock p.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I am happy to welcome the following groups of school children sitting in the galleries 

of the Legislature: From Willowbunch school represented by the Member from Notukeu-Willowbunch, 

Mr. Hooker, under the direction of Mr. O‟Reilly, the vice-principal, situated in the west gallery. 

 

50 students from the Lang school in the constituency of Milestone, represented by the Hon. The Minister 

of Welfare, Mr. MacDonald, under the direction of their principal, Mr. Folkerts in the east gallery. 

 

There are 27 students from the International Bible College at Moose Jaw, represented by the Member 

from Moose Jaw South, Mr. Davies, under the direction of their principal, Mr. E. C. Pennington, in the 

east gallery. 

 

I am sure all Members of the Legislature will wish to join with me in extending to them a very warm 

and very sincere welcome and that their visit to our Legislature will be enjoyable and informative and 

that they will have a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — I am pleased and proud to take the opportunity of also introducing to the Legislature 

three gentlemen situated in the centre of the Speaker‟s gallery — His Grace Bishop Valerian D. Trifa, 

Bishop of the Romanian Orthodox for North and South America. His headquarters are in Jackson, 

Michigan, and he is presently visiting in the city of Regina. Together, with him, is the Bishop‟s Vicar, 

the Reverend Martinian Ivanovici, the parish priest of the parish of St. George in the city of Regina, and 

the Reverend Father Brendan J. O‟Keefe, priest of the Canadian Orthodox Missionary Centre and 

Eastern Orthodox Chaplain at Regina Campus. I am sure that all Members will wish to join with me in 

extending to these important and reverend gentlemen our very best wishes and a warm welcome from all 

the people of our Province of Saskatchewan and its Legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — I would certainly like to associate the Members on this side of the 

House with your welcome to His Grace. Canadians of Romanian descent have made major contributions 

to our province over the years, in agriculture, in business and in various other fields. Generally speaking 

they have been very good citizens of Canada and of our province. I only wish a few more would decide 

to locate here. May I express the hope, 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

9 

Your Grace, that your visit here will be fruitful and enjoyable. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, let me also associate those of us on this 

side of the Legislature with your words of welcome and those of the Premier to our distinguished 

visitors. As the Premier has said, our Romanian community is one which has in a very considerable and 

worthy way maintained its distinction as a community, while at the same time becoming very much a 

part of the whole province. We are happy to welcome a visit to them and a visit to us. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Federal-Provincial Conference 
 

Mr. Lloyd: — Before the Orders of the Day I would like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) and I do this because of the meeting, the Federal-Provincial Conference 

meeting, which will be held on Monday and Tuesday of next week. Will the Minister of Agriculture 

assure this House and assure the people of Saskatchewan that at that conference he will urge the Federal 

Government to inject, by way of supplementary payments on grains, sizeable sums of money into the 

Saskatchewan farm economy this spring. 

 

Hon. D. T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — I would like at the outset, Mr. Speaker, to indicate 

that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) was invited to go down along with the Saskatchewan 

delegation to listen in on the brief that was being presented. And if the Leader of the Opposition had 

displayed as much interest in the agricultural situation in the province, as he now pretends to display, he 

could have been down there along with the Members of the Government and make his voice heard at 

that time. I want to assure all the people in Saskatchewan that the course that the Premier and myself 

will be taking will certainly be in the interest of agriculture in the province, not only today but in the 

years ahead. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A supplementary question since the Minister has clearly evaded the question. His answer 

by the way explains one of the reasons why I can‟t go. Obviously we are not to be allowed to know what 

happened in the conference and so I would not be able to comment on it. But may I ask the Minister then 

if he is not prepared to tell the people of Saskatchewan now what he is going to ask and present on their 

behalf. Will he be prepared after the Conference to tell the people whether or not they have asked for a 

sizeable injection of cash by way of supplementary payment on grains? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should answer that question. The Saskatchewan brief is 

completed. The Prime Minister did ask us to treat it in confidence until the actual meeting takes place. 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

10 

I can assure the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Lloyd) that we have a vigorous brief. We shall be giving 

our views on the agricultural crisis in no uncertain manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary then, can the Premier give us the assurance that he 

is going to ask for this sizeable injection of cash, or will he give us the assurance that we will know after 

the Conference whether he has asked for that? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I will give you the assurance that after the Conference you will know. 

 

Mr. J. Messer (Kelsey): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to direct a question to the Minister of 

Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane). I wonder what proposals the Minister will be making in the forthcoming 

Federal-Provincial Conference in regard to the recent findings of the Barber Commission, which pointed 

out that farmers have been for a considerable time subjected to unrealistic and non-competitive prices of 

farm machinery. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, as leader of the delegation, I am going to answer that question. You will 

know after the Conference is over. I can assure you that this side has already moved a Resolution and 

placed it on the order paper pertaining to the Barber Commission. I think our interest in this Commission 

is every bit as great as the Opposition‟s. The only difference is that we would like to do something about 

it instead of talking about it. 

 

Mr. Messer: — Mr. Speaker, the question was directed to the Minister of Agriculture. However, it was 

not answered by the Premier. What are the proposals that the Government is going to be making at the 

Federal-Provincial Conference in regard to . . .  

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Come on Tuesday and you will know. 

 

Mr. E. I. Wood (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to ask the 

Hon. Premier if the Minister of Agriculture is going to be a part of your delegation? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Yes, the delegation will include myself, the Minister of Agriculture (Mr. McFarlane) 

and the Minister of Public Works (Mr. Guy). 

 

Slow Movement of Grain 
 

Mr. G. R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would as well like 

to address a question to the Hon. Minister of Agriculture, and that is: in view of the extreme limited 

movement of grain from Prairie points which has resulted in some estimated 90 or 100 million bushels 

of space available at the 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

11 

terminal elevators, and in view of the January announcement that there are approximately 4,000 less 

railway cars in grain movement this year than last, what action has the Hon. Minister taken up to this 

point to bring about some immediate solution to this problem? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — I would just like to inform the Hon. Member that the Minister of Agriculture has 

been in constant contact with the Canadian Wheat Board, with the Federal Minister in charge of the 

Canadian Wheat Board, indicating the concern of not only the Government of Saskatchewan but also the 

people of the province to see to it that an immediate movement of grain take place in the province, for 

four reasons: one was so that immediate cash would be in the hands of the farmers thus benefiting the 

economy of the farmers and of the province; secondly, that we wouldn‟t get into the type of situation we 

have had at the end of crop years in the years past where some unforeseen circumstances could prevent 

the delivering of grain. I refer to the last crop year when strikes held up the delivery of grain for some 

two and one-half months, which kept the farmers from delivering grain and which affected sales 

overseas; thirdly, I want grain in the terminals both at the West Coast and at the Lakehead as soon as 

possible so that no country which is a customer of Canada will be prevented from negotiating sales and 

rapid delivery of grain that it is interested in. Two weeks ago for two weeks in a row, I may inform the 

Hon. Member that because of the strike or potential strike at the West Coast Japan has placed no orders 

for Canadian wheat. She sought to get them some place else, so we are interested in that. And fourthly, 

that, because of the greater interest in barley sales this year compared to a year ago, because of the 

tremendous interest in rapeseed sales, and because of what may be further sales for wheat in this crop 

year, the thing to do is to get that grain moving now, get it in position and then we won‟t have a block in 

transportation facilities. On top of that we have asked for the complete cooperation of the railroads, the 

cooperation of labor, the cooperation of the grain firms and the cooperation of the Canadian Wheat 

Board in all these aspects. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Does that clear it up for you? 

 

Mr. Bowerman: — No, it didn‟t. Mr. Speaker, may I address a supplementary question to the Hon. 

Minister? May I ask then what direct response has he had to the fact that there are less cars moving in 

the grain distribution system and how much response has he had? 

 

Mr. McFarlane: — The response that we have had is that the Wheat Board tell us, when we asked for 

the appointment of a Transport Coordinator to make sure that the railways were supplying cars, that they 

have got in touch with the railway companies, both the CNR and the CPR, and they have been assured 

that sufficient cars and locomotives to run these cars will be available. They tell us too that, although 

they didn‟t appoint the Transport Coordinator as we requested, they appointed an assistant coordinator 

for the western movement as well as an assistant 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

12 

coordinator for the movement to the Lakehead. They have assured us — and I am still apprehensive 

about this — however they have assured us that they have it programmed now so that they will get these 

facilities filled by the time navigation opens again. 

 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition (Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing during the last year of three 

former Members of this Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions 

each made to his community, to his constituency and to this Province. 

 

John Wesley Corman, who dies on April 29, 1969, was a Member of this Legislature for Moose 

Jaw City from 1944 to 1956. He was born in Stoney Creek, Ontario. He graduated from the 

University of Toronto in 1912 with a degree in Political Science. He studied law and was called 

to the bar in 1915. He was elected to Moose Jaw City Council as an Alderman in 1938 and 

elected Mayor in 1940. In 1944, he was appointed Attorney General, and Minister in charge of 

the Local Government Board, the Provincial Mediation Board and Administrator of Estates of 

the Mentally Incompetent Office. 

 

Tom Johnston, who died on September 11, 1969, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Touchwood from 1938 to 1956. He was Speaker of the Legislature from 1944 to 1956. He was 

born in Birmingham, England in 1881 and received his education there. He came to Canada in 

1901. He homesteaded near Cymric, Saskatchewan in 1903. In 1929-30, he was a member of a 

Provincial Royal Commission on Immigration and Settlement. In 1950 he represented the 

Saskatchewan Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association at the General 

Conference in New Zealand. 

 

William Pedersen, who died on January 31, 1970, was a Member of this Legislature for 

Milestone from 1934 to 1944. He was born in Rorbeck, Iowa, United States of America in 1883. 

He came to Canada in 1907. He received his education at Clay Township School, Commercial 

College at Des Moines, Iowa and also the Agricultural College, Ames, Iowa. He was a farmer 

and breeder of Aberdeen Angus cattle. He was the Secretary of the Caledonia School District; 

Councillor for the Rural Municipality of Caledonia, 1916 to 1925; Reeve, 1925 to 1934; 

President of the Grain Growers Local, Milestone for three years; President of the Milestone 

Agricultural Society for three years and President of the Saskatchewan Aberdeen Angus 

Association. He was a Mason and a Member of the Scottish Rite. 

 

Before moving a motion with respect to these three Members, Mr. Speaker, may I depart from the usual 

routine to express another condolence motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we join today in memory of former Members of this Legislature, I would ask the 

House to join with me in paying tribute to a man we all knew and respected. 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

13 

That man was E. N. (Ted) Davis. 

 

Mr. Davis was a close personal friend of mine and of many others in the Legislature. Many times 

I was grateful for his candid views and his advice on many matters. He was highly respected 

across Saskatchewan and Canada as a journalist. His ability to get at the facts of a story was 

renowned. Ted often gave the impression to those who did not know him of being gruff and 

thick-skinned. This was a front he had developed to perfection. Underneath that hard, outward 

appearance was a man with a deep personal interest in his fellow man and those around him. Ted 

Davis was known as the Dean of the Legislative Press Gallery, having been a member from 1928 

until he died last September 21. I am sure most senior Members here can recall seeing Ted sitting 

in the gallery with his eyes half-closed as though he was many miles away. However when the 

newspaper arrived on the street, it became apparent that Ted had been with us all the time and, 

perhaps, just a bit ahead of many of us. 

 

I would ask all Members to join with me in paying tribute to one of the better newspapermen that 

Saskatchewan has ever had — Ted Davis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to now move the motion with regard to the deceased Members. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most 

sincere sympathies to members of the bereaved families. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that I owe the House an apology. When I recognized the Premier before the 

Orders of the Day I believed, mistakenly so, that he was rising to make a statement before the Orders of 

the Day. In view of the subject that he rose to discuss I hesitated to interrupt him. The Member from 

Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) was trying to rise at the time and I intended to see him next. I will 

reconcile the conflict by seeing the Member from Moose Jaw South before I put the motion. I don‟t 

know for what purpose he intended to rise but, if he intended to ask a question, I will entertain it now 

and that I think will end the question period for today. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I could suggest that we might 

revert for brief questions following the condolences. This might be best now that they have been 

introduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I just didn‟t catch this. 

 

Mr. Davies: — I am just suggesting that it might be well for us to revert to Questions following the 

Condolences that have been introduced by the Premier. 

 

Mr. W. S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, several of my colleagues will wish to add 

their thoughts and reflections on the Resolution before us. Let me associate all of us with the motions 

and the sentiments which have been expressed by the Premier. With respect to Mr. Davis 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

14 

who was mentioned, I am sure that most of us can remember contacts with Ted Davis and can remember 

his many years in the Press Gallery and generally speaking in the political forums of the country. I can 

recall a number of very warm meetings with Ted Davis. Sometimes that warm meeting could be defined 

in various ways, but regardless of which way it was it never interfered with the pleasantness of meeting 

him and talking with him on the next immediate occasion. We share the regret at his passing and we 

pass on our condolences to Mrs. Davis and members of the family. 

 

I was not informed of the death of Mr. Pedersen and unfortunately did not have the opportunity of 

knowing him. However, I did know of him. We know from the recital today that he was one more of 

those pioneers of Saskatchewan who gave service at so many different levels of good activity during 

their lifetime. He was a Member of this Legislature for a number of years and again we share in the 

expression of regret and condolence to members of the family. 

 

I did of course know both Jack Corman and Tom Johnston. It was my pleasure to sit in the Legislature 

with them, to be associated with them in the counsels of my party and to sit in the Cabinet for a number 

of years with Jack Corman. 

 

Let me speak first of Mr. Corman, our late Attorney General. I think some of the legislation which he 

sponsored in this House is in itself very descriptive of the kind of man he was. It was he who introduced 

into this Legislature the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights and our Province as a result became the first 

jurisdiction in Canada to pass such a Bill. It has been followed of course since that time by the Federal 

Government and by several other Provinces as well. Within months after he became Attorney General 

he was introducing into this Legislature protection for farm people and he added greatly to the farm 

security legislation in this province. During his period the Mediation Board became a very vigorous and 

effective spokesman on the part of people who had problems which were bigger indeed than they. 

 

Those of us who sat with him benefited very greatly from his wisdom — and one must call Jack Corman 

a wise man — from his sound legal advice and from an almost intuitive political sagacity. He was a wise 

man and he was a kindly man. His real human sympathy, coupled with dedication, turned him to public 

service and in those positions of public service as Mayor of the city, Member of this Legislature, 

Cabinet Minister. His personal feelings were turned into very useful public acts. 

 

Tom Johnston was another one of these very distinctive citizens to sit in this Legislature. I suppose, Mr. 

Speaker, it would have to be agreed that Tom Johnston and Jack Corman were two of the very unique 

people who have from time to time occupied these seats. 

 

Tom Johnston was a pioneer in many ways. Obviously he was a pioneer farmer. He was also a pioneer 

in so far as organizations were concerned and a pioneer in so far as political activity was concerned. His 

influence was very early felt in farm organizations and in political organizations in the Province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

He first ran for a seat in this Legislature in the election 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

15 

of 1934 in the constituency of Lumsden. He was unsuccessful. The very next year he was back in the 

ring as a Federal candidate in Prince Albert, at that time running against the Right Hon. MacKenzie 

King, Prime Minister of Canada. Again he was unsuccessful. In 1938 he was elected in the constituency 

of Touchwood and he continued to represent that constituency until he retired voluntarily from it. 

 

Two months ago, Mr. Speaker, there was a ceremony in Regina to honor this very distinct and unique 

person. I thought that I might read to the Legislature one of the quotations which I used in speaking at 

that time. It was a comment by the American writer, Tom Payne. Thomas Payne wrote: 

 

I love the man who can gather strength from distress and grow by reflection. „Tis the business of 

little minds to shrink but he whose heart is firm and whose conscience approves his conduct will 

pursue his principles on to death. 

 

This can be said so truly of Tom Johnston that he did gather strength from distress. He reflected much 

and he grew as a result of that reflection. His mind did not shrink. His heart remained firm and certainly 

he pursued his principles on to death. 

 

Let me most sincerely associate myself with the Resolutions which are now before us. 

 

Mr. F. Meakes (Touchwood): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to say a few words in memory of Tom Johnston. I 

do it with deep emotional feelings. I was one who knew Tom, as he was known to everyone in 

Touchwood, very well. I was a member of his executive for many years and I was president of his 

political organization for seven or eight years. 

 

To work with him as I did was to respect him and to admire him. He was a common man with nothing 

put on. With him a spade was a spade. You always knew where he stood on any given issue. He was a 

man fearless to fight for those things that he believed in and yet he was always tolerant of other people‟s 

views. Many times I heard him expound his philosophy of, “I may think you are all wrong but I will 

fight to my last breath to see that you have the opportunity to express your views.” I knew him as a man 

who had deep human feelings for other people especially anyone who was facing the tribulations of life. 

Indeed it was his love of human beings that brought him into public life. He soon found out, when he 

came to Canada, the necessity of working with and working for other people. This brought him into the 

early cooperative movement and the old United Farmers of Canada. Many of the old-timers of 

Touchwood still talk about Tom in those early days, walking through the area organizing for the old 

United Farmers of Canada. He was a firm believer that the only hope that the farmers had was for them 

to stick together, and he expounded this to the very last. 

 

Just a few months before his death I visited him at home in Strasbourg, and he gave me another one of 

those little lectures on the necessity of people working together. He was a very versatile man and by the 

time he was 18 he was operating his own tailor shop in Birmingham, England. The call of Canada soon 

made him leave his native country and brought him to this province. Homesteading near Govan, he soon 

became a good farmer, 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

16 

and for those days farmed a large spread. 

 

I had the privilege of knowing Mrs. Johnston and the family. Through those difficult years of the 1920s 

and „30s, Mrs. Johnston and Tom raised a family to be proud of. He had a great influence on my life and 

in my thinking on social affairs and my feelings with other human beings. I know that he influenced 

hundreds of other people with whom he came in contact. 

 

In 1956, when he retired and I first ran, I soon found out as I traveled through the constituency, 

regardless of politics, Tom was held in the highest respect. People of all beliefs talked of him with 

affection. This was one of his greatest attributes, I think. He could argue with someone but always left 

that person with a feeling that he could return later and continue the discussions. 

 

In Tom Johnston we lost a friend, a good citizen and a great pioneer. He was the kind of man that we 

might well endeavor to copy. Mr. Speaker, I will always carry him in my memory as long as I live. 

 

Hon. D. V. Heald (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the 

remarks of those who have spoken before me in connection with this Motion; and I would first of all like 

to say a few words about the late John W. Corman, QC, who was Attorney General of this Province 

from July of 1944 until July of 1956. This is a period of almost exactly 12 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I consider myself indeed fortunate for one thing, for the thoughtfulness of my predecessors 

in the office of Attorney General, I think I could stand to be corrected, but I think that I am the only 

Minister in the Government who has the photograph of each and every one of my predecessors in my 

office, commencing with 1905. Before my incumbency there were nine Attorney Generals in the 

Province of Saskatchewan. The longest time in office was the late Chief Justice Turgeon who was 

Attorney General for a period of about 14 years, and then in terms of length of service as Attorney 

General of this Province comes Jack Corman. He served in this position for a period of 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the people who are presently in my Department started in the department during 

the term of office of Jack Corman. I can say without any hesitation whatsoever that the members of my 

staff in my Department, who had the privilege of serving in that department under Jack Corman, 

remember him with the greatest fondness and affection, because, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. 

Lloyd) said, he was a very wise man. He was a man of good judgment and he was also a very kindly 

man with a very effective sense of humor, a very quick sense of humor. There have been many 

anecdotes, indeed, related to me about the very active sense of humor that Jack Corman had. As I say he 

is remembered with the greatest affection by the people who still work in my Department. 

 

I didn‟t know him well, but I did know him to some extent. I had several occasions to meet him when I 

was practicing law and he was Attorney General. I can remember that I was always well received. The 

case that I had to put before him, or the position that I had to put before him on behalf of a client, was 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

17 

always given a good hearing. He didn‟t always agree with me, but I always had the feeling — and I 

think that my clients always had the feeling — that we had received a full and fair hearing by Mr. 

Corman. 

 

I would certainly extend my condolences to the members of his family. 

 

Mr. Pedersen, I didn‟t know well. However, I do know a number of the members of his family well. It 

has been said that he was one of the real pioneers in the Province of Saskatchewan. I remember when I 

used to come to the Legislature as a student, I used to remember Mr. Pedersen sitting in his place in the 

Legislature. I remember him because he sat as a seatmate of my Member at that time, Mr. G. H. 

Danielson. As I say, he was one of the really truly fine pioneers of this province. 

 

Mr. Johnston, I didn‟t know very well, but again what I said about Mr. Pedersen certainly would have 

application to him. I remember him presiding in the Legislature as Speaker, and I always considered him 

to be one of the really fine Members of the Legislature and one of the fine pioneers of the province. 

 

Mr. E. N. Ted Davis was a good friend of mine. I knew him for many years before I came to the 

Legislature. I knew him when I practised downtown. From time to time we were in the same coffee row, 

I guess you would say, on Scarth Street or on Hamilton Street. I knew Ted Davis as a gifted and 

dedicated member of the press of this province. And so I would like to associate myself with the 

remarks that have been made as far as Mr. Davis is concerned. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, without being too repetitive this afternoon I 

would like to join with the others that have spoken here in respect and regret today for the passing of 

former Members of the Legislature and also Ted Davis whom I knew for very many years. 

 

I associate myself particularly in these sentiments with regard to the memory of former Moose Jaw 

MLA and Cabinet Minister, Jack Corman, as he was “Jack” to everyone that he knew. It has been noted 

that he served Moose Jaw with great ability and dedication as an alderman, mayor and as a Member of 

this Assembly for a period of some 18 years. His service, of course, was given in many other ways as 

well. 

 

Jack Corman was first elected to city council in Moose Jaw in 1938. He became Mayor of the Friendly 

City in 1940. He was re-elected twice after that by acclamation. He was very popular both in Moose Jaw 

and the district as well. His friendly, witty and whimsical image, I think, Mr. Speaker, was indeed the 

reflection of the city area and its people. 

 

I wasn‟t a Member of the House when Mr. Corman was here, but I well remember the kind of style that 

he used in debates. He was very well regarded, I think, by friend and political foe alike. 

 

There was an item in The Leader Post on May 28, 1942 that said, and I am quoting: 

 

A stranger stopping in Moose Jaw on a business trip that 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

18 

included visits to the City Hall was heard to say that the personality of the city and of its mayor 

go hand in hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack Corman‟s achievements as a MLA and as a Minister of the Crown have already been 

briefly related. They will be well remembered. One certainly was very useful for Moose Jaw and that 

was the legislation expediting the settlement of Moose Jaw with its bond holders, because as you know 

there was a time when Moose Jaw‟s financial circumstances were very bad indeed. Of course the great 

pioneer step that he was associated with, The Bill of Rights, the first in Canada, was one that will be 

long remembered. 

 

Jack‟s ancestors it may not be known were United Empire Loyalists. The Saskatchewan barristers that 

knew him speak of his keen and brilliant mind in law school. He was articled in Moose Jaw with the 

firm of Dunn and Spotton and came into the Bar in 1915. He became a King‟s Counsel in 1935. 

 

When he was Mayor of Moose Jaw, Jack Corman was asked to give a Friday night broadcast over radio 

station CHAB. This radio program continued when he became Attorney General after his resounding 

election in 1944. His talent for combining down-to-earth humor with the discussion of daily events in 

politics made this perhaps the most popular and talked-about broadcast in the province. His “Corman‟s 

Column” in the Commonwealth was another very readable and topical item. But while I think that he 

had a very devastating style on the air and in the newspaper, he was never malicious and he injected wit 

and life into many a dull subject. He did bring down, of course, some criticism on himself but he was 

always universally liked and respected. Oddly his own political campaign rarely saw him campaigning 

for himself. In 1941 as a matter of fact he was elected for a third term as Mayor by a huge majority 

without making one campaign speech. 

 

I said that Moose Jaw benefited from the ministrations of Jack Corman and I have made particular 

reference to the changes in the law that helped Moose Jaw pull herself up by the boot straps and emerge 

from a very, very perilous period of financial difficulties. 

 

It has been said that Jack Corman was very kind. He was also a very human man and he had an ear for 

people. If anyone asked him for legal advice that person could be sure that he wouldn‟t wind up in 

expensive litigation, if there was a simpler or more sensible way to settle the problem. He saw the law as 

something to serve the people and to ensure their rights and their personal security. I first saw him in 

action in 1941 when he acted as the chairman of an Arbitration Board of which I was a member. It was a 

very difficult case. It involved the dismissal of a lady unionist. Jack, because of his way with people, got 

a unanimous report. The lady returned to work and she has since gone on to distinguish herself in a local 

Moose Jaw company. 

 

Of the many MLAs to represent their constituency and to leave this House, and later in the nature of 

things die, I think Jack Corman will rank among the best, the most able and the most deserving. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his family, his community and this House and 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

19 

the Province may be justly proud of the contributions he rendered throughout his life. 

 

Hon. C. P. MacDonald (Minister of Welfare): — Mr. Speaker, I wish to join and associate myself with 

the remarks of the other Members of the House to the families of the deceased Members. I want to say a 

special word about a very close friend of mine, Mr. Bill Pedersen, the former MLA for the constituency 

of Milestone which I now represent. 

 

It was my privilege to know Mr. Pedersen for probably 10 or 12 years and to call him a friend. In my 

own political life no single individual has influenced me as much as Mr. Pedersen. He was the kind of 

man that is remembered very distinctly in his community for several outstanding contributions. 

 

First, he is remembered as a pioneer. He came to the Province of Saskatchewan in 1907. He was of 

Danish background and came from the United States. He and a brother settled in Milestone and raised 

their family in that community since that time. I think that Mr. Pedersen will always be remembered in 

the constituency of Milestone and perhaps in the entire southern part of the province for the fact that he 

was a man who had a deep and abiding interest in his community. In fact his whole life might be 

referred to as a life of service. First of all he was remembered for the thing that we are recalling today, 

an MLA or a Member of the Legislature. He was also secretary of his local school district for some 25 

years. He was a member of the Rural Municipality of Caledonia for many years. He was the reeve of the 

council. He was the president of The Agricultural Society. He was the president of The Saskatchewan 

Aberdeen Angus Association. Mr. Pedersen in every avenue of life that he had an interest in, whether it 

was church, lodge, council, school or province, excelled and dedicated himself to his utmost. 

 

Mr. Pedersen will also be remembered in the southern part of the province for his interest in the sale and 

the leadership he provided in selling Victory Bonds during the Second World War. They still talk about 

his record and his ability to go into a farmer‟s yard or to a neighbor‟s home and convince them of the 

importance of contributing to the Victory Bond drive. 

 

One of the things that I like to remember about Mr. Pedersen most of all, is the fact that he was an 

excellent MLA. He was the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Milestone during the depression 

years and people still tell the story that Mr. Pedersen never drove down any road in the constituency of 

Milestone without stopping at every farm house. It didn‟t make any difference where he was going. It 

almost took him a day to arrive. He seemed to be able to sit down and discuss their problems with 

people of all political faiths. Whenever they asked him to do something he had a reputation of never 

failing to carry it out or do his best to aid in the solution of their problems. 

 

It is also interesting that he was a cattle breeder and that his son and grandson are now carrying on in the 

Aberdeen Angus breeding at Cropwell. His farm is one of the outstanding farms in Southern 

Saskatchewan. Many, many people in Saskatchewan and visitors from outside Saskatchewan have 

stopped at Cropwell and enjoyed the hospitality of the Pedersen family. 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

20 

They also enjoyed visiting the farm and the agricultural enterprise set up by Mr. Pedersen. 

 

Once again I want to say that I join with other Members of this House in expressing our condolences to 

Mr. Pedersen‟s family and to all the families of the Members who have died during the past year. 

 

Mr. G. T. Snyder (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say a few brief words in 

recognition of the long and faithful service of the person whom Moose Jaw people knew affectionately 

as their Alderman, their Mayor and in the most prominent years of his political career as their MLA and 

their Attorney General. 

 

I think that Members will be aware that, when the CCF formed the Government of Saskatchewan in 

1944, Jack Corman filled a key position. His legal background and his former political experience made 

him an extremely valuable asset to the Government of that day. Those Members who were fortunate to 

be associated with him in government regarded him as a scholar, as a very able and very dedicated 

public servant, but most of all Jack Corman was a person who believed in the dignity of the individual 

and the right of all people to live with honor and self-respect. 

 

He was one of those who regarded “humanity first” as a meaningful concept and meant it to be applied 

to the Saskatchewan environment in many ways. I was in England last spring at the time of Mr. 

Corman‟s funeral, and I deeply regretted that I was unable to attend and pay my last respect to him. I 

had visited with him only a few weeks prior to his death. I think that Members are aware also that he had 

not been in good health for some time, but in spite of this he remained very cheerful and was a fountain 

of wisdom in spite of his advancing years. I know that all Members will wish to join in a sincere 

expression of sympathy in the passing of one of Saskatchewan‟s most distinguished public servants. 

 

Hon. W. R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition 

(Mr. Lloyd): 

 

That the Resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased Members, be communicated to the bereaved families, on behalf of this Assembly by 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — I think that it is appropriate at this time to read two communications which I have 

received and which I delayed reading until this juncture in the proceedings. I have one from the 

Embassy of the United States of America, dated Ottawa, April 23, 1969: 

 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 

 

The President has asked me to reply to your very thoughtful letter of April 1, 1969, forwarding a 

Resolution nemine contradicente marking the passing of former President Eisenhower. Please 

convey to your colleagues 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

21 

the President‟s appreciation. It is reassuring to know that our Canadian friends share our feeling 

of loss and mourn with us the death of this great American President. 

 

Signed by Harold F. Linder 

United States Ambassador 

 

And another communication from Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, dated April 23: 

 

Dear Mr. Speaker: 

 

Please convey to the Members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan my sincere 

appreciation for the Resolution passed in honor of my husband. 

 

I thank you for this wonderful tribute which will be placed with the official papers in the 

Presidential Library in Abiline, Kansas. 

 

With my gratitude and very best wishes, 

 

Mamie Daud Eisenhower. 

 

Mr. W. G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — Mr. Speaker, do I have leave of the House to revert to 

questions now? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — That is a question which I have to put to the House. It has been asked that we revert to 

questions. Is leave granted? No. You have to have unanimous consent of the House. 

 

Mr. F. A. Dewhurst (Wadena): — I would like to rise on that point. We do not have items on the Order 

Paper specifically stating questions as all these come before the Orders of the Day. I realize that you, 

Sir, have attempted, and rightly so, in the last few years to try and get one topic covered before we reach 

Orders of the Day. But whether questions are completed there are no headings for oral questions, and I 

would like to know just why we have to have unanimous consent or why we have to revert because we 

are still on Order of the Day. We have not passed Orders of the Day. I think that the Hon. Member from 

Moose Jaw South (Mr. Davies) is within the rules that we have been following, without asking the leave 

to revert because there is no specific order which calls for questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — Again I wish to explain to the House how this occurred. I felt, when the Premier rose, 

inasmuch as we were having a question and answer period, in connection with the Conference which is 

going to take place in Ottawa this coming week, that possibly he was going to make a statement in 

regard to that, as we hadn‟t finished that particular piece of business. However, he entered into a motion 

in connection with the Members who have passed away and I didn‟t like to interrupt him at that time, 

considering the nature of the subject. Had it been a motion of any other kind I would have done so. I 

concluded that because we went ahead with it we did enter the Orders of the Day. I further draw your 

attention to the fact that we have absolutely no procedure in this House for an oral question period. 

There is no proper procedure in this House. It is my contention 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

22 

that, as was suggested by the Member from Moose Jaw (Mr. Davies), he was the person I would have 

seen next, had the Premier been making a statement or something of some other nature; and it was his 

suggestion that we might by leave revert. We have been on the Orders of the Day because we have been 

discussing them for the last hour and that‟s the situation which we are in now. If the Members wish to 

revert to questions then in my view it will have to be done by leave of the House. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — May I ask a question? Mr. Speaker, on the topic we have been on under Orders of 

the Day, I thought all we had taken was before Orders of the Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You are on Orders of the Day because I called Orders of the Day. Before the Orders of 

the Day people get up and ask questions as it has been customary to do in this House. 

 

Mr. Dewhurst: — There are no items on this Order Paper under Orders of the Day so what have we 

been doing? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — You‟ve been discussing the departed Members of this Legislature, quite obviously. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Do we have leave to revert to questions? 

 

Mr. Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked leave to revert to questions. Agreed. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

Federal-Provincial Conference 
 

Mr. Davies: — Mr. Speaker, I had thought to address this question to the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) but I don‟t think he is now in his seat. Since I understand from the remarks of the Premier that 

the Labour Minister will not be a member of the delegation to Ottawa, which I think is regrettable, I will 

place the question as a general question to the Government. My question is: Mr. Speaker, in view of the 

imminence of the Federal-Provincial Conference and the fact that DBS reports well over 16,000 

unemployed in Saskatchewan, would the Government inform the House on any specific proposals it has 

to place before Mr. Trudeau for immediate Federal Government action to ease the present provincial 

jobless crisis? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that once and for all today I can indicate that we have no 

intention giving publicity to our brief at this time. I will tell the Member for Moose Jaw South we have 

some proposals and he will learn about them Monday or Tuesday if he reads the newspapers, no doubt. 

 

Mr. A. E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — I would like to ask a question, Mr. Speaker. Would the Premier 

advise whether there are any construction projects the Saskatchewan Government now has that can be 



February 13, 1970 

 

 

23 

commenced now to alleviate the worst levels of unemployment that are currently with us? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We will make an announcement in due course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I may ask a question of the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. 

Steuart). Unlike the Premier who is going to a conference the Provincial Treasurer has just come back 

from one and is accordingly able to tell us what happened. I wonder if he can advise the House whether 

at that Conference of Finance Ministers he raised objections, and I would hope strong objections, to the 

current Federal Government policies, fiscal policies, which are allegedly to control inflation but which 

in fact are causing widespread unemployment and distress? 

 

Hon. D. G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — Tremendous objections. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:45 o‟clock p.m. 


