



















































Hansard: April 13, 1970


1582 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

40th Day 

 

Monday, April 13, 1970. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

FOREST INDUSTRY COMPLEX AT MEADOW LAKE 
 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, may I make an announcement to Members of the 

Legislature. I wish to announce today the establishment of a forest industry complex for the western 

region of Saskatchewan. I believe the complex when brought to fruition will be one of the most 

important developments ever to take place in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Under the Agreement, at the earliest feasible date, Parsons and Whittemore will begin 

construction of a chip and saw-mill designed to produce approximately 50 million board feet of lumber 

and chips in the vicinity of Meadow Lake. Total cot of the sawmill will be about $6 ½ million. The 

Federal Government has agreed to make $1.8 million in grants. Equity of approximately $1.1 million 

will be involved, with the province having 30 per cent. A SEDCO loan on a long-term basis will be 

made for the balance of the financing. It is expected that when the mill goes into operation 80 employees 

will be hired on a permanent basis in the sawmill and about 100 in the woods. Reasonable infrastructure 

support required for the sawmill will be provided by agreements between the Provincial and Federal 

Governments. 

 

Parsons and Whittemore have also agreed in principle to construct a pulp mill north of Meadow Lake. 

Capacity will be about 1,000 tons per day. It will be the objective of the company, subject to economic 

interest rates, to commence construction of the pulp mill within two years. In the event the construction 

of the pulp mill has not commenced within five years from the date of the Agreement, the Provincial 

Government shall have the right to reduce the management licence appropriately. 

 

Again the equity for the complex will be provided 70 per cent through Parsons and Whittemore, and 30 

per cent through the Province, similar to arrangements established in the Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

Company Limited. 

 

Total capital required for the pulp mill will be approximately $120 million. It is expected that a Federal 

capital incentive grant of approximately $12 million will be available. A long-term loan of $70 million 

from lending institutions will be guaranteed by the Provincial Government. 

 

Sufficient wood will be made available to sustain the Timber Board operations in Big river at present 

capacity. The development and establishment of this new industrial complex 



 

April 13, 1970 

 

1583 

will achieve the maximum utilization of the forest and labour resources of the western region of the 

province. The complex will provide employment for approximately 1,200 to 1,500 people, stimulate the 

development of the area, and promote the development of ancillary industries. 

 

The Agreement will provide that a maximum number of people of Indian ancestry must be employed 

both in the construction phase and in the operation of the two mills. We think this is important, Mr. 

Speaker, because as you know a great portion of the population in that northern area — and I am talking 

about Dore Lake, that’s roughly where the site will be — is native. Specific terms will be included in the 

Agreement to provide for reforestation and pollution control. 

 

When finalized this will be the largest single industry ever established in the province. 

 

I might say Mr. Speaker, that over the past three years 15 Canadian companies have been approached to 

see if they would be interested in that area. Either they lacked the courage or the imagination to proceed. 

Just as Mr. Landegger was the only one we could persuade to go into Prince Albert, so he is the only one 

we have been able to persuade to proceed in this manner into the Meadow Lake area. 

 

I might say that there are still some difficulties that have to be overcome before construction can 

proceed. A railroad line of about 80 miles length will likely have to be built from somewhere in the 

Meadow Lake area up to Dore Lake. We don’t anticipate that this will be a major obstacle. I am 

confident that this latest complex will contribute in a major way to improving living standards in this 

part of Saskatchewan. 

 

For Hon. Members of the Opposition, I might say that Mr. Landegger and his associates are sitting in the 

galleries. We worked a good deal of yesterday and this morning to conclude the negotiations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — May I also tell the Hon. Member for Prince Albert East-Cumberland (Mr. 

Berezowsky) that some time after this Session we will probably begin negotiations to dispose of our 30 

per cent share in the Prince Albert mill. This will relieve us of all obligations if a deal is concluded. We 

will be able to take the commitments we had at Prince Albert, and move them over to the Meadow Lake 

project. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. A.E. Blakeney (Regina Centre): — Mr. Speaker, I think Members on this side of the House will 

welcome any development that there may be in the Meadow lake or Dore Lake-Smoothstone area or that 

is presaged by the announcement of the Premier. I would hope that since he quoted rather liberally from 

the Agreements he would have no objection to tabling copies of the Agreements in the House. I think 

that many of us will be interested in the firmness of the commitment particularly with respect to the pulp 

mill. The chip-board mill is a relatively small operation in contrast with the other, an operation of $1.1 

million, if I understood the 



 

April 13, 1970 

 

1584 

figures correctly, although I may not have. The pulp mill is obviously a very major industrial 

development. I think all of us, including the people in the northwest area, would like to have the 

Agreements so that we can make an assessment of the firmness of the proposal. There is, as was noted, 

an agreement in principle. there are problems to be overcome. There are a number of words which are of 

relatively indefinite meaning. I am sure that all of us would welcome our own opportunity to assess the 

situation. 

 

Certainly we welcome this indication that our forest resources may find a more productive use. We do 

hope that there will be enough saw-timber retained which is over and above that which is necessary for 

chip-board operations — which should not require any saw timber — and pulp operations – which 

should require a minimum of saw-timber – so that the existing saw-log operations in the area can be 

maintained. there was a reference to saw-log operations in the Big River area, but I think many small 

operators and others, farmers who work in the bush particularly in the winter time, would welcome such 

assurances as are available that this saw-log operation will be continued so that this maximum use of 

saw-timber can be made. 

 

With those comments I would invite the Premier to table the Agreements from which he quoted. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated a moment ago or thought I indicated, this morning we 

signed a memorandum to proceed – a memorandum of understanding. The reason we hurried this along 

was to permit construction of the sawmill immediately. the Company officials will come to Regina some 

two weeks after the Session. It may take two or three weeks to negotiate the actual Agreement for the 

pulp mill. I will not be prepared to table the memorandum of understanding, but when the final 

Agreement is made I am sure we will follow the same procedure as we did with the Prince Albert mill. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I would like to make one brief comment. that latter comment is not very reassuring 

because consistently in the last session and in the current Session requests for copies of the Agreement 

covering the Prince Albert pulp mill have been denied. 

 

Hon. D.G. Steuart (Provincial Treasurer): — On a point of privilege, he got every Agreement he asked 

for. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I have the floor and the Provincial Treasurer is stating a flat falsehood. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! I don’t think a Member should say that the Provincial Treasurer, or any 

other Member is stating a flat falsehood. However, you may say that what he said is not in accordance 

with the facts as you see them. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — With every deference, Mr. Speaker, … 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I shouldn’t be putting words 



 

April 13, 1970 

 

1585 

in the mouth of the Member from Regina Centre. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — With every deference, Mr. Speaker, to state that someone is stating a falsehood is 

merely to say that his information is inaccurate, not knowingly inaccurate, and the knowingly inaccurate 

is what transgresses our rules. In order to comply with your ruling I will indicate that the statement of 

the Provincial Treasurer is not in accordance with my view of the facts, because in Committee we asked 

for these, in Committee he did not provide them and he said he would, and they are not here yet. I am 

not complaining except that they’re just not here yet. No single amendment to the Pulp Mill 

Agreements. I indicated in Committee that I was dealing with the 1965 Agreements and I have not 

received the amending Agreements either in this House or outside, notwithstanding assurances both 

inside and outside the House that I would get them. I don’t want to pursue this point except that I would 

really suggest that these Agreements be made public since after all they involve very substantial sums of 

public money. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t blame the Opposition for being a bit disappointed again because 

this free enterprise Liberal Government has for the second time done what the Socialists failed to do for 

20 years. We have got our second mill and they couldn’t get any so I expect them now to start 

obstructing just as quickly as they can. Come on, Bill, it’s your turn. You might as well get up and start 

now but we’re going to build a mill. 

 

Mr. W.J. Berezowsky (Prince Albert East-Cumberland): — Mr. Speaker, … 

 

Mr. Speaker:  We cannot have a debate arise on statements before the Orders of the Day. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make a statement. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Well alright, the answer was begged from the Member from Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland, so go ahead. 

 

Mr. Berezowsky: — I am always delighted as every Member in this House is and every citizen in 

Saskatchewan is delighted to see industry in Saskatchewan. It’s about time this Government produced 

something but it still hasn’t produced anything, only what may be at the public’s expense. We’ll know 

more about it later when you produce the Agreements. If you don’t produce them we’ll still get the facts. 

However I would like the Government to consider the people of Saskatchewan and when the 

Government enters into this Agreement it could consider that when it disposes of the Province’s forest 

area that it considers that there are people in Saskatchewan who are entitled to some of the benefits of 

that forest. When the previous CCF Government had an agreement with Anglo-Canadian we did reserve 

some 20 or 30 miles along the forest fringe for the people of Saskatchewan. But when this Government 

made a deal with Parsons and Whittemore it gave every tree in Saskatchewan north of the mill. Now I 

suggest to the Government, Mr. Speaker, that, when it makes a 



 

April 13, 1970 

 

1586 

new agreement, for goodness sake let it reserve some of that timber for the people in the North who may 

need granaries for purposes of the farm. I could give other suggestions if you would only come and ask 

us. I am glad you are going after a mill, I hope it comes through. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I know you don’t want to prolong this, but when some of these statements are made, 

when we made the Agreement with the Prince Albert Pulp Company — the man has made a false 

statement — we kept out timber for the Timber Board; we kept out timber rights for the creosol plant 

and we’ll do the same thing in the new complex. To say that when you made some agreement with some 

company you kept out 20, you might as well have kept out the entire North because you never got 

anything. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — Hang your head, Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! If we are going to have any further comments on the statement made by 

the Premier we will be entering into a wholesale, freewheeling debate entered into by every Member in 

the House. The customary procedure on statements is for a Member of the Government to make a 

statement and for one Member of the Opposition to reply. I agree that this is probably a rather important 

matter that we are discussing here this morning, but we have already gone far beyond the bounds of 

correct parliamentary procedure and here I think the matter should end. I did allow the Member for 

Prince Albert East-Cumberland to comment but then, of course, I made an exception in that regard 

because the comment was invited and perhaps because he comes from the free state of Prince Albert 

East-Cumberland. 

 

QUESTIONS 
 

BIG RIVER AREA 
 

Mr. G.R. Bowerman (Shellbrook): The Premier made reference to the Big River area in the statement 

that you made, Sir, and it was a very brief statement. What actually are you proposing for the Big River 

area? 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — We will be working with Parsons and Whittemore over the next few weeks to see 

what kind of an operation might be worked out, which will keep the people employed there. We are 

looking at the feasibility of a chip=board plant or a chipping mill. All the information we have indicates 

that a sawmill is not feasible there, through lack of timber. 

 

Mr. E. Kramer (The Battlefords): — Does the Premier feel now that this new complex will take the 

place, or help to take the place of some 160 saw-mills that have gone out of business in the last five 

years? I want to say while I am on my feet that I certainly welcome this and I hope it is more fruitful 

than the April Fool’s Day announcement of Primrose Forest Products five years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! We have passed the proper place for statements and comments on 

statements and we are now in the question period. The oral question period. I presume that the 



 

April 13, 1970 

 

1587 

Member has a supplementary oral question, supplementary to that of the Member from Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Kramer: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the Premier, does he think it will replace some of the 

employment that was lost with 160 mills going out of business. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — I think I explained that we expect about 1,200 new jobs in the complex and we think 

this will be a great asset to everyone in that area. I may tell the Hon. Member for The Battlefords that we 

expect to be using the Primrose Road in the process and I hope we won’t hear about that again in the 

House. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Don’t hold your breath. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  Order, order! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — I appreciate that the Premier is off the track at the 

moment, but may I ask the Provincial Treasurer (Mr. Steuart) when we may expect him to provide to the 

Member from Regina Centre (Mr. Blakeney) the information which he has agreed to table. 

 

Mr. Steuart: — I thought he had it. I’ll just check up, I thought it would have been given to him that 

same day. 

 

MANAGEMENT-LABOUR COMMITTEE ON CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY 
 

Mr. W.G. Davies (Moose Jaw South): — I would like to further inquire of the Minister of Labour (Mr. 

Coderre) with respect to the report of the management Labour Committee on the Construction Industry, 

a full report of which occurred in last Saturdays’ Leader Post. I would like to ask the Minister if it is not 

true that he had copies of this report in his office for the past week or ten days, and if so, if the House 

can now get copies and why indeed the House was not provided with copies before? 

 

Hon. L.P. Coderre (Minister of Labour): — I have indicated to this House in the past that the 

Committee has requested me to make an official presentation to the Government. As yet it has not been 

deemed possible to get the representative committee of the Labour-Management Committee to make an 

official presentation to the Government. Yes, I have a copy but I think it is privileged information. 

Somebody has broken a trust to release this information to the Press prior to that. The request made to 

me by the Chairman of the Committee is that they would like to meet a representative committee of the 

Cabinet, of the Government, to make the official presentation. Until then I am not at liberty to make this 

presentation to the Legislature. 

 

Mr. Davies: — Could I ask a supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. When does the Minister anticipate 

that the meeting will take place and the report will be provided to Members of the House? 



 

April 13, 1970 

 

1588 

Mr. Coderre: — As you are aware some members are involved in negotiations at this moment and it is 

rather difficult to get them together. But as soon as that can be done it will be arranged. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — A further question in this regard. Does the Minister not think the rules have not 

substantially changed since the information has been made available to the public to some extent 

through the Press? Doesn’t he consider it to be of mutual advantage to everybody that Members of the 

Legislature have the full report now? 

 

Mr. Coderre: — We will keep your remarks under advisement and we will have a look at it, Sir. 

 

Mr. Blakeney: — I wonder if I might direct a question to the Minister? 

 

Mr. Speaker:  We have had three questions this morning already with the necessary supplementaries 

thereto. I think three is enough for the oral question period and we will proceed with the business of the 

House. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I would like to welcome to the Assembly one group of students situated in the 

Speaker’s gallery. I believe they are from Grosvenor Park school in the constituency of Nutana Centre, 

represented by the Hon. Mr. Estey, the Minister of Municipal Affairs, under the leadership of Mr. 

Welsh. On behalf of the Members of the Legislature I wish to extend a warm welcome to these students. 

We hope that they will find their visit here educational and enjoyable and we hope they have a safe trip 

home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Head, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 o’clock p.m. 


