



















































Hansard: March 20, 1970


1057 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

25th Day 

 

Friday, March 20, 1970. 
 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

SOUTH SASKATCHEWAN RIVER IRRIGATION PROJECT 
 

Hon. D.T. McFarlane (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day are 

proceeded with I wish to announce that the Government has decided to postpone for a year the 

declaration of year one in the development of the South Saskatchewan River Irrigation Project. The 

effect of this decision is that no water rates will be charged for the project in 1970. Members will recall 

that the rate established under our irrigation policy for the project is $4.50 per acre. This step has been 

taken because of the new Federal wheat acreage reduction program which offers little to the irrigation 

farmer. 

 

WOLLASTON LAKE AREA — GULF MINERALS 

 

Hon. W.R. Thatcher (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, last evening an announcement was made from Ottawa 

concerning uranium. The Government of Saskatchewan was most disturbed by the announcement. For 

several years, I think Hon. Members know, Gulf Minerals which has a Canadian-owned subsidiary, has 

been doing exploration work in the Wollaston Lake area in Northern Saskatchewan. We believe they 

have one of the significant finds on the continent. We had hoped and expected that a major refinery 

would probably be feasible and economic in the not too distant future, although there are many hurdles 

yet to be overcome. The Government of Saskatchewan recently completed a tote road into the area. I 

think that action expressed our confidence. So when I read the press announcement, I phoned the Hon. 

Joe Greene this morning to see whether this Gulf deposit would be affected. He directed me to one 

clause in his press release. May I quote it to the House: 

 

To protect foreign companies now involved in exploration, the Government will grant an extension 

to give them time to prove they have found a commercially productive deposit. 

 

I have received this morning full and complete assurances from the Hon. Mr. Greene that if Gulf 

proceeds within a reasonable time — and he suggested that maybe two years would be considered a 

reasonable time — they will be exempt from the provisions announced last night. I am pleased that this 

is so and we will continue to work with Gulf to try and persuade them to pursue this project at the 

earliest possible date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the Premier would indicate 

which provisions are particularly bothering him? 



 

March 20, 1970 

 

 

1058 

Mr. Thatcher: — It was announced of course last night that foreign ownership of uranium would not be 

permitted. At least this is the way newspaper headlines read. When we read the story we were afraid that 

the Gulf project might not be allowed to go ahead. This Government takes the position as far as 

ownership is concerned that we would always prefer Canadian capital. But if Canadian capital isn’t 

available, then we want American capital or whatever kind of capital we can find. We would have been 

most concerned if on top of the wheat crisis, the potash problem, the oil difficulties, and everything else, 

that uranium development had not been allowed to proceed. 

 

Mr. Lloyd: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, while naturally we share the interest of the Premier and the 

Government in the development in Canada, we don’t necessarily agree that development is going to be 

hampered by actions which would, indeed, encourage and to some extent make possible Canadian 

ownership. As I said the other day in the House I think it is extremely important for the sake of the 

future of Canada, that the ownership and development of uranium in particular be kept in Canadian 

hands. I would have hoped that the Premier would encourage the Government of Canada to keep this 

ownership in the hands at least of Canadian people. Canadian corporations, and, indeed as I said, that he 

would go further and urge the Government of Canada to take public ownership development in this 

field. 

 

Mr. Thatcher: — The great problem, Mr. Speaker, is that we have waited for 60 years as a province, 

and nothing has ever happened up there. There is no Canadian capital that we know of that is willing to 

invest in the area. We think if this refinery proceeds there will be several hundred jobs. We want those 

jobs now not 50 years from now whether it’s American capital or Canadian capital that must generate 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly recessed from 12:30 until 2:30 o’clock p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Before we stat the proceedings this afternoon I would like to introduce to the 

Members of this Assembly a group of students from Yellow Creek school situated in the constituency of 

Kinistino, represented by the Hon. Member, Mr. Thibault. On behalf of Members of the Legislature I 

wish to extend a warm welcome to all these students. We hope that they find their visit here enjoyable 

and educational and we wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

1969 SOCCER CHAMPIONS 

 

Mr. A. Thibault (Kinistino): — I would like to add to the introduction that amongst the students this 

afternoon we have the 1969 Soccer Champions who have won the championship six times out of eleven 

tries. I think for a little village like Yellow Creek they certainly have put in a great deal of effort in 

accomplishing what they have 



 

March 20, 1970 

 

 

1059 

accomplished. I would like the Soccer Champions to stand up so the House can really see them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thibault: — Their names are Gerald Swicheniuk, assistant captain, Frank Stefaniuk, Morris 

Chytyk, Ron Stefaniuk, Glenn Fleming, Daniel Nemeth, Larry Nemeth, Barry Olexsyn and Ken Mazur. 

They are led here by their teacher, Mr. Clement Bertoncini and their bus driver is Mr. Andy Lypchuk. 

Now I certainly think that they deserve a big hand for their accomplishment and I want to wish them a 

safe journey home. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Hon. J.C. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Moved second reading of Bill No. 49 — An Act 

respecting the Superannuation of Teachers. 

 

He said: Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 49 is a major rewrite of The Teachers’ Superannuation Act. The first 

Teachers’ Superannuation Act passed in this Legislature to provide for teachers’ pensions was effective 

July 1st, 1930, and it has been amended and revised, of course, many times since that date with the latest 

revision being brought in here in 1965. The Act in its present form contains a number of ambiguous 

clauses, several provisions contain inequities by way of today’s standards. In 1966 the late Mr. R.J. 

Davidson, well known to some of the Members opposite and many here on this side, I am sure, a former 

chairman of The Teachers’ Superannuation Commission, was retained to review The Teachers’ 

Superannuation Act. His primary terms of reference were first of all to discard obsolete clauses and 

secondly to reword others for a clearer and more concise interpretation. Using that report of Mr. 

Davidson as a base, officials of the Department then went to The Teachers’ Superannuation Commission 

for a number of lengthy discussions the last few years, and the Bill before you is a product of those 

discussions. 

 

The new Bill was drafter and written with four points in mind. They are first of all to improve the 

present pension benefits; secondly to simplify clerical and technical administration; thirdly to eliminate 

some inequities within the plan and selection against the fund; and last but not least to give the present 

Act a good house-cleaning from a legalistic point of view in writing the Act. 

 

I would like to deal very briefly with some of the major changes, Mr. Speaker, First of all under the 

heading of improved benefits, at the present time the maximum retirement allowance payable under the 

Act is $6,000 per annum. Commencing July 1st, 1970 the maximum pension level will be increased 

from $6,000 to $7,000 and eventually to $8,050 per annum over the next six years. The maximum salary 

upon which contributions are to be made will be increased to $11,500 from the present $10,000. The 

second improvement under benefits provides that, if a teacher terminates employment after 10 

consecutive years of teaching service in the province, he is entitled to a deferred allowance payable at 

normal retirement age. If he does not have a 10-year period of consecutive years of service during his 

teacher career, or her teaching career, then he must have a total 



 

March 20, 1970 

 

 

1060 

of 20 years of service before qualifying. The 20-year period is a service qualification that is now 

required, of course, under the present Act. The third significant improvement, I think, deals with the 

calculations of the teacher’s superannuation allowance. After July 1st, 1970 of this year, the allowance 

will be calculated on the basis of the average of the six highest years of salary. At present the calculation 

is on the basis of the eight highest years of salary, and I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the 

major improvements in this Act that will be of benefit to well over 90 per cent of the teachers in this 

province. 

 

The New Act increases the number of days a teacher in receipt of an age and service allowance may 

teach from the present 80 days to 120 days. This provision will allow a superannuated teacher to teach a 

full spring term without having his pension reduced. Here again this is a provision that was sought by 

both the Teachers Federation and the School Trustees and one that we think is a move in the right 

direction. The fifth improvement has been that all teachers who have at least five years of service will be 

credited with four per cent interest on their contributions when such contributions are refunded. 

Previously no interest was paid on contributions up to four years’ service and two per cent for up to 10 

years and three per cent on 10 years plus. A sixth change has been to extend dependants’ allowances to 

age 21 from age 18. The dependant in this category, however, must be attending an approved 

educational institution on a full-time basis after attaining age 18 to qualify for an allowance. 

 

Now the second major area I referred to earlier is simplification of administration, Mr. Speaker. The first 

step here was to eliminate the two-account concept and to substitute that with one account, which will be 

known as the contributions account. In the existing legislation it is administratively awkward to initiate 

transfers of funds from one account to the other with nothing really constructive being accomplished as 

a result of that transfer. The one account proposed will contain both teachers’ contributions and 

Government funds. The teachers’ interest, the overall interest of all teachers contributing, will be 

safeguarded in that the fund will always contain at least the value of the teacher contribution and interest 

at the rate prescribed by Treasury Board at that time, and the Government will guarantee to continue that 

sufficient monies will be available in the fund to meet the monthly superannuate payroll. Another step is 

that school boards will be required to submit superannuation contributions deducted from teacher’s 

salaries at the end of the month in which the deduction is made. Presently contributions are submitted to 

the commission in December and July of each year. This, I suggest, is in keeping with the practices 

adopted by other provinces, along with income tax payments, Canada Pension Plan and so on which 

must presently be submitted on a monthly basis. 

 

Another change in the present legislation before us, Mr. Speaker, deals with the reduction of optional 

retirement plans. The current Act provides seven basic options with numerous combinations thereof. 

These options were not necessarily in the interests of the teacher, and certainly not always in the 

interests of the fund or the plan itself. The new Act will provide three basic options or normal forms of 

benefits if you will. Firstly, if a superannuate dies leaving a widow, half of his allowance shall be paid to 

the widow for life, or if no widow,  



 

March 20, 1970 

 

 

1061 

to any dependant or dependants named by the superannuate. Secondly, if a superannuate has no 

dependants on his death and if such superannuate has not received by way of allowance payments up to 

the date of his death an amount equal to the amount of his contributions with interest at his date of 

retirement, the amount by which his contributions and interests exceed the total allowances paid to him, 

shall then be paid to his estate or to a person named by the deceased. In other words, a retired teacher or 

in the event of early death, his estate is guaranteed in benefits an amount equal to his contributions with 

interest. Thirdly, an allowance may be adjusted prior to age 65 to take into account the old-age security 

pension. 

 

A further improvement proposed is the discontinuance of accepting voluntary contributions to the fund. 

Voluntary contributions have been made for many years and of course are contributions which are made 

by a teacher over and above the regular contributions. It is now felt that with the calculations of 

allowances being made on a final earnings basis, the allowance that a teacher receives is at a high 

enough level that it should not require supplementation. I think it is also a recognized fact, Mr. Speaker, 

if anyone examines the figures and the interest rates, that a teacher could well realize a better investment 

and a better return in the private money market than he could receive from the Commission. 

 

A third major objective in rewriting the legislation was to eliminate some of the iniquities within the 

plan and some selection against the fund. the old Act required that a teacher have at least eight years of 

teaching service within the 15 years immediately prior to retirement. This qualification sometimes 

prevented teachers from obtaining allowance even though they had a total of 20 years or more of 

service. The new Act will be phasing out this requirement by providing that a teacher must have taught 

eight years from June 30, 1954. 

 

Application from a teacher for a disability allowance will not be considered until expiry of a 60-day 

period after the last day for which the teacher was paid by the school board. This is intended to 

discourage application in case of temporary disability. The question of disability benefits is under 

continued study with the possibility that this liability may eventually be underwritten by some other 

method. Bearing in mind the fact that teachers are assured of receiving benefits at least equal to their 

own contributions with interest upon retirement, the need for 10, 15 and 20 year guaranteed options, I 

suggest, have become unnecessary. It will still be necessary for a teacher to meet the age-service 

requirements in order to qualify for an age and service allowance. 

 

Another point that is covered in the new legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that a teacher who had previously 

received a refund of contributions will not be required to return to teach in Saskatchewan. Let us assume 

he took a refund and left the province. When he comes back to teach in the province he must teach for at 

least two years before being permitted to restore the refund. Interest payments on refund restorations 

will be adjusted of course to bring them in line with whatever the current rate values are at that time. 

 

Provision has been made in this Act to allow any teacher employees or professional employees of the 

Saskatchewan School Trustees Association who are engaged in duties directly related 



 

March 20, 1970 

 

 

1062 

to teaching and who possess the qualifications and experience of a teacher to participate under the scope 

of the Act to come into the Superannuation Commission subject to the approval of the Commission. 

This is merely extending the same privilege as was extended to teachers employed by the Saskatchewan 

Teachers Federation. It should be pointed out here, I think, that the employers in both of these cases will 

be required to match the contributions which the employee has to make to the fund. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned at the outset that another major objective was to provide for more 

positive definition to try and avoid as much ambiguity and possible misinterpretation as was possible. 

Numerous sections of the old Act have become obsolete and numerous existing sections have been 

reworked to hopefully bring about that particular thought. I suggest that there are a number of other 

provisions and changes in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that could be much better dealt with in 

Committee. 

 

Mr. M. Kwasnica (Cut Knife): — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House have scrutinized the Bill 

carefully and we agree with the Bill in principle. It is a fairly progressive bit of legislation and except for 

possibly a few very minor amendments in Committee of the Whole, we won’t object to the Bill at all. 

 

Motion agreed to and Bill read a second time. 

 

Mr. McIsaac (Minister of Education): — Moved seconding reading of Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend 

The School Act. 

 

He said: During the last two years I am sure Members will recall that legislative changes in The School 

Act have been introduced designed to reflect and accommodate several of the important new directions 

that were seen taking place in education here and else where. We have concentrated a good deal of 

attention on curriculum reform, new classroom organization and teaching techniques in keeping with the 

concepts of the nongraded elementary school as one example. I think we have recognized that if teachers 

and trustees are to adapt their programs and to utilize the most modern techniques and instruction then 

they must have more freedom and more flexibility in the use of staff, school facilities and time and so 

on. We have found for example that teachers implement new courses and teaching techniques more 

readily of freed from some of the restraints of conventional time-tabling, more rigidly prescribed 

courses, single textbook authorizations and so on. In the same vein I suggest that school boards are now 

finding it desirable and even necessary to consider ways and means of extending the use of school 

buildings, school facilities as well ass staff. Members, I think, will recall our legislation of 1969 when 

we relaxed prescriptions relating to the length of day, the week, the year and so on. Some of the 

amendments that are in this Act, Mr. Speaker, are designed to carry forward that line of thinking. 

 

I think there is one particular proposal that deserves the attention of the House at this time and that is the 

proposal with respect to special education. Traditionally our schools have been geared to the needs of 

the large average group of the school population. Services for handicapped children have customarily 

been provided chiefly by way perhaps of voluntary effort. Boards may provide these services and in 

many cases 



 

March 20, 1970 

 

 

1063 

did and do so. However, Service Clubs, the Council for Crippled Children, The Red Cross Society, and 

many other groups, were and are of course involved in providing education for handicapped children. 

Our law did not require a school board to take care of the retarded, the physically and emotionally 

handicapped. However, as I say, school boards in recent years have become increasingly concerned and 

have been doing a much better job in this general field. I am sure that Members here are well aware of 

efforts in this regard. 

 

Many people, including trustees, public and private agencies, have urged the necessity of making 

services to handicapped children an integral part of the school system. We certainly agree that this is a 

desirable objective and necessary to ensure continued progress toward a fully integrated program in the 

school system. Toward this end an amendment to Section 122 will make educational serviced to 

handicapped children mandatory on the school board effective September 1, 1971. A board may provide 

these services within its own system or may do so by agreement with other boards, with other agencies, 

with other institutions. In this regard we do not expect any rapid proliferation of special institutions or 

building necessary to accommodate this. We believe as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that from 

experience with special classes of various kinds, even for the hard of hearing and the blind, a great many 

can be served by special classes within the regular school system. The children can then remain in their 

home and in their home community and grow up in that normal environment available to most of our 

children. Facilities for the School for the Deaf and of the School for the Blind, of course, will be 

continued to be made available for those who require them. There are others, of course, with varying 

degrees of disability, both hard of hearing and blindness. For that matter, a number of special classes are 

not being operated throughout the province and supported by the Department of Education to 

accommodate these children. 

 

Turning to one other Section in this Act, Mr. Speaker, I should like to refer for a moment to teacher 

sides. For several years we have been looking at ways and means of freeing professional teachers from 

some of the routines of schoolwork which occupy in many cases a good per cent of their time in school. 

For the past two years we have had some experimentation in the use of teacher aides in the province and 

certainly it has demonstrated I think to us and to any school that has been involved with these people, 

that this type of employee has a definite potential in the programs of our schools. Some may argue that 

only those people holding a teaching certificate should have anything whatever to do with the 

instructional program, but when one thinks that a good deal of time, of some teachers at least, is spent in 

clerical work, filling in forms, checking records, setting up equipment, collecting teaching materials, 

setting up laboratories and so on, it seems to me that there is definite room for a category of people, 

Para-professional people in the teaching system. We do intend to pay grants, in fact we do so now for 

the employment of school aides. The present legislation provides for formal recognition of teacher aides 

as a part of the school system. 

 

Amendments to Sections 204, 206 and 232 extend further recognition of the need for more flexibility in 

planning the use of time in scheduling the instructional program. The number of days which have 

traditionally been statutory holidays are now being made optional so that communities which wish to 

observe 



 

March 20, 1970 

 

 

1064 

these days as school holidays may continue to do so. In recent years school boards have found it to their 

advantage in the implementation of new or expanded programs, and the comprehensive schools have to 

be a good example, to do so jointly with other boards. This is particularly true not only in 

comprehensive but in special education in a number of other fields. Some of the boards are becoming 

increasingly concerned about avoidable duplication of services within the same community. There are a 

number of provisions here that will strengthen the joint boards that have been established. 

 

Another series of amendments, I think, are of real interest, Mr. Speaker. Legislation this year will 

provide the machinery by which a public school board and a separate school board may by agreement 

merge to form a single board of education to operate the schools of that district. Minority rights are fully 

protected, while at the same time every ratepayer has full access to the total educational services 

available in the community. Taxation would be uniformly applied to all ratepayers irrespective of the 

district in which they belong. 

 

The school district as such will remain. The Board of Education, if so decided upon, would consist of 

seven members, two elected by the ratepayers of the public school district and two by the separate 

school district and three by the ratepayers at large of both districts. I point out again that this legislation 

is of course permissive, but I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that it represents a fairly large step in 

allowing the development of boards of this kind. There are other amendments to this Act, Mr. Speaker, 

which I think can be better dealt with in Committee. 

 

Mr. N.E. Byers (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of provisions in this Bill that I think 

we can certainly support. The question of teacher aides is one that I know is a relatively new concept in 

education. I am pleased to see that the Minister has made recognition of this fact in this piece of 

legislation that the Department of Education will be laying down some of the qualifications necessary 

for these people to perform within the school system and their conditions of employment. I would like to 

comment on this and also some other items of the Bill; I would therefore beg leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:35 o’clock p.m. 


