



















































Hansard: April 08, 1970


1470 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Third Session — Sixteenth Legislature 

37th Day 

 

Wednesday, April 8, 1970. 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00 o’clock a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day. 

 

FIRST REPORT OF SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CROWN CORPORATIONS 
 

Mr. G.G. Leith (Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I would like to inform the 

Assembly that due to an unintentional error the following paragraph was not included in the Report of 

the Select Standing Committee on Crown Corporations which was tabled yesterday: 

 

Your Committee recommends that all feasible efforts be taken to avoid duplication of power 

generating facilities, resulting from installation of prime generating facilities in major school and 

hospital projects in the province. 

 

I hereby table the said paragraph to be part of the Report and I move that the first Report of the Select 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 

 

Mr. Speaker:  I hope all Hon. Members understand the situation which arose the other day in 

connection with the statement which has just been made by the Member for Elrose concerning the fact 

that some material was inadvertently, due to a secretarial error, omitted from the Report tabled 

yesterday. I think that by leave it could not be included. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Speaker:  Before the Orders of the Day I wish to introduce to all Members of the Legislature in 

the Province of Saskatchewan a group of students situated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are 54 students 

from the St. Ursula Academy at Bruno, Saskatchewan, under the direction of Sister Benedict and Sister 

Victoria. Their driver is Mr. Grunski. They are the grade 12 students who are attending the academy 

there. They come from all over Canada, including Hong Kong and Mexico. The academy is under the 

direction of the Ursuline Sisters and it is world famous for the classes which they conduct in music, the 

arts, including ceramics. 

 

I am sure all Members of the Legislature would wish to extend this group of students and to the Sisters 

the warmest of all possible welcomes and to express the sincere wish they will find their stay here 

enjoyable, educational and wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear! 



 

April 8, 1970 

 
1471 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

ADDITION TO BYERS FAMILY 
 

Mr. W.S. Lloyd (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, before the Orders of the Day I have a brief 

statement. The vitality and vigour of the p in the Kelvington con was, of course, well demonstrated last 

June in their ability to rise to meet the critical situation. The Member from Kelvington, however, was 

anxious to demonstrate that this wasn’t just a flash in the pan sort of thing and set about to demonstrate 

in other ways that there was this vigour and vitality there. as a result may I announce to the House, to 

their pleasure I am sure, that last night or this morning — whenever these things happen — a baby girl 

was born to the Member from Kelvington and his wife. I am sure we would all want to congratulate him 

and wish them well. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Nr. N.E. Byers (Kelvington): — Mr. Speaker, I may be out of order since I understand replies are not 

always permitted from the Opposition. But I would certainly like on behalf of Mrs. Byers and myself to 

accept the very kind wishes of Mr. Lloyd, our Leader, as he expressed the sentiments of Members in this 

House. This is certainly a very happy occasion for us. Indeed, it just so happened that I had arranged to 

speak at a public meeting in our town tonight. I think that shows something of the efficiency of our 

organization. I know the question of population has been discussed frequently in this House. I don’t 

want to appear a bit facetious but I think this will lay to rest the idea that we at least are not trying to do 

our share to keep Saskatchewan’s population on the move. Mr. Speaker, this is certainly a very happy 

day for us and I am glad that this has been recognized in this way. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

The Assembly recessed until 2:30 p.m. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Before the Committee comes to order and before we commence the business 

of the afternoon I would like to introduce to Members of the Assembly two groups of students situated 

in the galleries. We have a group from St. Matthew’s school in Saskatoon from the constituency of 

Nutana Centre represented by the Hon. Minister of Municipal Affairs, Mr. Estey. They are under the 

direction of Mr. Lobecky, and are situated in the west gallery. We have a group from St. Patrick’s 

Annex, an upgrading class, under the direction of Mrs. Pageant and Mrs. Uptall. On behalf of all 

Members of the Assembly I want to extend a warm welcome to all of these students and we hope they 

will find their visit here educational and enjoyable and we wish them a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members:  Hear, hear!

 

Mr. E. Whelan (Regina North West): — Mr. Speaker, before you proceed any further, on a 



 

April 8, 1970 

 

 
1472 

point of order, the students from St. Patrick’s Annex are located in Regina North West. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: — I inquired before the afternoon proceedings commenced and the individual I 

asked didn’t seem to know. I am sorry. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 o’clock p.m. 


